Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 6, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Wednesday,May 6, 1981, at 2:30 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was atelephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C.,except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of thoseparticipating.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. Teeters(New York)(Philadelphia)(Dallas)Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), Black (Richmond), Ford(Atlanta), Timlen (New York), and Winn (Philadelphia),Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey (Kansas City), Morris (Boston), and Roos(St. Louis), Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ofKansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns (Dallas), Danforth (Minneapolis), Ettin,Keir, Mullineaux (Philadelphia), Prell, Scheld(Chicago), Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account5/6/81Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. Doyle (Chicago), First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of ChicagoMessrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland),Eisenmenger (Boston), Fousek (New York), Keran(San Francisco), Koch (Atlanta), and Parthemos(Richmond), Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, Boston,New York, San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond,respectivelyMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the individuals present at a meeting without any indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 2.
 Gambs (Kansas City), Assistant Vice President,Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofMay 6, 1981CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [I'm not sure] if you heard me talking toMr. Kichline about whether he knew anything new about business[activity]. He told me "not much," but I think he ought to tell uswhat he knows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their uncertainty about whether Mr. Kichline has any new information about business activity.


Passage number 3.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, with regard to auto sales for the monthof April, sales on our seasonals were at a 5-3/4 million unit annualrate, which is about 2 million units below the rate in March. Theonly other information we've picked up relates to some very earlyinformation on worker hours in manufacturing for the month of April,and that seems to have risen a bit. We would infer from that and frominformation we know on auto production and some other physical productdata that industrial production probably will be rising 1/4 to 1/2percent or something like that for the month of April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating information and making an inference based on that information.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody else has anycomments on the business situation at present. Nobody has any strongsense of conviction out there.SPEAKER(.). No is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that they do not have any knowledge or opinions on the current business situation, and they are also noting that nobody else seems to have a strong conviction either. There is no disagreement or differing viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will turn to Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The statement is simply stating that they will turn to Mr. Axilrod for something, without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 6.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have some very tentative newnumbers on the aggregates. They have the normal tentativeness for aWednesday; they will change by tomorrow and perhaps a little more byFriday. The preliminary data for the week of April 29th had suggesteda decline of $1 billion from the week of the 22nd. The more completedata, which might be somewhat firm--that's the week we're going topublish on Friday--now suggest a decline of about $3-1/2 billion fromthe week of the 22nd. That would be followed, I hasten to add, by anincrease, if the numbers hold up, of about $3 billion in the week ofMay 6th. This looks offsetting, but in a real sense the level of theseries for both the 29th and the 6th is lower than had been built intothe paths. So, the level of the series is lower on average by about$2 billion in both weeks, April 29th and May 6th. The changes are, asI mentioned above, about offsetting. This figure would give us ashift-adjusted April rate of growth--I can't be very precise--probablyon the order of 14 percent or something like that. And that would putthe April level of M-1B almost right smack in the middle of theCommittee's 3-1/2 to 6 percent long-run shift-adjusted range. That,of course, is somewhat higher than the Committee had been aiming at byApril, but it's still well within the range.I don't have any new data for M2 yet for April, but the datawe had as of Friday would have had the level of M2 in the monthsomewhat above the Committee's long-run growth range, viewed as atriangle. M3 in April is also somewhat above the range. And bankcredit growth, which is [uncertain] because we don't have goodestimates yet for April, by March had been moving down toward therange. I don't believe that the growth in April will be very farfrom, and probably will be lower than, the 9 percent upper limit ofthe Committee's range. So, I think by April it's possible that bankcredit will be at or near the upper end of its range. We have beenrunning with a reserve path that would imply in the current week5/6/81borrowing of around $2 billion. Borrowing started out very highearlier, before the weekend, and it has been running about $1-1/2billion since then, as banks have had large excess reserves thatthey've been working down. In consequence of this, as you know,within the week there was some easing; we've had a drop in the fundsrate from the very high levels it had reached earlier. It, too, hasbeen easing down as banks have adjusted their positions within theweek. But, Mr. Chairman, perhaps Mr. Sternlight would want to commenton the particular developments in market rates that have followed thediscount rate move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about various economic indicators and their current levels. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Sternlight without providing any information or context that would suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 8.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, as the Committee members know,the markets reacted to the discount rate move with fairly sharp rateincreases. Rates had already been moving up in the wake of the verytight conclusion to the previous reserve week, the week ending the29th, and then when the money supply number was published Friday,there was a further upward rate move. And after the discount rateaction on Monday there were still further increases, leaving themarket in a very demoralized state, I'd say, early yesterday morning.From that point, things seemed to gel better; sentiment turned aroundto some extent. But there has been a lot of worry about whether theTreasury would get any kind of decent bidding for its three-yearauction. It turned out to be very substantial bidding at the ratesthat developed as that auction went on. The [auction average] ratewas a record high, 15.8 percent. But earlier that day the market wastalking about 16 percent or higher. Today the atmosphere continues toimprove. The 10-year auction has been held, with offering rates ofaround 14.55 or 14.60 percent, again fairly good. And market rateshave come down from the peaks they hit yesterday morning: The 3-monthrate, which had touched 17 percent, is down to about the 15-1/2percent area; the CD rate had touched 19 percent for the 3-month issueand now it's around 18-1/2 percent. As Steve mentioned, we had a highfunds rate at the beginning of this week, which I think was probablymore a function of an extremely tight ending of the April 29th weekthan of our own effort to control reserve restraint on the system.The funds rate had been averaging 20 percent on Thursday and Fridayand then it worked its way down, partly with the help of substantialborrowing over the weekend. The funds rate today started out around17-1/2 percent and it's around the 17 or 16-1/2 percent area thisafternoon. That's all I have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing a factual account of the market reactions and rates without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 9.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had rather special circumstances inthe money market affecting the federal funds rate for some weeks,where the banks either had not borrowed and then came in at the end[of the maintenance week] or had not borrowed and had run reservedeficiencies. This week we've had the opposite pattern of borrowingearly in the week in a very tight market and the banks are now beingleft with excess reserves. Just for the moment, it's a somewhateasier money market. Steve described generally where we are on theaggregates which, to summarize, is on the high side on the broaderaggregates--where we've been all along, or for the last couple ofmonths anyway. They are not moving particularly strongly at themoment but they are on the high side. M1 is right in the middle ofthe long-run path, if you consider that significant, but above wherewe want it to be at this point. We have reduced the nonborrowedreserve path for other than multiplier reasons in the light of the-2-5/6/81higher-than-desired total reserves, leaving us with something in theneighborhood of $2 billion of borrowings.I'm not sure that any great decision has to be taken here.In terms of the target, I think we have to recognize that at themoment we're running high, but we meet formally again in a few weeksand we will reassess that target. I'm not sure that there's any needto put down another target formally for the next two weeks. Werecognize that we are high; we recognize that in our operations. Wedo have a federal funds checkpoint, or whatever, which is 13 to 18percent. It has generally been fluctuating above that in recent days.And, today, I think we have to recognize that somehow or another. ButI would suggest that we don't have to take any decisions on moneysupply targets per se. We would recognize that we are running highand describe the situation--I'm just thinking now in terms of what wemight say in the brief paragraphs we write [in the policy record]about a telephone consultation--and recognize that we've made someadjustments in the reserve path. And there we are. There is alwaysthe question of the precise reserve path and where we are, if anybodywants to comment on that. I'm not sure I see anything in these mostrecent money supply figures that suggests any big change in that. Wecan certainly maintain that kind of borrowing level regardless of thefact that these last estimates are a shade lower than our previousestimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a description and analysis of the current state of the money market and the need for reassessment and adjustments.


Passage number 10.
MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne. I have a question. Steve,what is your best guess on money growth in May.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne simply asks Steve for his opinion on money growth in May.


Passage number 11.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may interject before Steve answers:It's not worth a damn. But he can answer the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion before allowing Steve to answer the question.


Passage number 12.
MR. AXILROD. I was going to say it's very much a guess, butwe see, of course, a diminution from April. If I had to put a rangearound our guess, I would say the rate of growth for May is probablyin a range of 6 to 9 percent [for M-1B]. Something on that order ofmagnitude would still leave us with a pretty high growth rate in M-1Bfor the [second] quarter on average. If we had growth a lot higherthan that, we'd begin to get zero velocities instead of a smallpositive coming out of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an estimate or guess for the rate of growth for May. There is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 13.
MR. ROOS. Steve, Larry Roos. What do you anticipate totalreserves to be next week at the end of the week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question about a prediction or anticipation of a future event. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 14.
MR. AXILROD. Next week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
MR. ROOS. I mean this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the events or activities of the current week are being referred to.


Passage number 16.
MR. AXILROD. One second, Larry, and I'll tell you. I don'tknow whether you really want the total reserve figure for the currentweek, but for the three weeks ending May 20th--that's the week justpast, the current week, and next week--it looks as if total reservesmight be around $40,960 million. I can give you the weekly figures.The path for total reserves is a little over $40,400 million. Thatis, for this period of three weeks, actual total reserves appear to berunning about $500 million above what the path for total reserveswould call for. And in each week of that period, it's not toodifferent from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing factual information about the total reserves and their deviation from the expected path.


Passage number 17.
5/6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But below the previous three-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only provides a date and description of a time period, there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 18.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm looking at unadjusted figures, butthat would be higher than the preceding four-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement presents a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 19.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't write down what you said, but Ithought you just gave a figure that was lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage indicates a disagreement or contradiction between what the speaker heard (a figure that was lower) and what they wrote down (which suggests a different figure or potentially no figure at all).


Passage number 20.
MR. AXILROD. No, the path is running lower than the totalreserves demanded. The actual total reserves appear to be runningabout $500 million or more above the path for total reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the actual total reserves are running slightly higher than the expected path for total reserves.


Passage number 21.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are above the path. But what figuredid you give for the three or four weeks just ending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about what figure was given for a specific time period.


Passage number 22.
MR. AXILROD. Well, for the three weeks ending May 20th, Igave a figure of $40,960 million. For the preceding four weeks, theaverage level of total reserves was $40,027 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the average level of total reserves for different time periods. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but you gave the projected level oftotal reserves for the next three weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is information about the projected level of total reserves for the next three weeks, but challenges or disagrees with it.


Passage number 24.
MR. AXILROD. The projected level is $40,960 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states the projected level of $40,960 million without introducing any potential disagreements or controversies. It presents a straightforward figure without any conflicting viewpoints or contrasting positions. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's for the period just ending, Ithought you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply indicates confusion about a previous statement or conversation. There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 26.
MR. AXILROD. No, for the period we're in--the three weeksending May 20th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a specific time period.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, May 20th. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Oh, May 20th. Okay" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple and neutral acknowledgement of a date.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
MR. AXILROD. The April growth in total reserves will turnout to be quite low, with the way the lagged reserve accounting comesout and the sharp drop in excess reserves at banks, which will holddown the growth of total reserves. The monetary base in April grew ataround a 6 percent annual rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of words like "quite low" and "hold down" suggests that there is a difference in opinion or expectation regarding the growth of total reserves. One person may believe that the growth will be significantly low, while another person may believe that the drop in excess reserves will limit the growth but not to a significant extent.


Passage number 29.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether I'll need this. Anyother questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and asking if there are any additional questions.


Passage number 30.
MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I had assumed thatyou were going to suggest changing the federal funds range. Is ityour judgment that the Manager can live with the federal funds rangefor the next two weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple inquiry about an assumption and a question about judgment.


Passage number 31.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was just fooling with somelanguage as to what we might report. I'll tell you what I havewritten down here. Don't hold me to this word for word, but tocapture the sense of it I would say: We held a consultation on May 6.The Committee agreed that in the period between now and the nextregularly scheduled meeting on May 18th--that's only two weeks we'retalking about--the reserve paths should continue to be set on thebasis of the money supply path established at the last meeting. It isrecognized that actual money growth may be high for a time relative tothat path, in view of the recent performance of the aggregates. Inthe light of this approach, the Committee recognized that short-termmarket interest rates might well fluctuate around levels prevailing in5/6/81recent days, which by implication says we're not [constrained] by the18 percent, and the Committee agreed to consult further if themonetary growth rate does not abate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining their thoughts and what they have written down. They mention that actual money growth may be high for a time, but there is no disagreement or conflict discussed.


Passage number 32.
MS. TEETERS. In other words, we're leaving the range inplace but piercing the ceiling as necessary. Is that the idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Teeters discussing a plan or idea.


Passage number 33.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This particular version is written on theassumption that we've had our consultation, related in part to thefederal funds rate range, and we say that we anticipate the rate isgoing to be around recent rates, which carries us into the 18 to 20percent area by implication. But it just does it by implication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a version that is based on a consultation and makes an implication about the anticipated rate.


Passage number 34.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is the advantage of doing itthat way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is asking a question and does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 35.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I just think it avoids controversyabout what the new limit is. I don't mean controversy in theCommittee particularly, but just that these people who look at what wesay with great precision would say that we really were aiming at 20percent or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their belief that avoiding controversy about the new limit is a good thing, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, Lyle Gramley. I think you have astronger case for the way you want to do this. We've been trying toargue that these are not ranges that imply a constraint; they are acheckpoint. And what we have done, if we go this route, is that wehave demonstrated in effect that this is not a binding range but acheckpoint. By implication, we have consulted with one another andhave agreed to let the Manager continue to operate in ways that arebased on reserve growth and not on interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, believes that the ranges mentioned are not constraints but rather checkpoints. This is in contrast to the views of others who may see them as binding ranges. Mr. Gramley argues that the manager should be allowed to operate based on reserve growth rather than interest rates. This indicates a difference of opinion or contention on the matter.


Passage number 37.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have expressed my feelings moreeloquently than I did, Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
MR. MORRIS. Well, the last time we did this, Paul, it causeda lot of confusion in the street when the record of policy actionscame out. A lot of people were very much confused as to just what thedevil did happen at our telephone meeting, since the range wasn'tchanged but at the same time the federal funds rate was 2 percentagepoints below the lower end of the range. So, it seems to me therewould be less cause for confusion if we just changed the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses his opinion that changing the range would cause less confusion. This suggests that there may be disagreement or contention among the other parties involved in the conversation about whether changing the range is necessary or beneficial.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I had that in mind with thisproposal, Frank. My own conclusion is that the net result of thatlast [episode] was highly constructive. Now, opinions may change onthat, but by doing something a little different I think we may finallyget them to look at it in a little different way. This is only meantto reinforce that feeling. I was just a little afraid that if weeither use the word "suspend," a slightly awkward word, which is onething we can say, or if we say [the upper end] is 20 percent, theywould go back and say: "Well, it really is a constraint." That's whyI tried to avoid it. Something precisely along the lines of GovernorGramley's reasoning is what I had in mind. But it's a psychologicalpoint in terms of how people read it. My conclusion was that it wouldbe less confusing doing it this way because I really do think that itwas worth the few days' confusion it caused that other time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing the speaker's thoughts and concerns about how their proposal might be interpreted or understood by others.


Passage number 40.
-5-5/6/81MR. ROOS. This is St. Louis. I would agree wholeheartedlywith you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support.


Passage number 41.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, you said in your language, if Iremember correctly, that we expect interest rates to be roughly thesame as in recent days. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question seeking confirmation of a statement made by Paul.


Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "To fluctuate around levels prevailing inrecent weeks" is what I happen to have written down here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply relaying that something is written down, without expressing any conflicting opinions or disagreements.


Passage number 43.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 44.
 The recent weeks doesn't mean to me--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Recent days" [is actually what] I have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion or perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. "Recent days," right. So, I guessnobody except us would know that that's 18 to 20 percent. It dependsupon how many days one looks at. If we're talking about the last twoor three days, then you're right. But if we're talking about five orsix days, then that would imply something lower than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is challenging someone's statement by suggesting that the percentage mentioned (18 to 20 percent) might not be accurate depending on the number of days being considered. They mention that if looking at the last two or three days, the statement is correct, but if considering a longer period of five or six days, the percentage would be lower.


Passage number 46.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think so. The problem would bethe opposite, if anything. It happens to be lower today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing their opinion or assessment that there is no problem and that, if anything, the situation is better (lower) than before.


Passage number 47.
 How manydays ago did the federal funds rate hit--MR. AXILROD. Well, going back, on Tuesday, April 28th, whichwas a little more than a week ago, the effective funds rate was 17percent; the day before that it was 16 percent. Then on the next dayit got to 19 percent, then it was 19, 20, and 18-1/2 percent; andpresumably today it will be 17 percent or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a series of historical facts about the federal funds rate on different dates.


Passage number 48.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say in the last week or so, if thatmakes it better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about a specific time frame.


Passage number 49.
MR. FORD. Paul, this is Bill Ford in Atlanta. I, too, wantto say, if I'm reading you right, that I think this is a move towardtrying to put across that we are deemphasizing adjustments in theinterest rate or fine-tuning it. That did create some confusioninitially, but the message is getting through to so-called Fedwatchers not to overinterpret every little tick or movement of the fedfunds rate. You might consider tacking on a sentence at the end, inlight of the comments we just had on confusion about which days wemean, to underline further the fact that we are continuing to stresskeeping the aggregates under control and deemphasizing the importanceof these particular trigger points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and suggestion for further clarification.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do have a phrase at the end--I think Iread it: "And the Committee agreed to consult further if the monetarygrowth rate does not abate." I just wanted to get some reference inthere to monetary growth in terms of the targets. There is nothingmagic in these words or the particular formulation. We could say"agreed to consult further if necessary to maintain adequate restrainton the rate of monetary growth" or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply suggesting a slight modification to the wording but agrees that the proposed phrase is not of crucial importance.


Passage number 51.
MR. FORD. That would be great. That would make it clearerthat we're moving in that direction and not paying a whole lot ofattention to the particular point level of the fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is expressing agreement and support for a certain direction of action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
5/6/81MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne. As long as we're expressingopinions--and I guess reasonable people can differ--I found the lastexperience thoroughly confusing. And most people who watch the Fedfound it thoroughly confusing. I must say that I think the approachthat you suggest, Mr. Chairman, is going to add to confusion. So,I've got to go along with Frank Morris. I think we'd be better off tosay we're going to have a funds rate ceiling rate of 20 percent orsome explicit number. What you've said may have a great deal ofmeaning to us, but I suspect that there are going to be lots of[different] interpretations in the market. There will be moreconfusion. So, I would favor being more explicit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, disagrees with the approach suggested by the Chairman and believes it will add to confusion. He expresses his preference for setting an explicit funds rate ceiling instead.


Passage number 53.
MR. GUFFEY. Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the name "Mr. Guffey" and "Paul" without any context or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage provided, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 55.
MR. GUFFEY. Roger Guffey. I would join Frank Morris and EdBoehne. I think we've effectively told the market that the fed fundsrate is only the point at which the Committee will consult. Andanything beyond that, I think the market is discounting. They don'tknow when we consult. If, as you have suggested, we have essentiallydone away with any point of consulting, I don't have any problem atthis time because we only have ten days before the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is simply stating his agreement with Frank Morris and Ed Boehne's view on the market's understanding of the fed funds rate. He also mentions that he doesn't have any problems with the current situation, given the limited time before the next meeting.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I don't think I really have, Roger, ifI may just interrupt. This is all filled with subtleties in somesense; pay your money and take your choice. But this says werecognize that market interest rates might well fluctuate aroundlevels prevailing in recent days or in the past week, whatever thewording is. I think, by implication there, if the rate were widelydifferent from that, it would be an excuse for consulting. Then itgoes on to say explicitly something about the aggregates. So, I don'tthink we've lost any sense of consulting here. I don't know that itwill be necessary in the next two weeks, but I would read this to meanthat if things were drastically different, particularly on the upside, we would consult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their interpretation of the text and stating that they believe there is still a sense of consulting present. They mention that if market interest rates were drastically different, they would consult. However, there is no disagreement or conflict being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
MR. GUFFEY. Maybe the market was a bit confused after theysaw the record before. And I guess I'm a bit confused as to why weestablish a range if that's true. You've tied this language, as Iunderstand it, to some projected rate of money growth for the periodahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Guffey, expresses confusion and raises a question about the establishment of a range in relation to a projected rate of money growth. This indicates disagreement or confusion regarding the logic or justification behind setting a range under certain circumstances.


Passage number 58.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I am saying is that I think it hasboth in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine the presence of contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the specific words or text being referred to. Please provide the actual passage for analysis.


Passage number 59.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I'd feel more comfortable saying we had aCommittee meeting and reestablished the range at 15 to 20 percent. Ithink that is consistent with what Frank Morris and Ed Boehne justsaid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage describes Mr. Guffey expressing his opinion on what the range should be. While he mentions that Frank Morris and Ed Boehne shared similar thoughts, there is no explicit indication of disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do that. It's a matter ofpreference. My own judgment, in this particular instance, is that itwould be more confusing and not less confusing in one sense. I thinkwe really have the [better] market [understanding now] after someconfusion. The confusion is not entirely absent now; it's a questionof which way to diminish it. Doing something that sounds quiteconsistent with what we did last time, I think, will put us ahead of5/6/81the game and not behind it. That has no implications to me for whatwe do with the range at the next Committee meeting. We can obviouslydiscuss that, but I think that's something we can discuss when we'rehere face-to-face [at the next meeting].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own judgment and preference, but there is no conflicting view or argument presented.


Passage number 61.
MR. BOYKIN. This is Boykin. Paul, I would support thatdecision versus actually changing the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin simply expresses his support for a decision without voicing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 62.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to be clear, what I'm a little afraidof--whatever language I played with for all of three minutes beforecoming in here--is that if we change the range, the confusion willcome down to [why] we set a range for such a short period of time.The market will say: "Well, what the Committee tried to tell us lasttime really isn't right. They really have a great concern about [thefunds rate], particularly if they were worried about it for a two-weekperiod. And they put it right on top of the present market rate; thatmust mean that what they tried to tell us last time wasn't true."That's what I'm worried about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 63.
MS. TEETERS. This is Nancy Teeters. This is much morespecific than the February 24th language. In that we simply agreed toaccept some shortfalls [in the growth of M-1A and M-1B]. In this onewe're mentioning both the monetary aggregates and the interest raterange, without specifying what it is. So, I think there's lessconfusion than there was in the February 24th [directive].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating a difference between two statements without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 64.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what we're saying is that there isno perfectly nonconfusing way of doing this. The question is: Inwhich direction do we want to go. I just have the gut feeling thatlanguage that establishes a new range for such a short period, againstwhat we just did, will create the confusion in the opposite direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The statement is a personal opinion or intuition regarding language and its potential to create confusion.


Passage number 65.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, what if we insert into yourlanguage something that says we recognize that rates are likely toremain at the levels they have been in recent days and that makesinoperative the upper end of the range until the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting the inclusion of a statement recognizing that rates are likely to remain at current levels and making the upper end of the range inoperative until the next meeting. It does not indicate any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 66.
MR. BALLES. Paul, this is John Balles. I think Tony Solomonjust made a very good suggestion. Without confusing the market wecould say something about raising the range specifically, sort ofundoing it. I think I would like a more explicit statement than youread that we are eliminating the upper end of the range until the timeof the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles is agreeing with a suggestion made by Tony Solomon and is expressing his preference for a more explicit statement about eliminating the upper end of the range.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 67.
 They would understand the federal funds range--MR. CORRIGAN. This is Jerry Corrigan. I must say I come outat just the opposite way from what John has just said. If you lookback prior to February 24th, for almost two years we've been trying toconvey the message that the funds rate band is a consultation point.We've also been trying to convey the message that when it has beenhit, consultations have been held and in one way or another,explicitly or implicitly, and when the forces have dictated, weeffectively have waived it. I think that putting new numbers aroundit in the context of the current situation works in exactly theopposite direction; it reinforces the view that we're playing footsieswith the funds rate. To me the language the Chairman has suggested isclear enough. It does by implication say that something in the areaof 20 percent is fine. But by implication it also says that somethinglike 25 percent isn't fine, and if we found the rate moving in that5/6/81direction, we'd have another consultation. I think that's what themarket, at least as I read it, is looking for. And that's the messagethat we've been giving them, or trying to give them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident when Mr. Corrigan says "I must say I come out at just the opposite way from what John has just said." He disagrees with the perspective presented by John.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no trouble in principle with whatTony and John are suggesting. The trouble is that it's very hard toput it in language that does not say: Right now this doesn't makemuch difference, but ordinarily we take it very seriously. It's easyto read that into it. That's the only reason I came up with thislanguage, not that I have any disagreement in principle. That's whatwe're doing; we are suspending [the ceiling]. When we use the word"suspend," given the confusion that has existed, it sounds as if inother cases we would have been very apt not to suspend it. That's myonly problem with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 69.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. But then what are you goingto do at the next FOMC meeting. Are you assuming that we're going tocome up with a range at the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It consists of a question seeking clarification about future plans.


Passage number 70.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am, but we can obviously discuss it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they have an opinion, but are open to discussing the matter further.


Passage number 71.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if we're going down this road,it seems to me that an argument can also be made not to come up with arange at the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that an argument can be made against coming up with a range at the next meeting.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one can argue that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: yes

Explanation: The phrase "one can argue" suggests that there is room for disagreement or debate.


Passage number 73.
MR. SCHULTZ. This is Fred Schultz. I might want to arguethat. It seems to me that we do need to deemphasize this funds raterange. It appears to be giving us an awful lot of difficulty. It hasadded to the confusion in the market. Events are such that we do havethe opportunity to continue that deemphasis. I think we should goahead and take the opportunity, and I would hope that at the next FOMCmeeting we could have a very thorough discussion about exactly what wewant to do with that funds rate range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 74.
MR. RICE. I like the language as it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not consider that question at allprejudiced by this language. That's not the object at all for mepersonally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's personal perspective and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 76.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, I don't have any trouble withthe substance, but I find the wording a little elliptical to myliteral mind. If, in effect, we are making inoperative the upper endof the range between now and the next FOMC meeting, I'm not sure thatthis language carries the implication that at other times we wouldwant it to be operative. If you're that insistent about not wantingto project that emphasis on the fed funds rate, it does prejudice--andmaybe rightfully so--the whole question of whether we have a fed fundsrange in the future or not, because I don't understand why you wouldhave that concern now and you wouldn't have that concern twelve daysfrom now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. In this passage, the speaker expresses their disagreement with the wording and raises questions about the implications and concerns that arise from it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have the concern because weconsulted. I think it's useful to consult when these things happen.Well, I don't have any problem with your thought, if you can put in5/6/81some language that doesn't say the opposite. And that's my problem.I started out where you are. I don't know what that language is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they have no concern because they consulted, suggesting that consultation is useful in such situations. However, another speaker raises an objection, stating that they do have a problem with the suggested thought unless it is phrased differently. This disagreement is evident in the phrase "if you can put in some language that doesn't say the opposite."


Passage number 78.
MR. GRAMLEY. Lyle Gramley again. I was sitting here tryingto think of some wording that would be more amenable to the group.Perhaps we could say something like: "Recognizing that market ratesmay stay near the levels of recent days and that the federal fundsrate may be somewhat above the upper end of the range set at the lastFOMC meeting...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is suggesting a wording change that could be more agreeable to the group.


Passage number 79.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That might do it. I was just thinking ofsomething similar: "In light of this approach, the Committeerecognized that short-term market interest rates might well fluctuatearound levels prevailing in recent days and that the federal fundsrate might exceed the range specified..." [I hesitate at] the word"specified;" I guess "specified" is all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement expresses agreement with the use of the word "specified" but hesitates slightly before confirming its appropriateness.


Passage number 80.
MR. GRAMLEY. The range "adopted".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 81.
MS. TEETERS. The "upper end of".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. It only mentions "upper end of" without any contrasting information or opposing views.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...the upper end of the range adopted atthe last meeting." See, it's when we get into words such as "adopted"or "specified" without saying what the directive does--that this isthe point at which we consult--that gets us into a little difficulty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that using words like "adopted" or "specified" without providing further information can cause confusion or difficulty in understanding the directive being discussed.


Passage number 83.
MR. AXILROD. "The range indicated".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "The range indicated" is a neutral statement that does not express any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 84.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The range indicated for consultation atthe last meeting." Maybe that's a way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply suggesting a potential method or approach for a situation.


Passage number 85.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think that language is animprovement. It's a little less enigmatic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a personal opinion about language being an improvement and adds that it is "a little less enigmatic." The statement does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 86.
MR. ROOS. Paul, Larry Roos. I think it's almost impossiblefor nineteen of us to draft a statement. You have a general feelingof support for what you're trying to do and I vote that you just goahead in your own words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Larry Roos, is expressing his support for the person named Paul and suggesting that he should proceed with his own words since it seems challenging for all nineteen people to come to a consensus on drafting a statement.


Passage number 87.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is a reasonable comment. Wecan try to get some words that mention the range. That lastformulation didn't sound too bad to me off the top of my head. Idon't think it prejudices anybody; it just recognizes that the fundsrate is going to be above what we said was the consultation pointbefore, which is a factual report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering a reasonable comment and suggesting a possible course of action. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 88.
MR. BOEHNE. I find the language that you just read to bemore acceptable than your original version. If whatever you drafttends to go in that direction, I wouldn't have any trouble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne states that he finds the language more acceptable and says he wouldn't have any trouble if future drafts go in that direction. This indicates agreement and satisfaction with the mentioned language or direction.


Passage number 89.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the basic issue is whether we wantto do anything more; I guess that is an important issue. I wouldpropose no substantive new directive. I don't know whether we need toput anything down here except for that point. I would propose that wenot change the money supply targets. And, apart from what we say inthe language, you understand that we've tightened up on the reservesand we won't, at the moment, do it appreciably further. We would doit further just in the normal course of events if the data come in-10-5/6/81adversely. That is the way we intend to operate. If that'sunderstood, we can conclude.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their proposal and intentions without explicitly disagreeing with anyone else's perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
MR. GUFFEY. Paul, Roger Guffey again. About your statementthat we've tightened up: It would be the first time, as I recall,that anything would be in the record saying that we actually havereduced our nonborrowed target and that it was done not by theCommittee in a formal way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is questioning the statement made by Paul, suggesting that it is the first time anything has been recorded about reducing the nonborrowed target, which contradicts the claim that they have tightened up.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anything I've read saidthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 92.
MR. GUFFEY. I must have misunderstood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the speaker may have misunderstood something.


Passage number 93.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The paragraph I have in front of me heresays: We had a consultation. The Committee agreed that in the briefperiod between now and the next regularly scheduled meeting thereserve path should continue to be set on the basis of the moneysupply path established at the last meeting. It doesn't say whetherwe lowered it, raised it, or moved it sideways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The paragraph simply states that the Committee agreed to continue setting the reserve path based on the money supply path established at the last meeting. It does not indicate any conflict or disagreement among the committee members regarding this decision.


Passage number 94.
MR. GUFFEY. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey's response seems cooperative and agreeable.


Passage number 95.
 With the comment that you made--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was recognized that actual money growthmight be higher. We have, of course, reduced the nonborrowed path.I'm just saying that it doesn't say in this operative paragraph [thatthat was] the conclusion of our discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement explaining that the conclusion of the discussion was not included in the mentioned paragraph.


Passage number 96.
MR. GUFFEY. So the fact that the nonborrowed path for theintermeeting period has been lowered will appear no place in therecord, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the nonborrowed path for the intermeeting period being lowered and the impact on the record.


Passage number 97.
MR. AXILROD. No. Factually, President Guffey, the numberswe have now suggest that nonborrowed reserves in April declined ataround a 13-1/2 percent annual rate. But that's just a fact. Itwouldn't say in the record what particular mechanical devices got itthere, if it went there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact without any opposition or conflict.


Passage number 98.
MS. TEETERS. Are you planning to put in a paragraph on theconsultation of last week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't planning to. We didn't have anyoperative decision. I guess since we weren't planning to then, weshouldn't plan to now. I don't know what it would say. I'm lookingat a paragraph here that Steve has written just as background. Ittalks about constrained availability of reserves and so forth. Thisis just something he might put in as background; it doesn't say thatthe reserve path was reduced. It says that pressures on reservepositions were growing and reserves were constrained. I don't knowwhat precedents we have in the Committee record, but we certainly musthave language of that sort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is merely stating their thoughts and uncertainties about a paragraph written by someone else. They mention that they don't know what precedents there are in the Committee record, but it does not imply disagreement or disagreement.


Passage number 100.
MR. AXILROD. This would be consistent with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 101.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's nothing in here that says we madean explicit decision about the nonborrowed reserve path. Any othercomment. In fact, I suppose this paragraph will go out to you forreview in the normal course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining that there is no explicit decision made regarding the nonborrowed reserve path and requesting feedback.


Passage number 102.
 Don't these consultations---11-5/6/81MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not seem to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple agreement or affirmation of the consultations.


Passage number 103.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. It will only be a paragraph or sosaying where the aggregates are and that banks have come underincreasing pressure and so forth. The operative language was what Iread you. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the location of the aggregates and mentions the growing pressure on banks.


Passage number 104.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the word "Okay." It is a neutral and agreeable response.


Passage number 105.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if we have something we haveto vote on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their uncertainty about having something to vote on.


Passage number 106.
MR. BERNARD. It doesn't seem so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It doesn't seem so" suggests that the speaker agrees with or has a similar view to what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not quite clear to me that we need avote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a lack of clarity regarding the necessity of a vote.


Passage number 108.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, in effect, what we've done--nomatter what the language is--is that we've suspended the upper end ofthe range. Does that require a vote or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we do last time. We didn'tchange the range. Did we have a vote. What did we vote on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The questions asked are seeking clarity or confirmation rather than expressing disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 110.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought Murray Altmann said lasttime that what we did required that we be recorded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's recollection of what Murray Altmann said previously, and acknowledging that being recorded was a requirement for what they did.


Passage number 111.
MR. AXILROD. I think there was a vote, but I can't rememberfor certain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is unsure and cannot remember the details accurately.


Passage number 112.
MR. GUFFEY. If you're talking about the last telephonemeeting, I don't believe there was a vote.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response given by MR. GUFFEY is simply stating his belief that there was no vote in the last telephonemeeting, without expressing any disagreement or argument. The response from SPEAKER is not provided, so it cannot be determined if there is any contention on their part.


Passage number 113.
 Not the last telephone meeting, the last--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. February 24th.SPEAKER(.). The last time we [went beyond] one end of the[funds rate] range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about a previous telephone meeting and the date that the speaker is referring to.


Passage number 114.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made before.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can have a vote. I don't knowwhat the pros and cons are. The operative sentence here is thereserve path: that the money supply path established at the lastmeeting is unchanged. That's what we would be voting on plus thisother language. If you want to vote on that, I think we can vote.What you're voting on is that the money supply path is unchanged andthe language indicating that we recognize that short-term interestrates are going to be around their recent levels and that thatinvolves a higher rate than was in the checkpoint provided before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a vote and explaining what would be voted on, but there is no conflicting opinion or debate present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
MR. AXILROD. Might involve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Might involve. Is that clear.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply confirming that they understand and asking for clarification.


Passage number 118.
-12-5/6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that there will be a vote without any clear opposing views or conflict.


Passage number 119.
MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Gramley YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesPresident Winn YesIt's unanimous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage states that all the individuals mentioned (Mr. Bernard, Chairman Volcker, Vice Chairman Solomon, President Boehne, President Boykin, Governor Gramley, Governor Rice, Governor Schultz, Governor Teeters, and President Winn) responded with "Yes" to an unidentified question, indicating unanimous agreement.


