Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 6-7, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., beginning on Monday, July 6, 1981,at 2:30 p.m. and continuing onTuesday, July 7, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. KeehnMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford, Timlen,and Winn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, Danforth, R. Davis, Keir, Mullineaux,Prell, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, AssociateEconomistsMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account7/6-7/81Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Johnson 1/, and Ms. Scanlon 1/, Economists, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, andKoch, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, San Francisco,and Atlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Burger, and Syron, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, andBoston, respectivelyMr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew YorkMs. Meulendyke, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof New York1/ Mr. Johnson and Ms. Scanlon entered the meeting following the action toratify system open market transactions in Government securities, agencyobligations,and bankers acceptances and left the meeting prior to theadoption of the domestic policy directive.-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 6-7, 1981July 6--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's only a formal gavel. The meetingcan come to order. I should mention first of all that we have a newmember of the Committee in the broader sense. Is he a member in thenarrower sense--I should know this--at the moment?MR. ALTMANN. He is a member, which means he has a vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to welcome Si Keehn from Chicago.I'm sure you are all aware of this at this point. I don't know if youhave had any meetings with the Presidents yet.MR. KEEHN. Not quite yet, just having come in last week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You haven't been introduced to all thebureaucracy of the Federal Reserve. You can be introduced to thisportion of the bureaucracy. We welcome you.The second item of business is the election of the GeneralCounsel. As you know, Neil Petersen left some weeks ago, and I thinkwe are fortunate here at the Board in having enticed Mike Bradfield tocome as General Counsel. And I think it's appropriate that he be madeGeneral Counsel of the Committee. I am familiar with Mike, as aresome other people here, because he was with the Treasury for someyears; and he has recently been in private practice in a firm inWashington. If somebody would like to make a motion to that effect--MR. SCHULTZ. I move the election of Mr. Bradfield as GeneralCounsel.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second heartily.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, we have several people herewho have worked with him closely in the past. Without objection, wehave formally disposed of that.I would like to change the [order of the] agenda a littlebecause enough has been going on with the money supply and interestrates recently that I think it would be useful to have thatbackground, if you are prepared, Mr. Meek. We will approve theminutes first.MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection the minutes areapproved. Are you prepared to talk, Mr. Meek?MR. MEEK. Yes sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll go to Mr. Pardee next just tocomplete this part [of the agenda] and then go to the general economicsituation.MR. MEEK. [Statement--see Appendix.]7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are the CD rates today?MR. MEEK. They were about 17.70 percent last Thursday andare somewhat lower than that today--about 17.50 percent after ouroperations today, I would say.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How is FNMA raising the money [they need]if they have cut back [on their monthly offerings in the market]?Where are they going for money--discount notes?MR. MEEK. Through the discount notes mostly.MR. PARTEE. What fraction do they have in the discountnotes? Is that a pretty big figure, Paul?MR. MEEK. I had a call in today to find that out, but I havenot gotten the figures. The market says that the rollover is quitesubstantial.MR. SCHULTZ. I hope when you are talking about municipalsbeing the "wallflowers in the industry" that you are not suggestingthat people are now papering their walls with them!MR. PARTEE. That comes next year!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?MR. BOEHNE. Regarding this spread between rates on U.S.Treasuries and agency issues: Is that pretty widespread throughoutthe agencies?MR. MEEK. It's pretty widespread. What has happened withFNMA, as I said, is that a good many people have taken them off their[approved] list, and it's harder for FNMA to sell anything longer thanthe four-year issue that they came out with. It's a much wider spreadthan I think lasted for any length of time in 1974. There was a briefperiod [then] when it got up to 75 to 100 basis points. But they havea significant problem. The new management of FNMA met with theindustry about a week ago and everyone is impressed with their plansand with the kind of appreciation they have of their problems. Butit's going to take some time to resolve them. Basically I believe, asthe Fortune article on FNMA reported, that the portfolios are underwater by a very substantial amount.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman as I listen to this and think backover what we've had to read, I become more and more impressed with thefact that we are hung by our own petard in the M-1B concept. If onereally tries to convert that to a deposit category, and makes anyallowance for the money funds and for repos, then the wholeperspective changes. One's whole interpretation and thinking aboutthis changes. I just think we are hanging onto something that is notvery real. I know the difficulty of trying to get rid of it, but itcertainly--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have one proposal to get rid of a rangeon M-1B.7/6-7/81MR. WINN. It really alters one's whole perspective on thisto think about it in a realistic sense.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know. The report that Paul gavesounded to me like very tight money in the old fashioned sense of theterm.MR. WINN. Well, I think one understands it a lot better ifone thinks of it in terms of the behavior being somewhat differentthan reported.MR. WALLICH. Do you mean that it naturally has a highergrowth rate or--MR. WINN. Sure. You get a much higher growth rate if youconvert this. We talk to people who are using money funds for theirdeposits; they're banking the rest of it. Something has to give.MR. WALLICH. So it ought to have a lower growth rate? I'mjust trying to understand the thrust of your remark.MR. WINN. My thought is that if you change the measurementof what we call [M-1B], then you get a different behavior path. Andyou get a different outlook on this whole history as well as oncurrent developments.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand fully the statistics onthe money market funds. Everybody I talk to is using them like crazyand the statistics don't show that.MR. WINN. That's right.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have the preliminary resultsof the survey from Michigan in which we surveyed a thousand or soaccounts and asked about their money market funds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [You mean] a thousand or so people, right?MR. AXILROD. People. And there were very close to athousand [with] accounts in money market funds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, really? How big was the sample?MR. AXILROD. Well, you are going to tax my knowledge here.MR. PRELL. About 5,000.MR. AXILROD. It's 5,000 households of which 1165 had an OCDaccount. Just adding quickly--there's close to a thousand or a littleunder that have money market fund accounts. We asked all holders [ofsuch accounts] the number of checks written per month. I don't haveit by the amount of deposits at the moment, but 76 percent wrote nochecks, 18 percent wrote 1 to 3 checks, 2 percent wrote 4 to 9 checks,and 2 percent wrote 10 or more checks per month. That's veryconsistent, of course, with our measure of the velocity of theseaccounts, which is very low.7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But how many withdrew money on 24-hours notice, Steve, without writing a check?MR. PARTEE. I don't think we asked that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You can set up your account rightaway.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's true. We asked: If money marketfunds were not available, where would the money be? That's anotherindirect way of getting at it. The answers were: Non-interestchecking, 2 percent; interest checking, 3 percent; and the rest was insavings accounts, and the bulk in money market certificates.MR. WALLICH. The analysis that only a very small fractionuse the account actively and that, therefore, it is like a savingsaccount may be misleading. That's because [if] only 5 percent or soof the holders use the account as if it were a checking account, thatpart really ought to be added to M-1B.MR. BOEHNE. I'm impressed with the number of small bankersin small towns in rural areas who now are running into their owncustomers who are putting money into money market mutual funds. Thesophistication of this is spreading to areas where in the past it hasbeen slow to go. It seems to have happened in the last 4 or 5 months,since the beginning of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions, comments? Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Paul, how did you interpret this "3 percent orlower" [reference to M-1B growth in the directive]? Was there anyfloor in your mind on that "or lower"? When we voted on the 3 percentor less, most of us would not have anticipated the kind of weakness wehad in the aggregates, nor probably would we have voted for that aheadof time had we known it. Yet, as the aggregates began to come in moreweakly, you lowered our nonborrowed targets to account for thatweakness, which seemed counterproductive to me if you had in mind somefloor not too far below 3 percent. If you had in mind no floor, thatseems appropriate.MR. MEEK. When the Committee consulted by phone on the 17thof June, the amount we had lowered [the nonborrowed path] at thatpoint was $180 million, and the shortfall was not all that great. Wehave seen quite a lot of weakness, of course, since that time.MR. BLACK. After you constructed the path on 3-1/2 percentand you got persistently [low] figures, you still moved it downsomewhat after that, didn't you?MR. MEEK. No.MR. BLACK. Didn't you?MR. MEEK. No, it has not been moved down.MR. PARTEE. No, that was the decision in the conferencecall.7/6-7/81MR. MEEK. Except that there was an adjustment. We came outof that Wednesday with the very high borrowing that I mentioned, andthere were some spillover effects into the next week, when borrowingalso ran high. And the overshoot in borrowing in that first week wasthen disregarded in that sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has not been moved down; it also wasn'tmoved up. And if the borrowings have fallen out since that time, theyhave just fallen out.MS. TEETERS. [During this period] we've had some ratherpeculiar borrowing patterns within the week. Sometimes borrowing wasvery late in the week and it was very early in the week a couple oftimes. What explanation do you have for that?MR. MEEK. I think one has to start with the Memorial Dayweekend when there is some suspicion that borrowing was as heavy as itwas over the weekend because we were coming toward the end of thequarter and people felt entitled, in some sense, to use the window.It was a long weekend and borrowing was quite heavy over that weekend.Thereafter, we had a kind of alternating pattern in which borrowingtended to be low and then high in successive weeks, which is not anunfamiliar pattern with banks who tend to bet that the next week isgoing to be like the [current] week. So, if Wednesday is tight, theyare likely to figure that out and borrow on Friday. That gives aprofile for the week of high borrowing before the weekend and lowborrowing afterward. If borrowing then toward the end of the weektends to be low, which happened in several weeks, and money marketconditions are easier, that tends to make banks borrow less before theweekend--less than called for by our path--with the result that byWednesday the amount they have to borrow is substantially more thanthe average, and interest rates go up.MS. TEETERS. We've had some exceptionally tight Wednesdays,haven't we?MR. MEEK. We've had some very tight Wednesdays. And as I[mentioned in my statement], I think [in the days prior to] theWednesday in the middle of June, the willingness to accumulatedeficiencies on the part of the banks reflected a conviction thatinterest rates were moving lower automatically because the economyseemed to be weakening and the M-1B numbers were coming out weaker.The banks assumed, I think, that at the end of the week it would becheaper to cover their positions than it was at 18-1/2 percent beforethe weekend. That presumption was not at all consistent with ourreserve path. So, on Wednesday the 17th of June, banks wound upborrowing $6.4 billion in order to have over $5 billion of excessreserves that day to balance their position.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I think it might be helpful inresponse to President Black's question to point out, with regard tothe additional very sharp weakness that occurred in M-1B, that thedata became available only Wednesday and Thursday when we had a sharpdownward revision in deposits of a couple billion dollars for the weekof June 24th relative to path. And preliminary data suggested a dropof almost $7 billion in the week of July 1st.7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I remember it correctly, two weeks agowhen we already had some June numbers, we were assuming [that M-1B in]June was minus 3 percent or something like that. We are now assumingtwo weeks later that it was minus 10 percent.MR. AXILROD. Most of that occurred in the last two days.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Paul, isn't it our purpose, though, to impose thediscipline of monetary policy upon the banks? And won't the fact thatthey had to pay more teach them a lesson? Won't it teach them that ifwe want to discourage their extending credit, for example, that theyhave to take it seriously and not anticipate that we'll be there withthe funds they need for their reserve requirements when they needthem? In other words, isn't this really the strategy of our wholepolicy currently, and isn't the level of the fed funds rate reflectingexactly what we want to achieve, if our strategy is right? We'reusing it as a means of affecting the commercial banks' creditactivities.MR. MEEK. What I was just describing was the conflictbetween their expectations and our reserve strategy.MR. ROOS. They haven't had this unfortunate experience in along time.MR. MEEK. [Unintelligible] that took place. That changestheir expectations, you see, and has market effects [such as I]described.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the federal funds rate today?MR. MEEK. I walked in here [directly] from the airport, so Idon't know.MR. AXILROD. It may be just under 20 percent by now. It hasbeen right around 19-3/4 to 20 percent all day.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He started doing his operations at19-3/4 percent; it bounced up a bit.MR. MEEK. We did $3-1/2 billion of 3-day repurchaseagreements today. On Thursday, both the New York and Board staffprojections suggested that we should be absorbing reserves this weekand, in fact, that was a fairly general forecast in the Street. Wediscovered a big shortfall the next day, and the estimates thismorning showed a need to add $1.1 billion of reserves on our numbersand $1.9 billion on the Board staff's numbers. So we did $3-1/2billion of 3-day RPs, which would supply about $1-1/2 billion [onaverage for the week].MS. TEETERS. What was the shortfall? Was it in float?MR. MEEK. Yes, and the banks' Treasury balances [were alittle high].7/6-7/81MR. PARTEE. I was surprised, Larry, by what you said. Itseems to me that this could be a miscalculation on the part of thebanks. But it could be an unfortunate exercise. We have beenspending quite a lot of effort, if I understand it, trying to say tothe market that we don't watch the funds rate and that what we do isto operate on aggregates. So, looking at a weakening in theaggregates, I think an intelligent banker might say: Well, that meansthere are going to be more reserves around and the market is going toease. So [the banker] operated on that presumption and then, in fact,found that the market didn't ease. Why? Because we were reducing ournonborrowed reserve target in the early part of the first four weeksor so in order to keep the funds rate from declining.MR. ROOS. Well, Chuck, I thought our strategy essentiallywas to attempt to bring down inflation by controlling the availabilityof bank credit. And I think the banks have been accustomed in thepast to assuming that when Wednesday came around somehow or other theFed would supply the necessary reserves in order to resist theotherwise upward movement of the fed funds rate. Now, by letting thefed funds rate flow upward, even though it's more expensive to them,we will discourage their provision of credit. Am I mixed up?MR. PARTEE. Well, no. My point was simply that onWednesday they either come into the window or they don't come into thewindow; [that has been their practice] for a long time. My furtherpoint was that they could look at what they regarded as being prettyweak money numbers and they could look at our statements to the pressthat we were going to provide the reserves and let the funds rate gowhere it would, and they might conclude that the funds rate ought toease if the money numbers are weak. Now, Steve's point, I think, isthe most relevant one, which is that it has only been in the last fewdays that the numbers have been all that weak. So, it's the hazard ofnot following the regime that we said we would.MR. BOEHNE. Is the weakness that has become apparent in thelast couple of days going to show up in the figures that are publishedthis afternoon?MR. AXILROD. Only to a degree. This afternoon we willpublish data for the 24th and that will show no change in M-1B fromthe previous week. But in the preliminary estimate we had expected a$2 billion increase. For July 1st our preliminary numbers, for whatthey're worth, show a $4-1/2 billion drop in the actual figure fromwhat we had projected. But that won't show up [in our published data]until next Friday, if it stays.MR. PARTEE. It could be revised quite a bit couldn't it,Steve?MR. AXILROD. Yes. The preliminary numbers have beenrevising $1 to $2 billion, at least recently since the MCA.MS. TEETERS. Is it consistently in one direction or not?MR. AXILROD. Well, we had two downward revisions [in a row].MR. BOEHNE. We seem to be in one of those patterns [wherethe revisions] go the same way.-7-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions.MR. PARTEE. So moved.SEVERAL. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Pardee.MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(?). I think [the situation] is seriousmyself, because there are quite a few industries that are losingcompetitiveness very rapidly and are having difficulty getting exportorders at these levels [of the dollar]. I have a report that theTreasury is projecting a $50 billion deficit next year on the currentaccount. We've been projecting a somewhat smaller deficit than that.MR. SCHULTZ. Current account or trade account?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Current account. Under thosecircumstances, the dollar is going to start crashing and it has a longway to go. And there is going to be very little [foreign centralbank] cooperation. I [heard] that atThe feeling is that one of thereasons don't ask for cooperation is first, that theydon't want the United States to hold a lot ofsecondly that, when the dollar starts to fall, they don't want to havecreated a precedent whereby they would have to give us cooperation.The whole tenor or the atmosphere [is that] the kind of cooperationwe've had in the last few years with central banks has been seriouslydemoralizing. This is what telling me also when I wasin Europe. I'm not saying that we are going to be able to do verymuch about it, given the Treasury's view, but I think it's not a happysituation at all.MR. WALLICH. Would you think that if we did operate in themarket, we could have changed these [exchange] rates much or couldhave kept them significantly lower?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we had had consistent andcooperative intervention both by the Bundesbank and ourselves, yes,they would be significantly lower because the foreign exchange marketwould be influenced by that to some degree. And so maybe wouldcorporations. I'm not saying our intervention as such makes thatdifference. If the psychology is not handled in such a way that thepsychology of the traders is influenced by our cooperativeintervention, then it's self-defeating. But we had a problem alsowith the Bundesbank, which followed extremely erratic interventionpolicies. They've gone as high as $700 odd million in one day andthen the next day [have done nothing]. For example, today theDeutschemark fell very rapidly and sharply and they didn't spend adime. On other days they will spend a lot of money. I don't thinkthat kind of intervention, even when large, is of any use at all. Itdoesn't change the psychology of the traders [and reinforce the view]that it's a two-way street.MR. ROOS. Tony, weren't these the same guys, though, whoback in the fall of 1979 jumped all over our Chairman allegedly7/6-7/81because just the opposite scenario was occurring? They were concernedabout the expansiveness of our policies and the dollar was terriblyweak, and I remember our discussing this and wringing our handssomewhat around this table about that problem. Aren't we damnedwhatever we do?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is a tendency always for theEuropeans, and to some extent the whole world, to be super critical ofus since we are the biggest economic force. There's no question aboutthat. But I think the situation was very different in the fall of1979. What they were looking for then was some meaningful monetarypolicy [action] that would promise to check our rate of inflation,which was running very high and was having an indirect spillovereffect on the dollar. There were no complaints in terms of the levelof cooperation between central banks on intervention.MR. PARTEE. Are you hearing reports of noncompetitiveness ofU.S. manufacturers?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.MR. PARTEE. What kinds of industries? Chemical?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chemicals have been very prominent,but we're getting reports of some others, such as textiles.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't think one ought to look at the factthat American industries are becoming less competitive as analtogether undesirable thing in the sense that this is one of the waysin which the incidence of monetary policy shifts and gets moved aroundfrom those industries that are heavily dependent upon credit toothers. The problem as I see it--and this is where I would agree withTony--is that the lags in this whole process are very different. Whatmay well happen is that two years from now we will be looking at acurrent account deficit of enormous magnitude [that is] slowing theeconomy down a lot, and we will be driving interest rates down becausewe're trying to keep our own domestic economy going, therebyaggravating our inflation problem because of what is happening to theexchange rate. It would be a lot better if we could smooth thisprocess out a little through intervention policy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We won't be masters of our owndomestic monetary policy if at that point it makes sense domesticallyto ease and we're running a $50 billion current account deficit andthe dollar is reacting the way I would expect it to be reacting. Even[though] last month's German current account and trade figures weredisappointing, the Germans are fairly confident that they will come insubstantially lower in '81 and with a surplus in '82. At some pointthe markets will turn around, and I think the extremes of this rollercoaster are unnecessary. We could be in a situation where we're goingto need that kind of cooperation.MR. CORRIGAN. Chuck, I've had reports of noncompetitiveness[with foreign producers] even in computers and high technology in thelast couple of months.MR. MORRIS. That's true in Boston, too.7/6-7/81MS. TEETERS. This doesn't jive with the staff presentationthis morning on the deficit that is in the projection. The staffdoesn't anticipate that the value of the dollar is going to fall morethan 4 or 5 percent. Isn't that right, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, from the average of the second quarter.It's a decline of 4 percent from where we are now.MS. TEETERS. I assumed there was a self-correcting mechanismand people say it's not going to work.MR. BOEHNE. Tony, from the European side, is the mainconcern with the high dollar a capital outflow problem or is it thisissue you're talking about that there's a lack of cooperation here andthat countries may not be the masters of their monetary policy?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I think they're more concernedabout the immediate impact on their currencies. There's a secondarylevel of concern among some of them, not among others, about the factthat in the longer run cooperation is going to be eroded. Some ofthem, on the other hand, may be perfectly happy to see a majorreversal of this, in which they would not come in and support thedollar as strongly [unintelligible]. They feel that the presentpolicy has freed them from that obligation. Obviously, they're stillgoing to support the dollar at some level because it can be verydamaging to them for us to get too competitive on exports. But thispolicy carries things to such an extreme, given the lag in the J curveeffect that--MR. BOEHNE. We trip up with the lag.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's just begging for more and moreamplitude in the swings. Add that to the volatility of our domesticinterest rates and it begins to have a damaging effect on the volumeof world trade and the volume of economic activity. Anyway, that's myview. I don't know what to recommend, but we are confronted--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The implication is that the Germans wantto intervene. I haven't seen any [evidence] of that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, the German government would liketo see cooperative intervention between the Bundesbank and the FederalReserve. The Bundesbank, or at least the head of the Bundesbank, isreluctant for the two reasons I mentioned: One, he doesn't want tosee the United States holding too many deutschemarks simply because itgives us more independence and we're less controllable; and secondly,when the dollar has turned around, he doesn't want us to be able withmore moral clout to ask for intervention because of the fact that hehad asked us to intervene earlier. I would say that there's a clearsplit in many ways right now between the Bundesbank and the Germangovernment. The German government's view is that one has to ignoreshort-term interests in the interest of stronger internationalcooperation. There's quite a difference of view, which they'reprepared to talk about, between them and the Bundesbank right now.MR. GUFFEY. Does this have any implication at all for ourswap arrangements and the conditions under which we could draw onthem?-10-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not in any formal sense. But I thinkyou're right if you're implying--assuming that our policy of benignneglect continues--that if there's a reversal and the dollar comesunder heavy pressure and they are reluctant to support it with theirown resources and we start supporting it by wanting to activate theswap line, it is possible there will be somewhat less enthusiasm andmaybe more foot dragging on our activating the swap line.MS. TEETERS. Well, there are two different points of viewhere. We're looking at the possibility of a current account deficitof fairly sizable proportions, which you're saying could bring about avery sharp decline in the value of the dollar.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At a later time.MS. TEETERS. At a later time. Our staff has taken just theopposite point of view: That we're going to get a sizable deficit andsome decline in the dollar but not a collapse. Is that correct, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. It depends on what you define as a collapse.The dollar today is 1.09 on this weighted average we use. We have itat the end of next year at 1.00. Is a 9 percent decline a collapse ornot? That is the first proposition, the trade weighted dollar. Thesecond proposition, after this correction, is that when we try to runit out and see what happens beyond 1982, the current account deficitessentially stabilizes at the $25 to $30 billion dollar range. That'snot $50 billion but it is a very large deficit. But it does stabilizeunder that scenario; it doesn't get worse. Those, I think, areconsistent with the kinds of numbers that President Solomon wasdescribing. It is describing a process, though perhaps not as far asothers might think it would go. If the dollar moves [down] sooner,then we are not going to get quite as large a deficit, but we mighthave more--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would guess--and Ted, I'd beinterested in your guess--that a 9 percent decline in the tradeweighted value of the dollar probably is going to be something like a30 percent decline against the deutschemark.MR. TRUMAN. Probably something like that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now, a 30 percent decline is notcollapsing in the sense of the whole financial system collapsing oranything like that, but I'm simply saying--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a minute. A 30 percent decline?MS. TEETERS. That takes us back to 1.80.MR. TRUMAN. A 20 percent decline would take it into the1.90s.MR. WALLICH. That would imply a very sharp rise in theD-mark against most other currencies.MR. PARTEE. Of course, a higher dollar would be having avery favorable effect on our own inflation rate in the meantime. We'd-11-7/6-7/81be getting the benefit that the foreigners were getting a couple yearsago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I detect a ground swell here in favorof intervention?MR. PARTEE. I don't feel it. I think it's working prettywell.MR. MORRIS. Does it make any difference?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. PARTEE. You mean in what the value [of the dollar] wouldbe?MR. SCHULTZ. Whether the Treasury will [want to intervene],given its--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's not only the Treasury; it's alsothe present management of the Bundesbank. The two together I thinkprobably make it less [likely] even if all of you feel very stronglyon this side--if you all feel strongly as I do. I don't see it, giventhe joint position [of the Treasury and the Bundesbank]. Now, in afew months it may be beneficial--MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, does it make any difference whatwe think?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, we have independent powers[but] we endeavor to cooperate internally as well as externally. Do Idetect a ground swell?MR. MORRIS. I certainly do.MR. CORRIGAN. A cooperative policy of intervention is betterthan not having one and I think the arguments that Tony makes arereally the cogent ones over a period of time. I'm not sure it mattersday-to-day in terms of any particular exchange rates, but in terms ofbeing able to ameliorate at least some of these more violent swingsthat produce these crazy effects over time, I think it is desirable.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Leutwiler, the head of the SwissNational Bank, said to me a couple of weeks ago that he feels that themore permanent disadvantage of the policy, as distinct from theBundesbank position, is that the foreign exchange market will not beas easily convinced in the future that there is cooperation amongcentral banks. He feels that when the time comes when there iscooperation again, it's going to take a lot more money and a muchlonger period of time for that stand to have credibility and to havean impact on the exchange markets. It is true that in the last yearor two, when the exchange market would see the Bundesbank and theFederal Reserve acting in very close harmony, they would pay a heck ofa lot of attention.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not so sure.-12-7/6-7/81MR. WALLICH. Basically it is a matter of supply and demandin the market. You may change some people's minds and thereby shiftthe demand and supply schedules, but if we have a $25 billion deficit,it has to be financed from somewhere. It isn't going to come becausetraders take positions supporting the dollar. It will have to befinanced either by central bank action--they once bought $35 billionin one year and it didn't accomplish much--or it has to be financed byour borrowing abroad and putting that into the [exchange] market.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Sure. Current account deficits haveto be financed. But you would agree I'm sure, Henry, that there areshort-term capital flows that, based on expectations and movements inexchange markets, can go way beyond [unintelligible] in the oppositedirection, depending on the particular psychology.MR. WALLICH. Well, it's the possibility of affecting thatpsychology that I don't feel very optimistic about.MR. SCHULTZ. I just don't know [at what point] we'dintervene. I recall that we were surprised that the mark moved from180 to 190 and we were intervening and then it went from 190 to [200].Those were big moves. Why didn't we go in at that point? I don'tknow--MR. PARTEE. We bought quite a few.MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, we did; we bought quite a few[deutschemarks] at that time. And now look how much further it hasgone. It's terribly difficult to know when to intervene. I do thinkwe'd be a lot better off if certain people in the Administration wouldnot make such a public [declaration] about nonintervention and thefact that we're not going to do anything. It seems to me that we'd bea little better off if there were a little less talk about it, but I'mnot sure that I'm for jumping in with a policy of [large-scale]intervention.MR. WALLICH. Well, one has to consider, in addition to thearguments that Tony has made for German nonintervention, that theywould be buying dollars at a very unfavorable rate if they bought any[ahead of] a near-term decline. So, that's not--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Nobody would expect them to supportthe dollar even under the tightest of cooperation at anywhere nearthese levels. I don't mean to carry this too far. Even though I maybe among the most concerned here, Paul, I'm not recommending that youdo anything about it and take on a confrontation in this area at thesame time that we have other problems in domestic monetary policy. Itdoesn't seem to make a lot of good sense at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Trade one [problem] for another.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you mean now that we're followinga more and more [unintelligible] on the domestic scene we can get more[unintelligible]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Divert the argument. Well, I haven'tdetected a full-scale ground swell.-13-7/6-7/81MR. GUFFEY. I would join those who would like to have a morecooperative intervention policy. If that, added to the two or threeother voices, is a ground swell, then--MR. WALLICH. I would be very happy to support it.MR. GRAMLEY. I would be very happy to go back to the old wayof doing things, if it could be done without a fight with theAdministration. I can't think of grounds on which I would less wantto do battle than this one.MS. TEETERS. Well, at least at this point in time.MR. PARTEE. I think the question can be left to developing astrategy as the dollar drops. It's too late now to rescue anything onthe up side I think. We did, of course, have a very activeintervention policy right up until January 20 or thereabouts.MS. TEETERS. Just as a point of information, when are theCarter bonds due? And how big are our balances over and above theamount that we owe in Carter bonds?MR. TRUMAN. First, Carter bonds are due at the end of thismonth. And the answer to the second question is that we have about$5.8 billion over and above the Carter bonds.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But not in deutschemarks.MR. TRUMAN. Not all of it. We have $5.8 billion over andabove the Carter bonds, $3.6 billion of which is in DM. That's it.MR. BOEHNE. I think Chuck is right. We can't fight this outphilosophically. We have to wait until the flag is on our side; wehave to wait until the dollar comes down.MR. GRAMLEY. Unfortunately, if we wait that long we couldfigure, as Tony indicated earlier, that we wouldn't have the foreigncentral banks on our side any more. It's going to be a lonely battleto fight. I think the die is cast; there's not much else we can do.MR. PARTEE. Just demand rules of the gold standard, that'sall, right?MR. WALLICH. You'll hear more about that soon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not convinced that it would have mademuch difference in the actual level of the dollar; in terms ofatmospherics, it may have made some difference. If we haven't anymore questions about that, we can turn to the economic situation overa prolonged period as background to our deliberations, keeping in mindthat we have to make quite a few decisions over the course of ourmeeting, presumably tomorrow morning for the actual decisionmaking.Are you prepared, Mr. Kichline?MR. KICHLINE. Prepared for what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything! Go ahead.-14-7/6-7/81MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, and TRUMAN. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions?MR. CORRIGAN. You didn't say anything about answers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a chart here on the money supply.MR. GRAMLEY. It's plotted wrong. It's plotted in the middleof the period; it should be plotted at the final period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I was wondering. Iwondered what was plotted. I can't find it at the moment.MR. KICHLINE. For M-1B?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Those are the changes fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter?MR. KICHLINE. They are changes fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter, adjusted, beginning in 1975 to date. We tried to incorporatesome ad hoc adjustments for ATS and NOW accounts. I think they arethe familiar numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I just didn't know whether they werefourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.MR. KICHLINE. In 1980 it's 6-3/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would note in that connection that I'vebeen trying to keep track of the annual year-to-year changes. Ofcourse, we won't know what the quarter-to-quarter changes will be forthis year either until we finish the year. But it looked for a longwhile as if it was going to be difficult to make the year-to-yearchange less than it was last year. Last year adjusted it was 6.7percent, which was the same as in '79. With this slump in June, if weremain within our targets without a weird pattern, we're going to havea year-to-year decline. If we're at the midpoint of the range orbelow, it will be a sizable year-to-year decline in the adjustedfigure. It will be an increase in the unadjusted figure, but I guessthat's to be expected.MR. GRAMLEY. Do you really mean a decline or a reduction inthe rate of increase?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A reduction in the rate of increase--adecline in the year-to-year change. What did I look at? I waslooking at the wrong numbers. My conclusion is right, but it's notmuch of a decline. That's right. I'm sorry. We have to be at themidpoint or below to get a year-to-year decline--I'll get thisstraight now--for M-1B adjusted. For M-1B unadjusted, we'll never geta decline.MS. TEETERS. Why do you want a decline on a year-to-yearbasis?-15-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because that's what we're supposed to bedoing.MS. TEETERS. I thought it was fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon which figures youthink are more significant. I happen to think the first threequarters are not excluded from the year. But I may be peculiar inthat respect. On M2, we are not going to get a decline year-to-year;regardless of what we do, we're going to get an increase of some size.And it looks as if we'll get a big increase in M3 on a year-to-yearbasis. I just cite this as background. We'll probably get a smalldecline in M-1B adjusted and some increase in all the other numbersyear-to-year.Let me ask another question and then I want to say somethingelse. The Treasury seems to think that the budget this [fiscal] yearis going to be only about $50 billion in deficit, if I interpret themcorrectly. How do we have a $10 billion dollar difference with onlytwo months left to go?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My other question is: How much [reflects]the difference in your [interest rate assumptions]? They wereassuming a 9 percent interest rate next year for the bill rate, andyou're assuming what--15 percent or something?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. How much is that worth in fiscal terms?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. KICHLINE. It's $17 billion additional expenditures usingthe staff forecast because of higher interest payments compared totheir March numbers. The actual level of interest payments in thebudget for fiscal '81 in our forecast--and I presume ours isreasonably close to the Administration's--is nearly $71 billion, andit would rise to $88 billion next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the figure on interest payments?MR. KICHLINE. $71 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a tabulation of the tentativeforecasts, at least, that were made by various members of theCommittee. I don't know whether you can review this better than I,Mr. Kichline; I don't know whether you are prepared to. Are thesestaff forecasts the same as the ones you have here or--MR. KICHLINE. Yes, they are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somehow, the Committee members straddlethe staff forecast in every item for this year and for next yearexcept [for nominal GNP].MS. TEETERS. You mean [unintelligible]?-16-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, in [nearly] everything. Technicallythey straddle [the staff forecasts]. The staff's forecast of real GNPis in the middle of the others for this year. For the GNP deflator,the staff is on the low side and for unemployment it's about in themiddle. But next year the staff is on the low side on real GNP and Iguess on prices. It's not unanimous but it's about in the middle Iguess on unemployment. If this [table] is right in terms of theAdministration's forecast, no member of the Open Market Committee whohas expressed himself so far [has a forecast close to] the real GNPgrowth implied in the Administration forecast [for 1982].MR. FORD. Paul, [our forecast is] much closer to theAdministration's than the staff's but we're still well below theAdministration's. [Real GNP growth of] 5.2 percent [in 1982] doesseem optimistic. The question I have that builds on your observationabout their T-bill rate [assumption] is this: Jim, am I reading yourcharts right in trying to put them together for the corporate AAA bondrate, the T-bill rate, and the implicit price deflator in 1982? If Ido the arithmetic correctly, are you really projecting that in 1982the 3-month Treasury bill rate will be a flat 16 percent in the faceof a 7 percent GNP deflator and an 8 percent CPI, yielding real ratesof interest of 8 percent on the short end of the yield curve and realrates of interest of 7 to 8 percent on the long end? These seem to meawfully high real rates if I'm reading your charts right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This has been a matter of some discussion.Maybe we ought to linger on this point a moment, Mr. Kichline.MR. FORD. If you lower that, it seems to me then that youcan allow for a lower deficit, you can allow for more investmentspending, and you can get a little closer to the Administration's realforecast, which is where we come in.MR. KICHLINE. As you know, forecasting interest rates is areal problem, and I tried to say in my [briefing] that there are a lotof pitfalls involved in this process. We've tried to look at this ina variety of ways. The charts aren't plotted incorrectly, and you'vedescribed what is there and what the implications are. Our generalview is that we do have very strong latent demands for goods andservices in the economy in a variety of sectors; [those demands] arebeing held down by interest rates. We're stuck with an assumption of4-1/4 percent [growth in] M-1B and a good deal of uncertainty abouthow to interpret that measure of money. Is it really the sort ofthing that one would have perceived in the past, linking it closely totransactions demands? Or is it changing? In our forecast, looking at4-1/4 percent money [growth], we have what we've termed some furtherdownward drift in the money demand function. That is, money is actingin a more powerful way than the 4-1/4 percent [growth] we observe.But even so, using any of the standard models, to get the economy tolimit growth of money demand to 4-1/4 percent takes incredibly highshort-term rates. The Board's model has much higher rates than wehave here. At the same time, we get very high long-term rates, whichis one of the factors damping investment growth in our forecast. And,in response to a question earlier this morning, my [comment] was thatwith the kinds of rates we have built in one could easily argue a casefor a lower investment demand than the staff has forecast. That is,the implied real rates are very high.-17-7/6-7/81So, we're really fighting this issue of what kind of[interest] rates would be associated with the 4-1/4 percent growth inmoney, whether [that] is sustainable, or whether in fact we might justfind the economy collapsing in that environment and [money growth]then snapping back. But it's a key issue with regard to the staffforecast. Projecting nominal interest rate levels out a year or ayear and a half is something I wouldn't like to stake a lot ofconfidence on. So, you pointed to a real problem. It seems to methat we could not expect that situation [of high real rates] topersist for an extended period of time. It would have to be resolvedin one way or another, either by the economy collapsing and draggingrates down or by rates falling with changing price expectations. Wedo have in this forecast a rather favorable price performance, and onewould think there would be an unwillingness to pay those long rates.So, it would need to be resolved.MR. WALLICH. Well, as long as the short-term rates aresignificantly above the long rates, people have an expectation thatrates will come down. And that is why they're willing to pay veryhigh rates temporarily. If they ever gave up on that expectation, the[yield.] structure presumably would flatten out, and it's only thenthat we would see the full restraining power of those interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody is enough ofan historian here [to know]. There have been lots of times in historywhen short-term rates have been above long-term rates, going way back.MR. WALLICH. During the 1920s.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does this happen when the generalstructure of interest rates is going down--that short-term interestrates are persistently higher than long-term interest rates and thegeneral trend is downward? In the 1920s I guess the trend was down.MR. WALLICH. It seems very logical in terms of thestructure. People expect rates to go down and they do go down; but inorder to hold short-term securities, they have to be paid a premium.Otherwise, they do like Merrill Lynch and start buying bonds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the historical recordhas been.MR. FORD. Paul, may I just expand briefly on the point youmade? Has there ever been a time in our history--I just don'tremember seeing a good chart on this--when long-term and short-term[real] rates were both in the 7 to 8 percent range for a period longerthan a year, which seems to be implied here? Right now we have highreal rates, so it's not impossible. We have them temporarily rightnow. I guess one has to believe that anything that is reality has tobe believable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with that analysis, to meanyway, is that it doesn't take taxes into account. And we've neverhad the kind of inflation, interest rates, and high marginal tax ratesof the sort we have now. I don't know how high these interest ratesare. They're high for some people and they're not high for otherpeople. I don't know how to resolve that.-18-7/6-7/81MR. BOEHNE. Well, I came out the way Bill did on the realrate route. It seems to me that these kinds of rates could notpersist over this long a period without causing some kind of collapse.I have found in the last six weeks that the apprehension and theanxiety level have been increasing in the thrift industry and in smalland medium size businesses. I think their expectation is thatinterest rates are going to come down before the end of the year. Ifthis kind of view prevailed in the economy, I think we'd have amassive spread of heart attacks.MR. BALLES. Starting at this table!MR. BOEHNE. Yes, starting at this table probably. It justdoes not seem to me that we can have this kind of interest ratestructure lasting for two years without some very serious financialcollapses.MR. PARTEE. But the question is: Do [rates] come downbecause the GNP weakens or for some independent reason? What Jim saysis driving them is [the assumption of] a relatively small money supplyexpansion and [the staff forecast] has to force that on an economywith quite a lot of nominal GNP. The staff could be making a mistakein velocity; turnover could be faster than has been predicted. Butotherwise, it either has to be a faster increase in money or a smallerincrease in nominal GNP.MR. BOEHNE. You've got a collision there.MR. PARTEE. The [problem] may be that what this forecastdoesn't show is the collapse that you said would develop.MR. FORD. Something does not add up.MR. BOEHNE. This forecast cannot come about in reality.Something has to give between now and the time we get to it.MR. GRAMLEY. But there are possible adaptations to thisforecast, setting apart the collapse of the thrift industry--orassuming that the thrift industry is handled by merging three-fourthsof them into banks or something like that. You could make thisforecast work by pushing up the deflator somewhat so the real interestrates don't look quite that fierce and by shifting the mix of GNP.If, for example, we got a substantial consumer anticipatory responseto a 3-year tax cut and less housing and less business fixedinvestment, we might get 1 percent [real] GNP and a somewhat higherdeflator; the overall outlines might work. But then we'd still haveto worry about how to handle the collapse of the thrifts and what sortof additional structural damage would be happening. I agree that weare looking at a situation in which very, very substantial structuraldamage is probably ahead if this is--MR. FORD. If the rates stay up.MR. WALLICH. What would happen if the M-1B estimate isreally, in effective terms, much too low? In other words, if asubstantial shift in the demand schedule were ahead because of the useof substitutes, would that lower interest rates in your context or--?-19-7/6-7/81MR. KICHLINE. Yes. Another way of saying that is that wewould have more money growth than the measured M-1B picks up.MR. WALLICH. And it would mean lower interest rates, then.MR. PARTEE. For this nominal GNP.MR. KICHLINE. Right, other things unchanged.MR. WALLICH. Which is what has happened to us again andagain, hasn't it? We set what looked like a very low M1 target andthen a shift occurred and it turned out not to be very low.MR. AXILROD. Governor Wallich, that hasn't really occurredsince 1975-76. That's when it most clearly occurred. Thus far thisyear, unless we get further shifts, we're pretty much on the"schedule" that we tended to project--that is, a so-called downwardshift on the order of 2-1/2 to 2-3/4 percentage points. If there's nofurther shift this year, that's about what we'll end up with.MR. WALLICH. Yes, but aren't you arguing in effect thatbecause we've had such a large shift in the first half of the year,we're therefore unlikely to get any in the second?MR. AXILROD. If we get a similar shift in the second halfthen we'll have a much more expansionary policy than was voted for.MS. TEETERS. Do you have a major shift in the demand formoney built into the '82 forecast also?MR. KICHLINE. About the same as in 1981. I would say thatin February we had a high interest rate scenario. We had assumed somedownward shift of the money demand function, as Steve mentioned. Wedidn't, however, have it all occurring essentially in the firstquarter. We're stuck with the question of what to do at this point,and we made the assumption that, in fact, a demand shift of 2 to 2-1/2percent for the year was reasonable. So, we wouldn't anticipate anyshift over the balance of this year, but we have once again put in asimilar shift for 1982. Even with that, however, we get very highinterest rates in order to hold the M1 growth down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll reverse the question. It's easy toask the questions of Mr. Kichline, but almost everybody in this roomhas a similar forecast for nominal GNP. You were told to assumesomewhat lower monetary growth next year. What interest rates are youassuming and how do you get there on the basis of historicalexperience?MR. FORD. Well, I think we have to assume--we better assumeit and if we don't assume it, we better pray for it--that what's wrongabout the way [the components of the staff's forecast] add up is thatthey do not believe that real interest rates will come down and thatthat will be accompanied by a decline in nominal interest rates.That's what solves the puzzle. That's what we have to hope for.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It solves the puzzle unless you considerpart of the puzzle [to be the] historical relationships between moneyand nominal interest rates.-20-7/6-7/81MR. FORD. Perhaps what we have to do--I've been thinkingmore and more about this--is to consider another shift adjustment.Now, listen fellows, if we project these kinds of interest rates of 16percent out for another two years then I think we have to hire thoseguys to do the Michigan survey every month from now on. I haven't hadthe benefit of [seeing] that but I used to work at that survey centerso I know how they operate. If I understood you right, you said that18 percent of the thousand households that have such an account saidthey were writing 3 or 4 more checks [per month].MR. AXILROD. Four percent of those who have money marketfunds--is that what you meant?--were writing more than 3 checks.MR. FORD. Yes, but that could be consistent.... Let me putit to you as a question: Couldn't that be consistent with a muchlarger percentage of the balances in money market funds being drawn inthe form of transactions if the wealthier households are the ones thatare doing it? Each check would have to be a minimum of $500, right?Then there is a learning curve. I would say that over the next yearor two, if you guys believe that these high interest rates will last,that percentage of households and especially the percentage of dollarsthat get used as checking accounts--assuming Congress doesn't takeyour advice, Paul, and puts reserve requirements on them--[is going torise]. We are going to see a big shift. The shift we're going to betalking about six months or a year from now isn't going to be theshift to NOWs out of checking; it's going to be the shift to checkingin the form of MMFs. And since normally we think of checking accountmoney as an M1 type number and since MMFs we think of as M2, we mayhave to think some more about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure that resolves your dilemma.The deus ex machina that brings that about is the high interest ratesthat you don't want to assume in the first place.MR. FORD. I'm saying that if you're assuming it, then youhave to do some shift adjusting of this other type.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can consider that we may have aninsolvable problem here and that Mr. Kichline is right: That barringa so-called disaster, if interest rates go down, then the GNP willjump up. And if interest rates don't decline, the economy willdecline sharply.MR. SCHULTZ. Isn't that what's likely to happen--that we'llhave periods of weakness that will tend to be followed by somestrength? It seems to me perfectly reasonable to expect some weaknessin the latter half of the year followed by some strength in the firstpart of next year caused to some extent by lower interest rates, bythe tax bill that will go into effect, and by [higher] defensespending. And given the kind of monetary policy we have had, if wehave some strengthening in the economy, we most certainly will havesome upward movement again in interest rates. So, are we not likelyto be faced by these opposing forces going back and forth?MS. TEETERS. [Interest rates] never go down, Fred.MR. SCHULTZ. Oh, I think they do; they go down. I thinkthey're going to go down in the latter half of this year.-21-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it's likely that we'regoing to have that kind of gradual change. I think it's more likelythat after a protracted period of these high real interest rate levelswe will see a significant recession both here and abroad. I don'tknow whether that will be in 6 months, 9 months, or a year, but atsome point I think we will see a significant recession; inflationaryexpectations will get lowered and interest rates, both nominal andreal, will come down. But I don't know if we have any alternative tothe policy that we're following. I don't see any gradual way for thisscenario to be different than that.MR. WALLICH. An average of 1 percent growth or 1/2 percentgrowth over a period of two years is historically very rare. I don'tknow if it has ever happened. I think that's the kind of scenario oneprojects when one doesn't know whether [economic activity] is going upor going down. So, you have the economy growing very slowly andunemployment rising. But it doesn't have a very high percentageprobability, as Otto Eckstein would put it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, for a more optimistic scenario: Our staffhas recently gotten into this treacherous business of forecastinginterest rates and they come up with much lower rates by '82 and goingon into '83 than the Board's model. That reminds me of that old storyabout a tough question in an economics exam where the student wrote"God only knows what the answer is." The professor came back and said"God gets an A and you get an F." Without going into a long harangueon methodology here, the Board's model is this large structural model.As I understand it, there's a lag of about 4 years between money andprices. By using a much smaller model with about a 2-year lag and byusing a loanable funds theory of interest rates rather than thetraditional liquidity preference theory, we get more real growth, lessinflation, and lower interest rates. That's really rather startling.Specifically, as opposed to, say, a 16 to 17 percent level for the3-month Treasury bill for this year and next year, we would show theTreasury bill rate coming down to about 9 percent in '82 and goingdown to about 7 percent in '83. As I say, God only knows which modelis right, but I wouldn't--MR. SCHULTZ. What do you get for real growth and inflation?MR. BALLES. We get more real growth and less inflation.MS. TEETERS. What money supply do you get?MR. BALLES. We're using the same assumptions as the Board'smodel.MR. GRAMLEY. What kind of increase in velocity are youtalking about, then? Well over 10 percent?MR. BALLES. No. As I understand it--and we'll get beyond mytechnical knowledge pretty fast here--one of the things that's keepinginterest rates very high in the Board staff's big structural model isthe need for a big increase in velocity. In our particular way oflooking at the world, we get a quicker decline in inflation byreducing the rate of monetary growth in each of the last 2 years. As-22-7/6-7/81you remember, there has been a slight decline in the growth of M-1Band there apparently will be a bigger one this year. That reactsfaster in our way of looking at the world in getting inflation down;hence, interest rates come down faster.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If this table is right that I have infront of me and you haven't changed your numbers, your nominal GNPforecast for next year is a lot higher than the staff's. Right?MR. BALLES. Yes, without trying to be overly precise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which means your velocity must be muchhigher than this, assuming you use the same money assumption, withlower interest rates. You have much lower interest rates and muchhigher velocity.MR. FORD. That's the key to it.MR. AXILROD. About [unintelligible] percent velocity.MR. GRAMLEY. If you figure out how to make that work, itwould be great. It's the kind of thing in which you've not looked atthe specific [unintelligible] about the implications for money demand.How is it that you get this sort of money demand relationship withinterest rates declining? If you have a big shift in the money demandfunction, then it will work. Otherwise, you're sort of out in limbo.MR. BALLES. Well, one of the things that we are assuming hashappened, and I think the Board staff has arrived at the sameconclusion, is that there probably has been a big downward shift inthe demand for money so far this year. We have the same ingredientsworking that we had in '74 and '75 when we had big institutionalchanges--remember that corporations and municipal governments couldget into savings accounts--and extraordinarily high interest rates.At that time we were [registering] an all time new record as well.And of the various episodes of history in which we have thought thatthere might have been a downward shift in money demand, the 1974-75experience stands out as one of the more likely episodes. We'reguessing now that the same thing has occurred this year.MR. PARTEE. And will continue.MR. BALLES. And will continue.MR. PARTEE. So, you're not that far from Bill.MR. FORD. No. And what's more, with regard to velocity andhow much GNP can be supported, M-1B is what you gave us for thespecification. You did not give us [a specification] for M2 or demandthat we respond [on the basis of] M2. It might be, if indeed thepublic meets more of its needs for money with these tricky MMFs usedas checking accounts, especially where big dollars are involved, thatlower money growth can hold up more GNP. So, yes, we get morevelocity; and it may be believable if this structural change that theMichigan survey talks about is happening.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.-23-7/6-7/81MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, all this conversation, ormuch of it, suggests to me that we ought to face up to the fact thatwe do not know how to measure transactions balances in our presentsociety. M-1B is somewhat of a nostalgic attempt to maintain aconcept of transactions balances and I think it's leading us into allkinds of problems. First of all, we don't know what M-1B unadjustedis in the sense that we don't know how much of M-1B is really not atransactions balance. For example, in the areas where there are veryhigh minimum balance requirements for NOW accounts, people will shiftassets into their NOW account in order to get the free services. InConnecticut, for example, the average balance in a NOW account is$6,000. This is substantially higher than the average balance inpersonal checking accounts in Connecticut before the NOW account cameinto being. The reason is that [banks] learned from the Massachusettspricing of NOWs and put in very high minimum balance [requirements].So, some part of M-1B unadjusted is not a transactions balance. Thenwe adjust the M-1B for shift adjustments, and I suspect this is doneon the basis of--to put it mildly--incomplete evidence. In additionto that we have the evidence just cited that some 4 percent of themoney market funds are being used, at least to some degree, astransactions balances. I suspect that percentage will rise over time.We have overnight RPs, for example, that are used by a good manycorporations as transactions balances, and RPs are not in M-1B at all.I really don't think we will ever, from now on, be able to have aconcept of a transactions balance in which we can have the sameconfidence we used to have in the old M1. At least we knew then thatM1 was the store of money that people had available to them to makepayments. It seems to me that we could be splitting hairs on M-1B fora great many years and talking about these wild changes in velocity,about these changes in money demand, and so on, and all we'd be doingis covering up the fact that we simply don't have any basis formeasuring what transactions balances are any more. And that's likelyto be [more] true in the future than--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Once Reg Q is gone completely and alldeposits bear some kind of competitive market rates, it's mind-boggling to think of [where] to cut off the so-called money supply interms of a coherent [measure of] transactions--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anyone who would like to defendM-1B or M1-A or M1?MR. PARTEE. Well, I think M-1B is quite a bit better thanFrank has said. What we really have to do is to talk about firstdifferences. We need something to steer by. Now, the fact that thereare some idle balances in a transactions total of M1 doesn't mean athing. There have always been a lot of idle balances in there, andwhat we need to do--MR. MORRIS. There are a lot of transactions balances thatare not in there, too.MR. PARTEE. And that, of course, one allows for in thevelocity estimate. You can take any number and modify it to takeaccount of other things that you think are happening in the economy.I don't see that M2 is that much better [than M1]. If I understandwhat the DIDC did, in another 25 days we're going to have 4-yearcertificates in M2 that are probably going to sell like wildfire. Are-24-7/6-7/81you going to consider those transactions balances? They're going tobe in M2.MR. MORRIS. I think M2 is too narrow, too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it helps or hurts,but we had a conversation similar to this about a year ago I suspect.I thought that M1 [growth] would never come up. And no sooner did Iso state in public testimony, it came back up to the point where[M-1B] was [above the Committee's ranges] by the end of the year.MR. SCHULTZ. But it seems to me that this is only half ofthe problem. Half of the problem is that we don't know what themonetary aggregates are; the other half of the problem is that wedon't know what the relationship is between the aggregates and GNP.MR. ROOS. Maybe we're getting to where we ought to give somethought to the monetary base.MR. WALLICH. I do think it can be said in favor of M-1B thattransactions balances are a unique concept. There's a logical reasonwhy they might be related to GNP. Once you go beyond that to M2 orM3, there's really no place to stop. All you can do is stop withtotal credit, like Henry Kaufman, because changes in credit presumablyindicate the degree to which people and businesses are overspending orunderspending their income. If you measure all forms of credit, thenmaybe you can measure excess demand or deficient demand. But by justmeasuring what is related to depository institutions, such as M3, youdon't capture the whole. There still are possible substitutions fordepository institution credit and open market credit, and one may bemisled.MR. PARTEE. That is what led the Board many years ago topromote the development of the flow of funds accounts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I'll start off by saying that Ididn't really use any model, but for the balance of this year my viewof the economy is very similar to that in the Greenbook foressentially the same reasons. I do see a bit steeper drop in thesecond and third quarters but a little faster snapback in the fourthquarter. For 1982 I haven't seen all those forecasts you have infront of you there, but I suspect that mine is probably an outlier inthat I'm looking for real growth in the 3-1/2 to 4 percent range, aslight fall in unemployment over the year back to where we are now,and inflation around 8 percent but with a hunch that we could dobetter on that.There are several reasons why I put down that kind ofscenario. One is the pent-up demand that Mr. Kichline referred tobefore, combined with the tendencies toward creative financing. Atany level of interest rates I think we're liable to see more activitythan we might otherwise assume simply because of the way things arebeing financed these days. The second point that I think is importantis the implication of this improved inflationary outlook, regardlessof whose numbers one looks at. With any of those numbers, we'regetting near the point where we've got to see some improvement in-25-7/6-7/81inflationary expectations begin to feed through into long-terminterest rates, along the lines perhaps that Mr. Ford was suggestingbefore. Certainly in the long-term area I do expect to see interestrates quite a bit lower than they are now. I'm not as pessimistic asthe staff is either in terms of the near-term or the longer-termoutlook for interest rates in general, partly for the reasons I justmentioned. But I also think that financial innovation, or however youwant to describe it, will have continuing implications in terms of thebehavior of M-1B, even if interest rates are lower. I also aminclined to the view that at least in the context of next year, weprobably will see a fairly exuberant response to the tax package,although I'm not sure about the durability of that going out to '83and '84. So, there's a good chance that we could see a fairly strongeconomy throughout next year.I have to hedge my bets a little, too, though. Obviously, anoutlook like mine assumes, among other things, that we do get at leastsome give in wages; and it assumes that we don't get any fresh shocksfrom energy or food. More importantly, it assumes that we're able tosneak through this [period of] financial strain and keep thingsreasonably in check. There I must confess to being a little morenervous now than I was even a month ago. Paul Meek mentioned the FNMAsituation. I think it is symptomatic. I had another incident relayedto me the other day when the people at the Independent State Bank inMinnesota who are [pooling] bank CDs and selling them [as] moneymarket mutual funds told me that they were now having trouble sellingthese funds, even [though they consist of] bank CDs that are fullyinsured by the FDIC. The sensitivity level has reached that point, sothey reported to me. That's obviously a major question mark.The other thing I'll mention in terms of major question marksis this deficit outlook. Obviously, we still don't know where we'regoing to come out on the tax package. But if we look at the staff'sestimate for the '82 deficit, they have about $80 billion compared to$45 billion. They have about $100 billion in Treasury and agencyfinancing for the year as a whole and they are $30 billion above theAdministration's estimate of outlays despite, I think, having lowereddefense expenditures as well. Now, if the staff is right and theAdministration and Congress are unable to make offsets, that comesnear to resulting in a $50 billion deficit and I think we will haveproblems both in terms of the real economy and in terms ofexpectations and everything else. For the moment in my own forecastI'm willing to assume the best, but I wouldn't bet all I own on it.MR. PARTEE. You wouldn't?MR. CORRIGAN. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else would like to go on the couch?Nobody else has anything to say about the outlook?MR. ROOS. Is this in addition to [the forecasts] we wiredin?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, just any general comment that youwould like to make.-26-7/6-7/81MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the key is what happens toinflationary expectations. If we keep the money supply on target, asI think we will, I believe we're going to see lower interest rates anddrastically improved inflationary expectations. So, I come out fairlyclose to John Balles and Jerry on that. My figures are a littledifferent. I didn't have to contend with a speed-up in velocity,John, because we put our nominal GNP at 8 percent, which is a littleless than the Board staff [forecast]. But we come out with realgrowth of about 3 percent for '82, about the same on nominal GNP bothyears, and an implicit price deflator of 5 percent in '81. The latteris probably whistling Dixie, but I think we could see some drasticimprovement there.MR. SCHULTZ. I thought I was the outlier on that deflator.I had 6 to 7 percent, but you have me beat!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I share all this optimismabout inflation.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I was just going to say the same thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just report on a few veryscientific surveys I've made in my own research.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You've [talked to] lots of taxicabdrivers!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right! I asked a fewbusinessmen recently what they are assuming on inflation for the nextfive years in their internal planning. I haven't found one who is notclose to 10 percent. I also asked them, when I've had a chance, whatit would take to change their mind. And they say a couple of years ofless than 10 percent!MR. FORD. It's a distributed lag effect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just wonder with how much speed we canexpect these changes in expectations to materialize. As nearly as Ican see, they haven't been dented by anything--well, I shouldn't saythey haven't been dented. There is more questioning; business peopleare not so likely to say [inflation] is going to accelerate. They'reready to concede that they may be wrong, but I'm not sure they are yetready to take a strike to have wages rise at 8 percent, let's say,given that kind of expectation. And I don't think labor is going toask for less than 10 percent, so where are we?MR. SCHULTZ. Corporate profits aren't going to be verystrong and [corporations] are going to have some real incentive tostart getting a little tougher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. Theoretically, yes.But as they look around, they say look at what happened to our friendMr. McCardell at International Harvester. He took a nice strike andtried to get wages down and damn near bankrupted the company.MR. FORD. The tax cut will pay for that union settlement.-27-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The corporate tax cut will pay for theunion settlement?MR. FORD. Yes, that's what I mean.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Market people that I talk with feelthat inflationary expectations are not down. That's a view amongtheir clients as well as their own view. And, of course, that iscorroborated by the long rates we see. So, I come back to a verypessimistic view. It seems to me that there's a good deal oflikelihood that [the economy] will stay stagnant. If the economypicks up in the fourth quarter the way some people feel it will, itwill put a lot of pressure on interest rates. And we will have had bythen, unless we [see rates decline] in the coming weeks of thisquarter, a protracted period of very high real interest rates. Itseems to me that some companies are getting to the limit of theirabilities [to cope with these high interest rates] and there will besome failures. I think this will change inflationary expectations andin the process there will probably be a certain amount of recession,too. But that's a [scenario] that doesn't give us a gradualtransition to a much better world.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. As far as inflationary expectations areconcerned, people I've been talking to are really not convinced atthis point that we'll make a lot of progress. There seems to be moreconversation about that possibility, but decisions are being madeevery day down our way based on expectations of [continued high]inflation.As for the economic outlook, we don't differ greatly with theBoard staff's forecast. Though we think the rate of inflation mightbe a little less in 1981, our 1982 forecast is just about where theBoard staff is. But we feel the economy in 1982 is probably going tobe a bit stronger than the Board staff is forecasting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't submit estimates so perhaps it'sunfair to say anything. But I come out a lot closer to Tony thananybody else who has commented. I think we have a heroic staffforecast here in saying that inflation is going to drop this much.I'm inclined not to believe it because I don't think we've had theconfrontation with costs that is going to be required to call for apermanently lower increase in costs than we've been seeing. I don'tthink that's easily handled by people just saying that they willsettle for a lower pay increase or take lower corporate profitswithout fighting back. I think they will fight back, and it's goingto be a very difficult period. I have the feeling--and have had itfor the last year or so--that the way we're running monetary policynow, and it's a way that's probably appropriate, is as a governor onthe economy. Essentially what we have here is a governor-typeoperation in the way the staff has run their forecast through '82.Any time those latent demands begin to perk up and we get an overrunin money, we will tighten up and interest rates will go higher. Thatwill then force the economy down [to] the point where the money demandwill be [less] strong and interest rates will fall. And we'll get a-28-7/6-7/81little better [economic performance] coming up to that limit again andthen tend to go through it while interest rates will be high until theinflation rate is significantly reduced.I guess I would be rather in agreement with the staffprojection except that I would have put inflation a little higher thanthey have it, for next year certainly. I think there's going to be abig food price increase next year. Also, I can't really buy therecovery they have in the second half of '82 because by then we'll befaced with financial distress on all sides. And I think that willhave enough of an expectational influence that the economy won't, infact, recover. That's all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I put down numbers for 1982 that are not a lotdifferent from what the staff is forecasting. My real growth numberwas 1 percent; my implicit deflator number was, as I remember, 8-1/2percent or somewhere around there. But I put those numbers down witha lot more foreboding than has been expressed in some of the commentsaround the table, because I think those numbers are realizable only ifwe get very, very lucky and have a big shift in money demand or if wehave a sequence of developments in which we get more consumption thanthe staff is talking about and a lot less investment, with all thatmeans for potential problems for the future. Particularly, I want tocall the Committee's attention to what I think could be a degree ofself-deception. That is, we have to be awfully careful about whatwe're accomplishing, if in fact we live within our targets of moneygrowth but get a lot more effective increase in money because we'vehad big downward shifts in money demand. I don't buy the argument,for example, that because nominal money growth is actually falling wecan get declining inflation but because we're getting such a big dropin money demand we can also get real growth. That in effect sayssomehow that the inflation rate is some mystical property ofexpectations and has nothing to do with what is really going on in theeconomy. I don't think it's going to happen that way. Inflation isgoing to come down if, and only if, we're awfully lucky and at thesame time have very, very constrained growth in real economicactivity. We'd be very lucky indeed to get the kind of improvement onthe inflation front that the staff is forecasting. We will get itonly if real growth is constrained to somewhere around where we'retalking about. I worry a lot about the implications of interest ratelevels that persist at where they are now for another 18 months. Ithink we're really looking at major, major problems ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I played with the numbers also and I came upwith two scenarios. Basically, the overall [unintelligible] is thegovernor on the rate of growth of nominal GNP. And given thereduction in the rate of growth in money and the assumed reduction fornext year, we don't have much room for a nominal GNP that is verylarge. One of the two scenarios that seemed to fall out of my workingwith the numbers was that we would have a full blown recession thisyear. Yes, it could happen. With all the growth that we've had,[growth for the year] could still come out at 1 percent because of thefirst quarter, but we could have zero or a negative in the otherquarters. If you look at the flash on real GNP in the second quarter,-29-7/6-7/81the only thing that is positive is inventories; everything else isdown. Basically, it's a negative quarter. If we got the recessionthis year and we stayed with high interest rates, then we could getsome recovery but not a very vigorous one next year. The otherscenario that can work here, with these high levels of interest rates,is that we could squeak by this year without a major recession andthen have very, very slow growth next year also--basically two verylow growth years rather than a recession and a recovery. I don'tthink we can live with these interest rates over that period of timewithout really causing a recession, the timing of which I'm uncertainabout. But with these rates of interest we will be there probablysooner rather than later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Our projections for 1982 are almost exactly insync with the staff's, whereas we project a little stronger economicgrowth in 1981 than does the staff and are a little less sanguineabout the deflator. However--and I guess maybe I'm always out ofsynchronization myself--for once I feel a lot more satisfied with whatis happening than do some of my colleagues here at this table. Ithink one has to look at it with a little perspective, recognizingthat we have embarked on something quite different than what we hadback in October of '79. We had an understandable year of adjustmentprocedurally to get the effect of what we said we were going to do.We did this against a backdrop of a public and financial markets thathad been promised an awful lot repeatedly and they were, and still areto some extent, somewhat cynical and understandably so as to what theymight expect either from the Administration or from the FederalReserve. However, I think in the last several months our record onmonetary policy--our record of holding monetary growth under control--has been quite remarkable; and at least the utterances of theAdministration, whether or not one agrees with them philosophically,are somewhat of a departure from anything that has been presented tothe citizenry in a long time. It seems to me that the key to thefuture depends very much on the next 6 to 9 months. If we're able, aswe appear to be doing now, to control the growth of money and if theAdministration--and the politics of this are somewhat important interms of people's attitudes--is able to produce and to persist inhaving a friendly understanding on the part of the public of what it'strying to do, and if we can stick with this over the period of theimmediate future, I think the entire ball game might be significantlychanged and changed for the better. I am a little apprehensive. Twomonths of control of M-1B or the monetary base or whatever else onemay look at is not indicative of long-term results. But it certainlyis better than anything I've seen in a long time. And I feel prettygood about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I was away so I didn't put in anynumbers. My only reaction to the staff forecast is that I'm skepticalof the favorable inflation developments. I can't prove that outcomeisn't likely but it seems more optimistic than I would expect in lightof the details of the situation, both in terms of the particulardevelopments in food and energy and what I see on the side of costs.As for the slow growth, I have no sense of which way it's going to go.It seems to me that Chuck is right in saying that we have a governor-30-7/6-7/81on the up side. Any time the economy breaks out on the up side itwill be pushed down again by rising interest rates. If we have asymmetrical policy, that would be true also on the down side. That isto say, any time the economy slows down interest rates will be pusheddown if we keep the money supply on track. So, I wouldn't anticipateany very severe recession. But the economy could fluctuate betweenmoderate expansion and moderate contraction. Now, I hope the analysisis true regarding this quasi-equilibrium of [the economy] movingsomething like 1 percent for two years as a result of strong privatedemands. It would give us an opportunity for the future. It would beequally well rationalized in terms of there being a very strong demandfor credit on the part of the government through a rising deficit thatkeeps interest rates high rather than the strong and unsatisfiedprivate demands. If we get out of this inflation, it's unlikely to beby what Lyle calls some mythical relationship. I think it will bebecause costs are coming down. And costs will come down in the[usual] painful and unpleasant way--falling profits, rising excesscapacity and, unhappily, higher unemployment. There is some tradeoff,I think, in terms of lowering the level of unemployment, excesscapacity, and the duration; the lower level and longer duration willaccomplish about the same. But I think it would be surprising if wegot out of this inflation without more sacrifice than is implied inthe optimistic interpretation of our situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn. This may be your only chanceto give us a view from the outside world uncontaminated bydeliberations within the Federal Reserve.MR. KEEHN. Well, having been in the chair about three orfour days, I'm sure you can appreciate that my impressions andopinions are rather freshly minted. But I must say, reading theforecast and hearing it today, that I find it exceptionally gloomy;the figures we submitted were slightly on the more optimistic side.But as I relate this to the individual industries in our area--and Ithink you have heard in the past that some of our industries areindeed troubled, and certainly since the last meeting, if anything,they have deteriorated further--I really end up not finding anyparticular disagreement with the way the forecast looks.But just to add a comment to what Lyle said earlier, there isa growing impatience, if you will, in our area about the high level ofrates. Many of our industries which are troubled now really areimperilled by the high level of rates. Though our board, for example,understands the need for this, they are taking the view that at somepoint we have to bring rates down or we're going to cause some verysignificant problems with some basic industries in our area. On alighter note, at our board meeting a week or so ago at which wediscussed the discount rate, there was a comment--more in desperationthan I think as a serious comment--that we should recommend areduction in the discount rate of about 4 percentage points. But inthinking about that, it did occur to our directors that if I walked infor my first meeting with that kind of suggestion, you might reallylook up to see what just came in the door! I did want to report,however, that the interest rate scenario is of increasing concern andis increasingly worrying the people in the Middle West.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.-31-7/6-7/81MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, we've mentioned very little aboutwages, but we have the backdrop of the air traffic controllers, theupcoming post office [negotiations], and baseball as anotherindication of the popular mood on wages.MR. GRAMLEY. Foul ball!SPEAKER(?). It sounds like you're getting [unintelligible].MR. WINN. I don't see much easing of inflation occurring.It may show up. But at the moment, with utility rates going up andthe possibility of food [price increases], the mood in the publictoward inflation easing isn't very evident. Everybody is looking morefor it to hold [steady].MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. WINN. My second point is that in talking around--I'vebeen in the building game a little recently--builders all complainthat they haven't had a chance to increase their prices in the lasttwo years because of the status of housing. They are all sittingthere with [price hikes of] 20 percent or more ready to go anytimethere's a little uptick in the housing area. Now, this may be wishfulthinking, but they certainly are not psychologically adapted towardholding the line. Finally, all our scenarios suggest a smooth processdeveloping. I just think about all the uncertainties and thequestions. I don't think we have a year to go on the thrift industrybefore we start to see some major shifts of funds. I don't knowwhether it will be people getting scared and shifting funds, or anacceleration [of flows] into the money funds, or a money fund goingkaput. Then we could wake up with $100 billion more looking for aplace to go. We may have major problems from crises and movements ofmoney, which are going to impact institutions in a way we don'tforesee. And that's going to be the biggest psychological change totake place in the period ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we exhausted the comments? I guesswe can't carry this much further this afternoon. We didn't get quiteas far as I thought we would. Maybe we'll start off with Mr. Axilrodtomorrow.Let me just say that, when I look at where we are today ascompared to where we were six months ago, I share Larry Roos's feelingof some satisfaction thus far. But it's a limited satisfaction. Ithink we have clearly taken the froth out of inflation. All thoseprices that are sensitive to tight money or expectations, or both, arepretty well deflated. In fact, I think many of them are deflatedbelow the cost of production and, therefore, if things got easier,they would go up again at some point. If the economy began going upagain and interest rates began going down, we probably [could expect]increases in some raw materials prices anyway. I think we've beenexceptionally lucky on oil--I don't know how long that will last--andwe've been pretty lucky on food. The trick is to convert that luck,to the extent that it is luck--it's partly tight money--into a morelasting wage and cost pattern. Views differ on that. I don't quitebelieve that we're seeing it yet, but I hope we will see it. I thinkwe can begin to say that something may be happening on the inflation-32-7/6-7/81side. I'll concede that much, Mr. Kichline, even though it will takesome time to be confirmed.I also think conditions are softening in the economy, whichmay be optimistic compared to the view of some in the markets thateven this level of interest rates wouldn't soften anything in theeconomy. I believe we are seeing, at the moment at least, somesoftening; but the burden of all the comments that were made aroundthe table is that there is no simple way to get from here to there. Idon't know whether the staff forecast or many of the other forecastsimply a fairly simple way. They don't imply big recessions or a bigbacktracking on inflation. I'm not sure that there is an easy way toget from here to there or any way that doesn't involve a lot more realproblems and controversies than we've had so far. But we don't knowwhere all that is going to lead or precisely what direction it's goingto take.Meanwhile, we have to make a few decisions. We unfortunatelyhave to use these fragile numbers that we have, and some of them aregetting increasingly fragile. I agree with Frank Morris in terms ofdirection, but we happen to have a law as well as an expectation thatsays that we have to review our present targets and have to put downsome new ones for next year. We are in a happy or unhappy situationthat practically everything is outside the target range. It's notquite that bad: Some are high within the range; others are above orbelow; it depends upon which one you look at. I think we do haveinconsistencies among the targets for the first half of this year. Isuspect the staff analysis, when Mr. Axilrod gets to it, will suggestthat those inconsistencies will become less as the year progresses. Iguess he has to assume that because they were estimated in aconsistent way originally and if they're off path for six months--ifthe original analysis was right--they have to come back towardconsistency in the next six months.MR. AXILROD. We're not that stubborn!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, at the moment they areinconsistent. We have to consider, therefore, whether to change thepresent targets to realign their internal relationships. I don't meanto suggest that that's positively necessary; it depends upon theanalysis. And they all have ranges, so we have some room for someinconsistencies. But we do have to consider this internal alignmentquestion. We have to consider all the questions that were raisedabout what velocity is likely to do and what all the new institutionalarrangements mean. When we get through all that technical [analysis],we have to decide where policy ought to be in some sense in terms ofreal pressure. And the policy [discussion] only comes after we getthrough that morass of technical questions, the way this is set up.We're going to do all that for this year and, obviously, we have toset some ranges for next year. Again, we have what one might think ofas pictorial questions in terms of how the targets look against thisyear's targets and this year's performance relative to all thoseexpectations out there, and we have to reconcile that somehow with ourpolicy predilections.The policy question comes down, I suspect, to a question ofwhere we want to take our chances because--at least speaking formyself--I doubt that anybody can be all that certain about any-33-7/6-7/81particular outlook or all that certain about what some of theseinternal relationships are. Not only do we have to make substantivedecisions, but we have to portray them to the public. And we aregoing to have to lean one way or the other on where we want to takeour risks. I would only say in that connection that we may not bequite as far along as we thought but we are some distance along theroad of taking the risks that a constraining policy [presents] in theinterest of dealing with the inflationary problem--risks for not onlythe financial system but the real side of the economy. I supposeeverybody is looking to see whether that's where the risk is going tobe balanced in the future or not. With that much comment, I guess itis late enough so that we can retire for the evening and come back atwhat time?MR. ALTMANN. 9:30.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At 9:30 in the morning we will take up thelong-term discussion. We will consider revisions in the targets forthis year, if any--and I'm not implying there should be any--andwhether we want to make any changes in the targets from this year fornext year. And then we will come back to what we want to do in thenext month.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, isn't it worth pointingout that the staff originally recommended a much higher M2 as beingconsistent with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they recommended a somewhat higherM2, but the distance--SPEAKER(?). 10 to 12--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. It wasn't that high; it was1/2 to 1 percentage point higher. The discrepancy could explain, onecan say, perhaps half [of the overshoot from the target]; I thinktheir original analysis probably would have explained one-third ortwo-thirds of it or less.[Meeting recessed]-34-7/6-7/81July 7, 1981--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline, do you want to take about aminute to describe the producer price index figures that came out thismorning?MR. KICHLINE. In June the producer price index for totalfinished goods rose 0.6 percent; that compares with 0.4 percent in Mayand 0.8 percent in April. For the second quarter as a whole, it wasup 7.1 percent at a compound annual rate compared with 12 percent inthe first quarter. Food prices rose 0.5 percent compared with nochange in the preceding two months. Finished energy goods rose 0.2percent compared with a decline in the preceding month. But excludingfood and energy, the total was up 0.6 percent, with a bit slower orpretty much unchanged rates of increase across the board. Forexample, capital equipment prices were up 0.7 percent compared with0.9 percent in the preceding two months. On average there does notappear to be much of surprise in this particular index compared to ourearlier expectations.MS. TEETERS. The crude food [component] was up verystrongly, though, wasn't it?MR. KICHLINE. That's correct. It was up 2.8 percentcompared with a 2 percent decline in the preceding month. I might sayon food that it's principally the meat prices that are up,particularly beef but pork as well, and we had in our forecast acontinued further rise in those prices. So it appears as if the risein meat prices has begun.MR. SCHULTZ. But futures prices for meat in the last coupleof weeks have been down surprisingly. I don't understand that.MR. KICHLINE. Yes. Some of the spot prices, though, havebeen moving up. I think the crude materials prices reflect that risein the food area, in beef and cattle particularly; it's just therethat we've seen increases in spot prices. The rise has been erraticbut [generally] up. You're quite correct, though, that there is[that] expectation. I don't know about the last couple of days, butthe futures prices did not show anything that unusual.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, do you want to proceed with alaying out of these difficult arithmetic issues and presumably someeconomic implications thereof with respect to the targets with whichwe are blessed or hung--one or the other?SPEAKER(?). Hoisted!MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's all complicated, as Mr. Axilrodsuggests. Let me just make a couple of comments. If I can, I willseparate the substance from the numerology; that distinction may notbe accepted by everybody around the table, but let me make it for themoment. I do think there are some signs of progress on inflation andinflationary psychology; I'm not one to overstate that, as I suggestedyesterday. Largely we have affected the things that are most likely-35-7/6-7/81to be affected by restraint in the short run: commodity prices,precious metals prices, and the exchange rate to some extent. Thehardest part of the battle is ahead in terms of affecting theunderlying rate of inflation. Maybe something is happening there butit's still in the "maybe" stage. Nevertheless, the stage is at leastset more favorably than we've had it in the past. All that is on theplus side.We discussed at great length the economic outlook yesterday.I don't think anybody is very satisfied with any of the projections interms of their internal logic and plausibility for continuing over aperiod of time. There is a high risk premium in any of them and ourjob is assessing where the risks lie in our own policy in terms of ourbroadest objectives. I haven't much doubt in my mind that it'sappropriate in substance to take the risk of more softness in theeconomy in the short run than one might ideally like in order tocapitalize on the anti-inflationary momentum to the extent it exists.That is much more likely to give a more satisfactory economic as wellas inflationary outlook over a period of time as compared to theopposite scenario of heading off economic sluggishness or even adownturn at the expense of rapidly getting back into the kind ofsituation we were in last fall where we had some retreat oninflationary psychology and the latent demands in the economyimmediately reasserted themselves. Then we would look forward toanother prolonged period of high interest rates and strain and facethe same dilemmas over and over again. Neither of these outlooks isvery simple or happy in a sense. But between the two I suspect, hardas it is to say, that the lesser risk in the long run is taking achance on more sluggishness in the short run rather than devoting allour efforts to avoiding the sluggishness in the short run.How that converts into these numbers is another thing. Wehave technical problems of internal consistency between M-1Bunadjusted and M-1B adjusted and between M1 and M2. We have theproblem--if it is a problem--that we're low on M-1B and that to comeback within the range or at least near the midpoint of the range, asSteve said, gives us very high growth rates in M-1B for a period ofmonths. If we had those high growth rates, we'd probably overshoot onM2. We wouldn't be overshooting on the annual objective for M1 but wewould probably be overshooting on M2. So, we have a question as towhat to do with this year's ranges. I have some predilection myself,but it's no more than a mild predilection, not to fool around withchanging them this year on the grounds that to change them has anatmosphere of fine-tuning and it's even harder to explain at the endof the year why we are outside of the ranges if we are outside ofthem. [Changing them implies] a kind of renewed commitment to comingwithin them and we may lose a little flexibility that it may bedesirable to have.On the other hand, internal consistency and the actual levelof M-1B could easily suggest that some reduction in that range wouldnot be out of line. So, one could argue it either way. If we raise[the range for] M2 or M3, which is another possibility, as Stevesuggested, it creates something of a problem of giving confusingsignals to the market, just in terms of the surface impression of"easing." And if we change this year's targets, particularly if welower the M-1B range for this year, we have to consider what that doesin terms of what we can say about next year in the portrayal of some-36-7/6-7/81year-to-year declines. [The task] is not impossible, but we just haveto consider what those implications are. So, we have a lot ofpermutations and combinations, starting from my own predilection thatthe general risk is that we in some sense may be too easy rather thantoo tight during the period ahead. I think we ought to take our riskson the side of being tighter rather than looser. I leave it to you toconvert that into numbers, but that's my general sense of thedirection in which we should be moving.With that much introduction, I open the discussion at thispoint not to a consideration of the short-run operational decision forthe next month or quarter or weeks--although obviously that's going tobe in the back of people's minds--but of this problem of what to dowith [the ranges for] this year in terms of internal consistency orbroader changes and what to do about next year. We are not looking atthis point at the short run but recognize that the [dilemma] we're inis going to be greatly colored if we have the [large] decline in M-1Bfor the next published figure that the preliminary data suggested.The way we start out the next quarter is going to be considerablyaffected by whether we get a big increase in the following week, whichis now the instinct of the projectors and some people in the market.We have an [estimated] increase of $5 or $6 billion in the week ofJuly 8, which seems possible. We started out July with a betterposture in terms of our targets; if M-1B goes down by $4 billion inthe next published figure and remains there, then we are really behindthe eight ball in terms of the targets in the short run. Whereas, ifwe have that big recovery in the following week, we would not be facedwith that same drastic low starting point. In an ironic way I ratherhope that the July 8th figure is a big increase. The ideal thingwould be that we recover from the big decrease of the coming week andstart off at a reasonable level for the next quarter. But that's allin the lap of the gods, so far as I know. All I know is that it'sgoing to color where we start off this quarter. But since we don'tknow that and we can't do anything about it, I don't think we can takeit too much into consideration at the moment. Let us proceed. Mr.Roos.MR. ROOS. I think you've resolved the question I had. I wasgoing to ask a procedural question. Maybe I'm alone in this, butwhen Steve reports a lot of figures as he did--four pages of them--Idon't have the mental ability to absorb that and to translate thatinto where we are going. I was going to ask the question--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a comment in that respect, ifI may. I think we are all in the position you are in. I suspect thatif we arrive at some tentative figures, after some preliminarydiscussion, we better have a recess for figuring out the implicationsof all these figures in terms of growth rates over the next couple ofquarters to make sure we are really where we want to be. There's toomuch arithmetic involved to put together the figures casually. So, Ithink we ought to get a general feel of what people think and then goback and do some of the arithmetic and see whether we are really wherewe want to be in terms of all these targets and theirinterrelationships. Go ahead.MR. ROOS. Well, I would support the basic position youexpressed a little while ago: That if we are going to err, which Ihope we won't, it ought to be on the side of constraint rather than-37-7/6-7/81ease. I think that one of the big problems we have is the problem ofcredibility and how people see what we are doing. If we were to doanything that would give the appearance of easing monetary policysignificantly at the present time, I think we'd frustrate what wouldbe the apparent objective of ease--bringing down interest rates andbringing relief to a soft economy. So, I would support, Mr. Chairman,what you have said as far as basic policies are concerned.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be pretty vague, and I was prettyvague. I raised the question of lowering the M-1B target [for thisyear]. But whether or not we lower it, I would not aim right nowaggressively, in quotation marks, for something like the A alternativepresented here in the short run and what that means for the long run--returning to the midpoint of the present target. I think we have thealternative of either lowering the target or saying that we are goingto be low in the range--not necessarily outside the target, but wedon't expect to be in the upper part of this range. We could eitherbe below the target or in the lower part of the range. Those are thetwo choices I see for changing the M-1B target for this year.MR. ROOS. Well, alternative 2 on page 8 [of the Bluebook]would be my preference in that regard. That's the more restrictive ofthe two for the remainder of this year.MR. SCHULTZ. I think that's moving too fast.MR. ROOS. Are we moving up?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Page 8 is where are we.MR. SCHULTZ. That's 3-1/2 percent. You are not suggestingthat we attempt to get on a path right now of getting back to 3-1/2percent by the end of the year, are you?MR. ROOS. No.MR. PARTEE. I didn't think we were talking about the shortrun.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we shouldn't be talking about theshort run. Is page 8 the short-run stuff?MR. ROOS. That's the last half of this year.MR. BLACK. To hit the bottom part of the present range of3-1/2 percent--MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know. You say it's fast. Let meremind you that a year ago we were sitting here talking about how inthe world we could get back up into the ranges. In fact that was thekey note of your July presentation. So, who knows? I think we oughtto choose these numbers with respect to what we think the longer-runeffect will be and then struggle with the question of whether we comein low or go above or anything like that in the short run. But weought to try to keep in mind what the economy requires.Quickly, Paul, I happen to agree: Alternative 2 looks allright to me.-38-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What page?MR. PARTEE. Page 8. That's the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I'm confused about what thosealternatives are. What are they?MR. AXILROD. Those, Mr. Chairman, are simply the growthrates--in some sense the midpoint growth rates--we'd expect. So,alternative 1 is the midpoint of the present longer-run range of 3-1/2to 6 percent and we would expect M2 and M3 to grow at rates above theupper ends of the present ranges. If, however, growth in M-1B wereheld to the lower limit of the present 3-1/2 to 6 percent range forthe year, we would expect that growth in M2 would be in its range andgrowth of M3 just a tick above its range. That [table on page 8]shows those relationships.MS. TEETERS. Steve, in Appendix III, the associated interestrates for the third and fourth quarters are 19-1/2 and 21 percent, isthat right?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. PARTEE. They're high rates.MR. SCHULTZ. If you believe that.MR. PARTEE. But I think the point is that we can, in fact,accept the strategy of alternative 2 and not change the long-rangetargets for this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. Let me just clarify this.If we implicitly accept the strategy of alternative 2 in a rough way,we are left then with the question before us of whether we keep theM-1B range unchanged or whether we lower it. [That strategy] isconsistent with either hypothesis, and we wouldn't have to change theM2 range. We could, but we wouldn't have to. Now, I don't knowwhether any of you people who have commented already want to sayanything about 1982. In effect, you have said alternative 2. Youhaven't said anything about 1982, and I don't know whether you want toat this stage.MR. WALLICH. The 1982 ranges and the changes for 1981 aresomewhat separable topics. We can separate out the very short run andseparate out the rest of year, and then we can talk about 1982. Ithink those three topics are more manageable than if we try to getinto all of them at the same time.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I disagree, Henry. I think one hasto discuss what one is recommending for '82 in discussing whether torevise the remainder of '81 or not. If you want to revise theremainder of '81, you then are going to be much less willing toannounce a further reduction [for '82], presumably, at this time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is a relationship betweenthe two. We have too many numbers to discuss here, we all agree. ButI think we should just get out on the table initially a feeling--I-39-7/6-7/81guess it's broadly reflected on page 8 and then it's reflected on page14, too--about what's implied for next year.MR. ROOS. I would recommend alternative II in '82 also,going slowly at [our job of reducing monetary growth]. Alternative IIis consistent with our long-range objective of reducing our M-1B[range] by about 1 percentage point a year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have an Arabic number 2 on page 8 anda Roman numeral II on page 14.MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't go with the Roman II; I would sayRoman I, possibly with a 3-point range.MS. TEETERS. We don't have the answers, but implicit inthese is the level of interest rates. Alternative I is the one thatkeeps interest rates in the 18 percent range for the full 18 months,isn't that correct? Presumably alternatives II and III would putinterest rates in the 20 or perhaps 22 percent range.MR. AXILROD. Well, it probably would, if you assume theeconomy unchanged.MR. PARTEE. Until the economy collapses!MR. WALLICH. It doesn't have to collapse; it just needs toease a little.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's a further complication. Atleast we in New York, Steve, are a little surprised by the interestrate levels projected to be consistent with each of thesealternatives. To me these interest rates are very much on the highside. Certainly the market would think they are on the high side.And since they're derived on fairly unreliable historicalrelationships based on the model, it may be that the market is lesswrong and more right. We ought to take with a grain of salt theinterest rate projections; I'd think of them as being more the outsidelimit on the upper side rather than as the most likely result.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. May I just go back and ask Mr. Roos andMr. Partee if they are ready to pronounce judgment? This all shouldbe considered very tentative. All I want is an instinct at thispoint. Consistent with alternative 2 for the short run, meaning thisyear, would you leave the ranges unchanged or would you lower M-1Bpresumably?MR. ROOS. For the short run?MR. PARTEE. No for this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I mean this year. Not really short runbut this year as opposed to next year.MR. ROOS. The ranges should be left unchanged. I think weought to opt for the lower of the two alternatives to stay within theranges, if I understand it.-40-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. We have two questions here. One iswhere we should aim in substance and the other is whether we shouldchange the range. That's a pictorial question. We can go either wayon the pictorial question.MR. ROOS. I would think, and this may be unrealistic, thatat this particular time whichever way we go, it would be appropriate[to provide] an early explanation in a public statement by theChairman or through some other mechanism as to what we actually wereseeking to accomplish in this meeting. In other words, in thissituation an understanding of what we are trying to do is so criticalcurrently that getting our story across through signaling [may not bethe way to go]. Maybe it is too early to talk about this--maybe itought to be in the directive--but whatever we come up with, if we optfor what the Chairman implied earlier, I just wonder whether thisshouldn't be expressed and explained quite openly or publicly withoutthe 30-day lapse that usually accompanies these things.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it presumably will be explained inthe testimony.MR. ROOS. That's when--the 21st? [Secretary's note:Chairman Volcker testified on July 20, 1981.]MR. PARTEE. On your question, I think it's really a matterof taste. We could say, as we often have with these ranges, that theyare there for a purpose. That is, things change, and we change [ourview of where we want to be] within the ranges. It looks as if therewas a change in the demand function for money and, therefore, we aregoing to come in low on M-1B and we're going to come in high on M2 andM3. Or, if you prefer, we could say there has been an apparent changein the relationships here and, therefore, we are going to reduce theM-1B range 1/2 point and increase the M2 and M3 ranges 1/2 point.It's just a matter of taste as to the cosmetics of how we go about it,Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think it is a matter of pictorialtaste. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I am very sympathetic to yourexpression and Larry Roos' expression of the way in which we ought toerr if we have to. I would take a different position on the ranges,however, and suggest that the more prudent thing to do in light of theweakness in the aggregates in the first half may be to take the bottomhalf of this range that we previously adopted. That would mean thatif M-1B could grow 10.4 percent, it would hit the midpoint of thepresent ranges; it would end up considerably below that, of course, if[second-half growth] came in below that. The reason I think this isimportant is that even to hit the bottom part of that range, we haveto have a pretty good rate of increase in terms of how the marketjudges that. We would have to have [growth at a rate of] 7.4 percentbetween now and December. And since they remember what we did lastyear, if they start seeing figures like that and we have not taken anyexplicit action to lower that range, I think that would disturb themmore than if we do lower it. It is quite true, as Larry says, that ifwe explain this at an early stage, that will help some. But all toooften the market doesn't seem to listen to these explanations; theyjust look at the cold figures. So, I would say we really ought to-41-7/6-7/81make [our objective] explicit and try to come in somewhere in thatlower half. I would rather come in a little above the lower part ofit, though, and would want growth a little higher than that ofalternative 2, which would bring us nearly to the lower part of theM-1B range. So far as the ranges for M2 and M3 are concerned, I'dleave those unchanged. If we come in somewhere in the lower part ofthe existing M-1B range, that would enhance the chances that M2 and M3would come in within the ranges that we specified; if they should turnout to be lower than that, then we have plenty of range to accommodatethat, too.MR. PARTEE. Would you just cut the range? Is that the idea,Bob?MR. BLACK. Yes, I'd cut it off at the midpoint of 4-3/4percent and have the range be 3-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent and try to comein somewhere within it. If we had had stronger performance in theaggregates up until now, I would not be as sympathetic to that, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are you for next year?MR. BLACK. Next year I would cut [the range for] M-1B downto 3 to 4-1/2 percent. That's not exactly what any of thesealternatives specify.MR. PARTEE. 3 to 4-1/2?MR. BLACK. Yes, 3 to 4-1/2 percent for M-1B and then I wouldtake the alternative III [ranges for the other aggregates] but I'dclip the top half of M2, M3, and bank credit by about 1 percentagepoint and leave it there. Most of those ranges might be prettyreasonable. They are not all that far apart so I don't feel asstrongly about that as I do about the desirability of emphasizing,either through explicitly cutting the range or through stating it veryclearly, that we are aiming at somewhere in the bottom half this year.That's really the important point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to say a few words first about how Iget to where I am. It's useful for thinking about ranges in thefuture to remember that we are dealing in a world now in which themoney demand function has been shifting all over the lot. And I agreewith Tony that one can't make interest rate forecasts from the moneygrowth ranges under these circumstances without having a great deal ofuncertainty. But I wouldn't express it the way he does. I don'tthink we ought to take these interest rate forecasts with a grain ofsalt. I think we ought to look very, very carefully at thepossibility that they may be right and at what that means for theselection of ranges. It seems to me we are looking at an economy withsome very strong increases. We have a lot of expansive forces goingon, but the economy is being held in check by very, very tightmonetary policy. High interest rates have slowed economic growthessentially to nothing. And if interest rates went down a lot, theeconomy would bounce right back again. On the other hand, I alsothink we have real interest rates where we want them now because weare making progress on inflation. If one believes the staff iscorrect that we are going to make more progress over the next 18-42-7/6-7/81months, we are going to have a rather dramatic shift in expectationsabout inflation. That means that unless nominal interest rates comedown as inflation subsides, we are going to have real interest ratesincreasing substantially. We are going to have a lot tighter monetarypolicy than we really want. If nominal interest rates come down, thenthe downward shifts in money demand that we have been experiencing inthe past several years are much less likely to occur. I'd like toremind you of how much this has meant for the course of the economythis year. If you look on page 6 of the Bluebook, you find that overthe fourth quarter of '80 through the second quarter of '81 shiftadjusted M-1B went up 2.2 percent at an annual rate. But if you addthe 5 percentage point shift in the money demand function that tookplace, that number converts to 7.2 percent. The point is that we maynot be anywhere near that lucky in getting downward shifts in moneydemand in the future.So, I think Chuck Partee is right. We may be sitting on asituation in which, in order to keep interest rates from going up likegangbusters, we have to permit a lot faster money growth than we havehad in the first half of this year. That means to me that we shouldstick for '81 with the same ranges we have. If we are fortunate andmoney demand continues to move down, growth will come in near thelower end of the ranges. If we are not so fortunate, we may end upwith growth over the four quarters more like the midpoint of therange. I would leave M2 alone; I don't think we need to change the M2range. And I would be inclined to abandon altogether the actual M1range along the lines that Steve suggested. For '82, I would beleaning in the direction of something like a 3 to 7 percent range forM-1B and maybe even 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 because I think wehave seen somewhat of a change in the relationship between the two--although heaven knows, developments may come along that would alterthose relationships between now and then. I'm wondering, in light ofthe uncertainty with which we've been looking at these M-1B numbers,if we ought to be thinking over the long run of leaning more heavilyon a broader aggregate such as M2 and perhaps indicate in ourannouncement this July that we are thinking along those lines.MR. PARTEE. The trouble with going toward leaning on M2 isthat we still haven't had a presentation of information that wouldindicate that it's a more reliable guide. One has an instinctivesense of that because it's more stable and closer to GNP, but wehaven't had that analysis.MR. SCHULTZ. But some comment in the directive to indicatethat it is indeed being looked at might well be worthwhile. Giventhat we are in fact looking at a family of aggregates and that none ofthese aggregates is behaving very well, it might be a good idea toindicate to people in the market that we are indeed looking at leastto some degree at M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make one comment on one ofGovernor Gramley's points, which I think is valid, but maybe not toomuch in the very short run. At some point, if inflation does comedown and interest rates come down, we may find we need much highergrowth in transactions balances relative to nominal GNP than anythingin recent experience has suggested. How we would ever make that shiftis very difficult psychologically in terms of all this numerologybecause we all keep talking about the need to reduce money growth, and-43-7/6-7/81it would give the wrong signal if we actually set a projection basedupon [the need for faster growth]. It's too early to assume that needanyway. Some day it's going to happen or it may happen. My reactionis that it's premature [to act on it now]. It may not be premature toraise the subject as a possibility for the future, but it's too earlyto raise the subject in terms of the actual targets we put downbecause I don't think we are there yet. And we might give a wrongsignal by leaning on it now even though I suspect it is going tohappen at some point. Some day we are going to have to say ratherflatly that the target is higher relative to nominal GNP precisely forthis reason, and I would consider putting a sentence or two of thatsort in the testimony. But it's probably too early to reflect it inany actual targets we set, because it will not be identified in thepublic mind with this rather sophisticated analysis but would just beinterpreted as a straightforward easing of policy. And that is notwhat would be meant. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I think Lyle has given us a verysophisticated argument against the proposition that the way to getinflation down is to keep pulling the aggregates down. I get thesimilar argument from a very theoretical side. The people who areexamining the post-World War I inflations conclude that at the end ofthe inflation [the monetary authority] can enormously increase themoney supply without rekindling inflation because that is whathappened then. But I share the Chairman's view that we are far fromthat point. Moreover, typically when one has had declining interestrates, velocity has not changed back to its previous behavior but hasremained high because there's an underlying trend that increases it.So, I would be very hesitant now to move in the direction of allowinghigher targets.There are two things we need to bear in mind. One is thesubstantive point about what we want to do; the other is thestrategic. The two substantive things we need to do are to avoid therepetition of 1980 by going to a very high rate from a low level,perhaps in order to get back on track, and thus conveying theimpression of a massive expansion. That suggests to me that we oughtto keep M-1B growing slowly the rest of the year, if necessary bychanging the target range downward. But that can also be done byspecifying that we're aiming at the lower end of the range. That'swhat the Germans have been doing, and recently they actually havechanged the target. The other thing we ought to do is to get M2 andM3 more or less on track. Yesterday's discussion shows that M-1B isincreasingly regarded as unreliable. I say that very reluctantlybecause I've favored transactions balances as a criterion. But itdoesn't seem to be a feasible criterion, at the present time at least.So, I think we need to focus on M2 and M3, and that suggests to meagain that either we lower the M-1B target or aim specifically at itslower end. In either event, I come out with something like thealternative 2 growth rates for '81.Now, for '82 I see Tony Solomon's point that if we make a bigmove on anything in '81, we can't make a very large move in '82.That's the strategic aspect of the matter. But I think there's stillroom for some reduction in the target for M-1B this year and a smallerreduction for it next year. I would go somewhere along the lines ofthe ranges in alternatives II and III on page 14.-44-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, with the exception of Mr. Black, I wasthe outlier on my forecast for inflation for next year. [My forecastwas] predicated on the idea that we would continue with the policy ofmonetary restraint. I disagree with Governor Wallich. I think wehave a real opportunity at this point to bring inflation down. Thereare a lot of indications that the groundwork has been laid and thatthere is sensitivity [to that possibility]. I certainly would agreewith Mr. Solomon, though, that it takes a period of intense price andwage competition to bring inflation down. We have that opportunityover the next four quarters and I think it is very important that wenot lose this opportunity for two reasons: (1) because the Americanpublic are going to get very impatient if they don't start to see somereal effects from the kind of policy we've been carrying out; and (2)because we have another big tax cut coming up on the first of July ofnext year and that's likely to be very stimulative.So, to me, the next four quarters are really crucial. It isvital that we have a continued policy of monetary restraint. Thereare risks on both sides. There is a risk in what I really would liketo see, which is a period of very slow growth or a mild recession, andthe risk is that it could get out of hand on the down side. I don'tthink that's likely to happen, first because there is a great deal oflatent demand in the economy and if the economy does weaken to thatdegree, interest rates would come down and that would have astimulative effect. Also we have another tax cut coming on October 1and we have continued heavy defense spending, [both of] which I thinkare likely to prove to be a support underneath the economy if itshould get much weaker than I would anticipate. The risk on the otherside of not having a firm policy of monetary restraint is that wecould have a very difficult time early next year. It seems to me thatthe period of greatest danger for the thrifts is that period; if weease up and then have this tax cut and the defense spending and theother things that could well take place, we could easily be in asituation in the first quarter of next year where interest rates arerising and there is tremendous pressure on the thrifts. I thinkthat's the period of great danger. It seems to me that we have a realopportunity here and it's very important that we not let thissituation get out of hand as we did last year. The economy is poisedso that we can exert a real effect on inflation.So, I would like to see us reduce the lower M1-B band forthis year to 3 percent from 3-1/2 percent. I see the arguments on theother side, but if we leave it at 3-1/2 percent the market would lookat it and say: "That points to a big increase for the remainder ofthis year and if the Fed weren't going to try to hit that target, whydid they leave it there?" I think that makes a lot of sense. Theargument can be made that if we put in 3 percent, then that is a realtarget and maybe we would have to hit it in spite of what may happenin the meantime. It seems to me that the stronger argument is that ifwe leave it at 3-1/2 percent, the market will anticipate that we'regoing to be pumping up the money supply pretty rapidly between now andthe end of the year to get to that figure. So, I'd like to see uslower that range to 3 percent on the down side.Next year, I do think there's likely to be a wide swing,particularly in M-1B. My anticipation is that the economy likely will-45-7/6-7/81remain somewhat sluggish in the first half. But if we do have somesuccess in getting inflation down and that tax cut hits on July 1, thesecond half of the year could be pretty strong and I think we arelikely to get some rather wide swings [in monetary growth]. I wouldopt for alternative III, which would mean a further lowering of thetarget range for M-1B on the bottom side but retaining the 3-pointrange.MR. PARTEE. May I ask: What does 3 percent imply for therest of the year? If [M-1B growth] were to come in at 3 percent,Steve, what would June to December be then?MR. AXILROD. Well, the June-to-December growth would bearound 6-1/2 percent. That would be the alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's consistent with alternative C incontinuing to--MR. AXILROD. That's alternative C. [M-1B growth] comes inat 3 percent for the year.MR. BLACK. You'd leave the upper part of the range unchangedthen, Fred?MR. SCHULTZ. I would. I'm very much afraid--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're also saying you'd leave itunchanged in '82?MR. SCHULTZ. I'd leave the upper part of the range alone forthis year or lower it 1/2 point. I wouldn't lower it by more thanthat. I am afraid of tightening these ranges too far.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you reduce the bottom limit of therange for this year, just pictorially, I think you'd want to reducethe top too because you wouldn't want to be widening the range in themiddle of the year.MR. SCHULTZ. All right. I'd accept that. I'm really muchmore concerned about the bottom part than I am the top. I'd acceptthe lowering of the top.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What would you do for '82?MR. SCHULTZ. 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would leave the top the same as thisyear and would reduce the bottom by 1/2 point further from this year.Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. May I remind you that we shouldn't take toomuch credit for the price easing? I never thought we were totally atfault for the price increases that we suffered from OPEC and food; andI don't think the fact that OPEC and food have calmed down has a greatdeal to do with monetary policy per se, except in the very long run.As a result, I think we ought to be very careful about what we do interms of interest rates. Nobody yet has mentioned housing; nobody hasmentioned the Chrysler problem; nobody has mentioned all the companies-46-7/6-7/81that have had their credit ratings downgraded; nobody has mentionedthe possibility that the thrifts are going to go [under] if we keepinterest rates up. I get the impression that we're really tearing atthe fabric of the financial world and the economy. If we persist inhaving very high interest rates over very long periods of time, we'regoing to cause a disaster in this country. It may not be next monthand it may not be next quarter, but it's going to be a severe problemand it's going to come down on our shoulders for having pushed theeconomy over the edge.I happen to agree with Tony Solomon on the short run becauseif we aim for the 3-1/2 percent lower end of the M-1B range for thisyear, then we have no place to go next year. We can put our ranges atany place up to 5 percent, but if growth were to come in [at or] above3-1/2 percent, we're going to be in a position of increasing the rateof growth of the money supply and not decreasing it. So, I think it'sfoolish to try to come in at that lower end. I think we're going tocome in at the lower end and I think we're going to come in at thehigher end on M2, which we've known since the staff was telling usthat in February. However, the markets are totally aware of ourproblems with M1-A and M-1B and M2. If you read the most recent DRIreport it describes exactly what our problems are in getting thesethings to come together. Therefore, I don't think we have anycredibility problem in explaining the difference between M-1B at thelower end of the range and M2 at the upper end of the range. Thatleads me to the decision that I don't think we should change theranges. We should stick with the M-1 B range of 3-1/2 to 6 percent.We ought to have good conversations and a good flow of informationback and forth between ourselves, the market, and increasingly withthe Congress, and we can explain what is happening. We don't have tochange the ranges to do that. I don't think we should go foralternative II; it's too strict. If people look at the first half ofthis year, everybody is aware that we're way under on the M-1B growthrate. Even if we don't achieve our current range the second half ofthe year, they will be understanding of it. And we can talk about it.When we come to next year, if we aim for a higher rate ofgrowth in money and presumably some easing in interest rates, which Ithink is appropriate at this point in time, then my preference is withLyle; I don't see any reason to tighten up. Nominal GNP next year isgoing to be a great deal larger than it is this year. Why reduce themoney supply and almost assure ourselves that we're going to maintainhigh interest rates for this long a period of time? It seems to methat we don't have to adopt any of these strategies. We could stickalmost exactly with the numbers that we have this year and, in effect,that represents a fairly tight monetary policy. So, I come downsomewhere between alternatives 1 and 2 on page 8 and for retaining the1981 targets for 1982, particularly since we are setting preliminarytargets for 1982. In the past we've trapped ourselves by setting[new] targets in July and reaffirming them in February. With all theuncertainties that we have, it seems to me we'd be better off to stayput now and, if necessary, change them in February but not commitourselves to a lowering of the targets this far in advance of actualeconomic developments.MR. PARTEE. Well, all of those ranges on page 14 lower thetargets a bit, Nancy. Alternative I lowers the target ranges by 1/2point.-47-7/6-7/81MR. FORD. It raises the M2 and M3 and bank credit ranges.MS. TEETERS. I wouldn't take any of these, Chuck.MR. PARTEE. Oh, I thought you said you'd take alternative I.MS. TEETERS. No, I'm talking about alternative 1 on page 8,which is the shorter-run target. I'd take the present ranges for '81[instead of any of those] on page 14. I don't see any reason tochange them.MR. PARTEE. I see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just make one point as afootnote. I think you are correct in worrying about [high] interestrates and what that might do to the financial fabric. The question ofstrategy is whether we take that risk in the short run or exacerbatethat risk by being too easy in some sense in the short run and havinghigh interest rates longer. I think that's the issue before us.MS. TEETERS. But that has been the issue repeatedly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MS. TEETERS. It has been over the past 2-1/2 years that I'vebeen here, and all we do is end up with high interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you could argue we haven't beentight enough.MS. TEETERS. Try to tell that to the construction industry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm embarrassed to say that I havechanged my position every day in the last four days, as I looked ateach of these permutations and combinations. I was in favor of almostevery single one that has been mentioned at one point or another. AndI must say I've come full circle. I won't bother you with why I camefull circle. The disadvantages of each of these approaches are prettyobvious, but let me explain why I now would recommend that we stay[with the targets we have] for the remainder of the year. Theproblem, I think we all agree, is primarily presentational. Fred,even though I agree with much of what you said, I would disagree withyou on the reaction of the market and the public. If we leave thetarget unchanged for this year and say that we expect to come in atthe lower end--I'm talking about M-1B obviously--I think that isbetter than lowering it a half point. If we lower it a half point,the market will believe we're going to make an enormous effort to comein at that lower target because, otherwise, why make the adjustment?If we leave the target range alone and say we expect to come in at thelower end or possibly even undershoot given unusual situations--velocity or what have you--I think the market would expect less of anexpansionary policy from us in the remaining few months. They wouldexpect less of a repeat of last year. There are so many disadvantagesof adjusting any of this or fine-tuning that I'm not sure what we gainthat is significant, and we constrain our hand for '82.-48-7/6-7/81We have a wide range of possibilities [for next year] becauseof this velocity question. It seems to me, however--and here I woulddisagree with Nancy--that for '82 we still need to show continuity ofpolicy and continued severe monetary restraint. What I would do isgive a preliminary view--emphasizing that it's very much subject toreview if there are unexpected changes in velocity and as we assessthe state of the economy--that we would cut the range for M-1B for '82by 1/2 point and leave the M2 and M3 ranges alone, recognizing that wehave not cut them for 2 or 3 years. It seems to me that there areoverwhelming technical arguments for that and I think they're fullyexplanatory. Everybody knows about the surge in moneymarket funds,and in general I think we have convinced everybody that we have a veryrestrictive policy. I don't think we have to worry about the factthat we haven't cut the M2 range in a couple of years. There are goodreasons, which everybody will accept. So, that would be myrecommendation.MR. WALLICH. That's a tighter fit for M2 than is proposed byany of the alternatives I through III on page 14, isn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He said leave it unchanged.MR. WALLICH. He'd leave it unchanged at 6 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 9.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would not lower it, right.MR. WALLICH. But the alternatives here all raise it, yousee.MR. PARTEE. They all raise it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Part of this whole credibility issueis a perception of a kind of simple-minded, if you want to call itthat, approach. If we ignored the recommendations of the staff lastyear to raise the M2 range for '81, at this point I don't see theargument for going ahead and raising it [now]. I don't believe theinnovations in financial instruments that we should expect next yearare going to be such that we should have the kind of growth in moneymarket funds that will put more pressure [on M2]. I would not raisethe range.MR. WALLICH. I wasn't disagreeing with your proposal; I wasjust trying to point out that you were really making a very toughproposal.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I think it's reasonably tough.In some ways, as I explained earlier, I think the markets are stillfocusing more on M-1B. And as I said, perversely I'm afraid, if welower the range a half point, the markets will expect us to make aneven greater effort to hit it than if we leave it alone and say weexpect growth to come in at the lower end.MR. SCHULTZ. Explain to me what worries you about that. Areyou worried that we would be making a major effort to get growth up to3 percent? Is that what bothers you? Or are your worried that thatis too constraining? Which side are you on?-49-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not talking about the substantivedecision on how we actually handle ourselves for the rest of the year,because we don't have full control of where we're going to come in.I'm talking about my impression of the public reaction or the marketreaction, which is that if we say that we're going to lower it a halfpoint, rather than say that we're leaving it alone but we expect tocome in at the low end, then the markets will expect a more determinedexpansionary effort on our part because we are fine-tuning the range.MR. SCHULTZ. A more determined expansionary effort if welower it to 3 percent than if we leave it where it is?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Than if we leave it alone and say weexpect to come in at the lower end or even possibly undershoot.MR. WALLICH. But the substance of it is that we shouldn'tmake M-1B grow very fast; whether we express that in terms of a targetor by saying we expect its growth to come in low is a matter ofstrategy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me say this, on the substance ofit: I feel that we should be careful not to [let growth] exceed thelower end and we should accept a little undershooting. I don't thinkwe'll get that much criticism because I don't see that it's going tobe timed with a recession. Obviously, if we were undershooting and wehad a recession simultaneously, we would get an enormous amount ofcriticism.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The next appointee to the Open marketCommittee is going to be a market psychiatrist!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we have every kind of therapisthere.MR. SCHULTZ. And the one who goes off will also need apsychiatrist!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think we're positioned really rather well withrespect to our '81 targets. Looking forward from last February, Ididn't expect that we'd be as well off as we are now, and I think weought to accept the good fortune that we have. So, I wouldn't tinkerwith the '81 targets. To be at the bottom end with respect to M-1Band at the upper end with respect to M2 is about as good as we canhope for. In fact, I'd be very happy if we ended the year in roughlythat position. So, I would leave those targets unchanged. I amconcerned somewhat by the shortfall that we are getting in M-1B.We've now had [minus] 5 percent in May and [minus] 10 percent in June.We do have a forecast of growth in July and I think there's anunderlying feeling that the risks are for too much growth in thesecond half of the year. But I have seen this pattern develop before,so I have no problem in beginning to resist this shortfall some, whichI think is consistent with the idea of moving between now and year-endtoward the lower end of the M-1B range. It doesn't do us any good inthe market to run double-digit shortfalls because what comes from thatis the expectation that we can't tolerate that for very long and we're-50-7/6-7/81going to have to resist it. So, I think some resistance to that isappropriate.As far as 1982 goes, I think we ought to keep the ranges forthe broader aggregates about the same as those we now have for 1981and I am torn between whether we should lower the M-1B range by a halfor a whole point. I could live with either. If we lowered it by awhole point, we'd be getting a little more consistency between thenarrower and the broader aggregates. But the important thing is thatwe lower the M-1B range; whether we lower it a half point or a wholepoint I'm not sure is significant. We are going through a period ofmaximum danger with regard to the inflation problem and the potentialdanger to structure as well as a possible recession over the next 12months. However, I'd rather be running that gauntlet over the next 12months than the 12 months after that or the 12 months after thatbecause we have begun to make some progress down the anti-inflationroad and the costs and the amount of that risk will be less over thenext 12 months than in the subsequent 12-month periods. From thestrategic point of view, we have to try to keep this anti-inflationarymomentum, of which monetary policy is a part, going over this year andnext year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, making a couple of generalpoints first, I certainly count myself solidly in the camp of thosewho would say we should err on the side of firmness now. I think thatis very important. I also tend to agree with Mr. Solomon that in allof the scenarios that are laid out here, particularly in the shortterm but maybe even beyond that, the interest rate profiles are toohigh. I also think that the actual growth of money over the secondhalf of the year is very important in terms of how we start off 1982.And when I look at some of those numbers that have money growth at 8or 10 percent in the second half of this year looking toward gettingdown to 2 or 3 percent next year, the trajectory that presents createssome real problems for me as well. One other general point: I thinkSteve implied that the staff thought that some of the definitionalkinds of problems associated with M2 and M3 relative to M1 might beless next year. I'm not at all sure of that. It seems to me theycould be greater, given what the DIDC is doing and the possibility oflegislation for an all-saver type certificate or something like that.MR. AXILROD. I didn't mean to imply that.MR. CORRIGAN. Okay. Well, I don't think we're out of thewoods by any means in terms of those problems with the broaderaggregates. As far as the specifics, taking the 1981 targets first, Irather strongly favor the view of retaining the '81 targets as is. Tochange them involves two problems for me: One is the strategicproblem for next year; and the other, which may be more important, isthat to do so would give the impression that we really know enough tobe able to fine-tune these aggregates at midstream by 1/2 point orwhatever. I don't find that very appealing. So, I would retain theexisting targets for 1981 although, as I will indicate later, Icertainly would not mind an outcome that looks like alternative 2 onpage 8. I would not change the targets. I do have some sympathy forthe idea of getting rid of the M1-A measure just to get rid of it.-51-7/6-7/81In terms of 1982, again partly because of this potentialproblem I see with M2, M3, and bank credit, my view at this time wouldbe to state a target for M-1B of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, using the3-point band. And as Mr. Solomon suggests, right now I would leavethe targets for the broader aggregates for '82 where they are for '81,with some rather full explanation in your testimony that partlybecause of uncertainties about the tax legislation or whatever we willhave to take a harder look at these at the beginning of next year.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So you're recommending a full pointreduction in the M-1B rate for 1982?MR. CORRIGAN. It's a half point on the top and a full pointon the bottom.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. You would solve half theproblems by abandoning M-1.MR. MORRIS. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That simplifies it.MR. BLACK. If he wants to get rid of M2, he can do so.MR. MORRIS. Well, I wasn't proposing that we do that in '81.In general, in order to improve communications between the FederalReserve and the public, we shouldn't change the guidelines unlessthere's a pressing need to do so. I think it generates confusion.And I don't see any pressing need to change the 1981 guidelines. ButI'm not sure I would do what you're suggesting, Paul, which is tosuggest to the [Congressional] Committees that we're confident we aregoing to come in at the lower end of the range, because this M-1Bmonster is an extremely volatile instrument. Last year half of theyear's total increase in M-1B occurred in one week. I think it wouldbe fine to say that we want to be within the range, but I'm not sureI'd want to commit myself to coming in at the lower end even thoughwe're way below it at the moment. I thought Steve's remarks supportedextremely well my view of getting rid of the M-1s as a guideline. Heonly concluded that we should get rid of M1-A; I don't quiteunderstand that. But I would go beyond Lyle Gramley's position anduse M3 and bank credit as guidelines rather than go to the halfwayhouse of M2. If we were to do [as I suggest], we would accomplish oneof the things that we're concerned about. That is, we're concernedabout a one-time shift in the demand for the narrow aggregates in theevent of a sharp decline in interest rates, and it would no longer bea problem. I just don't see how we could accommodate that with anM-1B guideline. But if we had an M3 and bank credit guideline, wecould accommodate it very easily. There are two other advantages, itseems to me, of such a shift. One is that there's a great deal lessnoise in the broader aggregates than in a narrower one. The noisefactor, which is huge in M-1B, gives the monetarists a shot at usseveral times a year. They say the money supply is either growing toofast or too slow. There's no way we're going to get M-1B growing atanything approximating a straight line because of the heavy noisecontent, which was even demonstrated recently in the [articlepublished by] the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank.-52-7/6-7/81MR. ROOS. Monetarists don't shoot at other monetarists,Frank, and we're all monetarists.MR. MORRIS. Another nice little problem it would solve isthe weekly money supply problem because even though we'd be givinginformation to the market every week on the M1s, the market would notbe weighing that so heavily since they would know we were no longergearing policy to M1 but to the broader aggregates. Now, assumingthis advice is not going to be accepted--MR. GRAMLEY. I find it very persuasive. You ought keep on.MR. PARTEE. You ought to be a debater, Frank.MR. MORRIS. --if we could get away with cutting the rangefor M-1B by 1/2 of one percentage point next year and with keeping theother ranges where they were, I think that would be an excellentoutcome. If we can't, then I would be willing to cut the whole batchby 1/2 percentage point. And I would support Steve's suggestion thatif we're going to have an M-1B target, we have solely a shift-adjustedtarget. Having two targets for M-1B is also a source of confusion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure that's what Steve wassuggesting. We would have an M1 target period, not shift-adjusted.MR. AXILROD. Yes, no M1-A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's on the presumption that we declarethe shift is completed.MR. MORRIS. I see.MR. AXILROD. Or irrelevant.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either completed or irrelevant, one or theother.MR. MORRIS. But it may not be completed.MR. PARTEE. That's the problem.MR. AXILROD. That's why I was suggesting widening the range.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to make a parentheticalcomment that may be of some use. I encountered enormous resentment inEurope among government officials and central bank officials about ourcontinuing to publish the weekly money supply statistics. Maybe theirreaction is much too excessive, but they believe that we unnecessarilyencourage extra volatility above and beyond what our October '79approach involved by our continuation of the weekly publications. Ijust pass that along for what it's worth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to have to consider that oneof these days. I take it that the predominant comment from marketpeople, as you would expect, is that they want us to continue it.There are some comments in the other direction, however; but all themarket people argue that the more information they get the better.-53-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I find that quite a few leadingbankers in New York feel exactly the opposite.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The farther away you get from the marketoperator types, the less sympathetic people, including the more seniorbankers, are to that. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with the generalthrust of your opening statement, especially the part where you seemedto say that we should take the risk on the side of more softness inthe economy rather than try to counter any sluggishness that mightoccur in the short run. From my point of view, probably the mostcritical question right now is whether we continue to do what we saidwe were going to do--whether we are going to continue to reducegradually the growth of money--or whether we are going to try toadjust our position in light of what we think we see developing in theeconomy. To me it's extremely important to be perceived as doing whatwe said we were going to do. Rather than try to adjust to the short-run changes that we see, which might make more sense from the short-run point of view, I think it's better to continue to do what we saidwe were going to do. That is likely to have a much more decisiveimpact on inflationary expectations. So, for that reason I wouldfavor, as have others, keeping the 1981 targets where they are. Iwould not change the ranges at all for the reasons set forth byseveral of you, particularly those set forth by Tony Solomon. I wouldalso for the rest of 1981 opt for alternative 2 on page 8. But it'simportant to try to keep M2 and M3 as close to their target ranges aspossible, and therefore, I would be willing to accept growth in M-1Bof 3-1/2 percent [or less in the second half of this year]. In theinterest of trying to keep M2 and M3 close to their ranges, it'simportant to accept the shortfall for the rest of the year in M-1B.As for 1982, I would favor strategy 2 as indicated on page12, accepting the 3-1/2 percent growth for M-1B for 1981, and movingback to the 4-1/4 percent midpoint of the range for 1982. That, Ithink, implies some variant of alternative II on page 14.MR. PARTEE. I think it's alternative I.MR. RICE. You may be right.MR. PARTEE. Well, you might ask what the staff had in mind.MR. RICE. What I was going to propose is that, in effect, wedo what we said we were going to do and reduce the M-1B range by 1/2percentage point. So, [for 1982] I'd move to a range of 3 to 5-1/2percent and leave the ranges for M2 and M3 where they are right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say that given all thecomplications of this, I think the meeting is going to run until afterlunch. I'd like to get through this preliminary go-around and maybebefore we resolve this turn to the short run because I think that hassome influence on how we finally come out. I suspect we're going tocontinue the meeting after lunch. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me just make acouple of preliminary comments as background to my recommendations.First of all, I feel that there's a good deal of latent strength in-54-7/6-7/81the economy and that at any indication of lower interest rates, forexample, that strength will come forth and we'll have a quitedifferent problem than we may be facing right now. Secondly, it doesseem to me that we've made some real progress against inflation andthat the public is at least willing to accept that. To be sure, mostof it has not been of our own making; it has been in both energy andfood prices. Nonetheless, the stage is set. And one lastobservation: If it is true that we've come to this point for whateverreasons, whether we've had a part in it or not isn't important.Historically, the Federal Reserve has always come up to the hitchingpost and then backed off simply because the Administration and theCongress have thrown bricks at us or have not been supportive of apolicy of restraint. Through the course of recent history at least,we've backed off and we've made a mistake each time. I think we havean opportunity this time to carry forward what we should have donebefore because for the first time ever we do have, for whatever lengthof time, the support of the Administration at least. So, we ought totake advantage of that opportunity. That is the background.With that background, I would like to propose that we notchange the ranges for the remainder of 1981. I'd leave them the samewith the understanding, [explained] through testimony or otherwise--and I think the market already understands--that we're probablylooking to the lower end of the range. The fact that M2 and M3 arerunning very high in the range or outside of the range at the momentseems to me to be consistent with perhaps running at the bottom endof, or even below, the M-1B range for the remainder of this year,while M2 and M3 are right at the top of their ranges. As a result,the fact that we may end up with M-1B below the lower end of the rangefor 1981 is not important. I wouldn't move the ranges downward simplyto accommodate that shortfall.MR. MORRIS. We could juggle the shift adjustment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unfortunately, the only new evidence wehave on the shift adjustment would lower the adjusted M-1B. If wewanted to take that evidence from this Michigan survey, that's--MR. GUFFEY. Well, I think we ought to leave it right whereit is. That story can be told from the picture that will unfold in1981, and I think it leaves open the lines of communication even withthe monetarists. For 1982, from the alternatives on page 14, I likelowering the range of M-1B coupled with broadening the range to 3percentage points, so 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent has some attractivenessto me. But I'd also retain the present ranges for M2, M3, and bankcredit. I'm not sure what those all mean. For M2 at least I'd retainthe present range, the 6 to 9 percent. As to the short run and whatwe do in the next month, as I understand the procedure, we're notgoing to talk about that right now. So I'll stop. I do have somecomments to make about that, however.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. On the substantive issues of where policy shouldgo, I agree with your opening statement and with the consensus that'sdeveloping that, given that there are risks on both sides, we have torun the risk of holding tight.-55-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just restate my own semantics. Ithink you have stated it correctly. There are risks in everything wedo. I think the lesser risk is--MR. FORD. The holding tight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --holding tight, not that that's thegreater risk.MR. RICE. Did I summarize it wrong?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think the sense of it is clearenough, but just as a semantic matter I think we're minimizing whatinevitable risks there are by doing that. There are risks with any ofthese alternatives.MR. FORD. Next, with due regard for Nancy's and otherpeople's concern about the thrifts, I very deeply share that concern,but I think we can lose with the thrifts either way in that there's alesser risk of playing to win now in the next few months than byletting their equity run down longer and facing the same problem ayear from now with less equity when that turnaround comes, as Fred sonicely put it. Substantively, my thinking goes from that point. Thatsays then, concerning the '81 targets, to leave the ranges where theyare. There are two approaches: the one Fred suggested or leaving theranges where they are and explaining that we're willing to acceptbeing at the lower end or even a little below [on M-1B]. I'd put morestress on getting M2 within the top of the target, if we possibly can,even though the staff forecast suggests it will be a hard thing to dowithout blowing interest rates through the roof. But I just amskeptical of that view, or I should say more optimistic about theoutlook for interest rates than they show in their forecast. We'repraying for a better interest rate forecast than the one they have.If theirs is right, we're in big trouble with the consensus that we'redeveloping here.Concerning the 1982 targets, like a number of previousspeakers, I think we need an alternative to the ones shown.Basically, it's alternative II with a modification on the M2 target.I'd like to see M2 kept where it is because if we set an M2 targetwith a cap of 9-1/2 percent, that would be the highest rate we've hadat any time--if my table here is correct--since July of 1977. And I'mworried that even though there are technical reasons for seeing M2 asbeing somewhat more expansive than previously, the markets keeprecords of this stuff and if they see us moving M2 to the highestrange we've set in four years, that could hurt our credibility andexacerbate the problem of getting within the targets. So, I'd saylet's go for alternative II on the M-1B range, but cut M2 down to thepresent range of 6 to 9 percent [despite] the grounds that it's hardto cut it given the structural changes that Steve and the staff havepointed out to us. Concerning the short run--well, we don't need totalk about the next quarter yet since you want to do that after lunch.The only other thing I'd say is that, Frank, you're not completelyalone in the woods. I have developed a touch of Morrismania and I'dsay we should move in the direction of considering dropping M1-Aimmediately. I'd go at least that far with Frank.MR. MORRIS. You don't have much mania!-56-7/6-7/81MR. BLACK. Even I have that much!MR. FORD. And step two toward Morrismania is at least torestate our concerns about the very substantial structural problemswith M-1B. Deemphasizing M-1B a bit in our statements would be theway I'd lean toward Mr. Morris's position on which aggregates toemphasize.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Basically I'm in favor of what I call the KISSapproach: Keep it simple, sir.MR. SCHULTZ. Or keep it simple, stupid.MR. BALLES. Your opening statement, which has been supportedwidely around the table now, was that there's much more to be lostthan to be gained by tinkering with these 1981 ranges. In fact, Idon't recall that we've done a midyear correction heretofore. Ifthat's wrong, I withdraw the comment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't had much experience. I thinkwhat that means is that we haven't done it for two years.MR. BALLES. The latitude with the present ranges seems to meto be adequate for the balance of this year. With respect to thealternatives for 1982 set forth on page 14, I would go for alternativeI for M-1B, which is to drop the range by 1/2 point, but I find itdifficult to buy any of those alternatives for M2, M3, and bankcredit. A number of people have spoken on this so far, and I wouldcome out bottom line the same way, to leave those ranges for thebroader aggregates the same as they are now. However, I would beginformally and more explicitly, following up on what Lyle said, to givemore recognition to M2. We have done that in a very subjective way inour recent published directives. We can all recall the time when wewent as far as saying we would give it equal weight. That has beensome years ago now. Perhaps it needs to be discussed at some lengthhow far we go in the formal sense in giving more recognition to M2.If you look at the spread between M1 and M2 over quite a long periodof time, it bounces all over. I have a table--Bill says he has onetoo--that shows that over the last 20 years that spread has averagedabout 3-1/4 percentage points. The 4-1/4 point spread which is shownon page 14 between the midpoints of M-1B and M2 just seems to me to beexcessively high. Coming in somewhere around the historical averagespread of 3-1/4 points would justify leaving the M2 range at 6 to 9percent for next year, which is where it is now. One of the reasons Iwould lean more toward M2 in a formal sense in our policydeliberations is that I have some skepticism about M-1B; I don't shareFrank's view completely, but we are dealing with a very tricky animalin the shift-adjusted M-1B. And at least for next year, that gives usperhaps good reason to place more weight on M2. As a number of othershave said, I wouldn't be unhappy at all if we dropped M1-A altogetherand do it right now. When we get into the short-run specs, the June-to-September period, I'd like to say more about leaning asaggressively against undershoots as overshoots, but that discussioncomes up later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.-57-7/6-7/81MR. BOYKIN. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I also would agree with thesubstantive comments that you made in your opening statement. Withrespect to the strategy for the rest of 1981, I would tend to favoralternative 2 on page 8. I would not make any adjustments in the '81ranges; I would just let those stand the way they are.As for the strategy for 1982-83, I would look to strategy 2.With respect to the ranges for 1982, I would go for a 1/2 pointreduction in the M-1B range to 3 to 5-1/2 percent. I would also bevery inclined to leave the M2, M3, and bank credit ranges where theyare currently. It may be because I sit next to Frank Morris, but I'mbeginning to find quite a bit of sympathy for looking a little closerat M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I'm impressed with the power of thenumber. We should remind ourselves that [when] we were sitting here ayear ago and thinking about the future we forgot base drift in settingour targets. If we go back and adjust for that and secondly if weadjust for the changes that have occurred in M-1B--and the Michigansurvey, I think, does not include corporations' use of money funds inthe transactions balance set-up--the adjustment probably is in theother direction. [If] we were sitting around the table at the momentfaced with the fact that we were over our targets, not under ourtargets because of the base-drift problem and the adjustment of M-1B,I wonder what our reactions would be. I think we can get trapped bythe numbers we're playing with here if we're not careful.Second, contrary to the view most people have expressed, I'dbe very strongly in favor of changing our targets at the moment. Ithink we're going to get trapped next spring if we don't. Supposewe're successful in the sense of coming in at the lower end or less;that becomes our base, if we use precedent on this score. Think whatkind of adjustments we're going to have to make and to explain at thatstage to make this fit any kind of economic analysis related to thosethat we've heard. If we're not careful, we're going to be increasingour numbers in February. I feel it's much easier to try to explain itnow. Also, if we set targets, we ought to try to shoot for themidpoint. When we set targets and say we're going to shoot at thelower end or less, I think we're playing games a little. Moreover, ifwe have to make an adjustment, I think it is easier to make it now andthen not make one in February. I think we have ourselves trapped bythis annual review, particularly when we base it on where we arerather than on having some continuity in the series over time. I'd bein favor of making the adjustment now and, if we're lucky, that wouldbring us closer to the midpoint of the adjusted range. Then we wouldnot have to make a change on an annual basis to make a continuouseffort to achieve our inflation objective. It seems to me that weought to avoid getting trapped into basing our ranges on where we areand do it rather on a continuous series over time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn, you can make an interimconcluding comment and we can have a coffee break.MR. KEEHN. Well, I'd best be brief! With regard to 1981, itseems to me that from the earlier discussion, we're clearly in alearning phase [regarding the relationship] between M-1B and M2. And-58-7/6-7/81until we learn more about the downward shifts, it's awfully hard to beprecise. To change either range at this point implies a greaterdegree of precision than may perhaps be the case. I don't see how wecan logically change one without the other. Being new to this, Ithink the outside perception is that the actual results count muchmore than how they actually relate to our ranges. So, I'd be in favorof not making any change at this point.With regard to 1982, it seems to me that a great deal hasalready been accomplished and that for all the reasons that have beenstated we will have lost a great deal if we do not continue thedownward shift. The visibility of reducing the numbers somewhat has agreat positive effect. Therefore, I'd be in favor of alternative Ifor M-1B but would leave the other ranges where they currently arefor fear that if we raise them at all, it would have a negative marketreaction.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make one or maybe two commentsbefore the coffee break. Most people have said: "Keep the rangesthis year the same," which was my instinct when I was thinking aboutit before. However, I found that Governor Schultz raised some rathercogent points. I did a little arithmetic this morning and I think onecan argue, although I'd want to confirm this arithmetic, that it'sreasonably safe--that may overstate it a bit--to expect that we wouldcome within the M-1B range if we lowered it by 1/2 percentage point.That may give us the leeway that Frank is worried about in theunfortunate circumstance that M-1B growth would go up. I still don'tthink it's going to go up above the upper end, but as opposed tosaying we're going to be in the lower end of the range there may besome advantage in just reducing the range a little this year.Everybody probably changes their mind on this, like Tony Solomon, butI find the case for keeping the range less persuasive than my owninitial instinct suggested, depending upon just how the arithmeticworks out. I think the arithmetic works out rather favorably on that,although I'd want to look at it again. Anyhow, let's go to the coffeebreak and after the coffee break we'll go to the short run; and thenwe'll go back to the long run again and make sure the short run fitswith what we want to do in the long run.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we are back on page 15 [of theBluebook]. Is that where we are, Mr. Axilrod, for the short-runranges? I'm not sure on the arithmetic of how the short-term rangesmatch with the long-term ranges. Maybe you can inject something now.Do you have another statement to make about the short-term ranges?MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, I had not planned on anysubstantial statement in view of the preceding one. But I thought itmight be useful to expand at least a little bit on how these short-runranges relate to the longer-run ranges. And that would give me anopportunity to provide some additional data that would be relevant tothe Committee's preceding discussion. We constructed alternative A toreach the midpoint of the present longer-run range for M-1B by thefourth quarter. Given the shortfall in money growth in May and thenin June bringing the level down even further, unfortunately that[calls for] a very rapid growth rate for M-1B month by month [in theJune-to-September period] of around 10-1/2 percent. Alternative A is-59-7/6-7/81associated with a slower growth rate on a quarterly average basis inthe third quarter of around 4 percent, and then of course by thefourth quarter [as the quarterly growth rate] veers toward the 10-1/2percent monthly rate, the fourth-quarter average rate would be around10.3 percent. Alternative B again has a relatively rapid growth monthby month of 8-1/2 percent in M-1B, and that alternative wasconstructed to get toward the bottom end of the present range. Itactually implies a growth Q4 to Q4 of 3.9 percent, which is somewhatabove the bottom of the present range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Fourth quarter to fourth quarter? And itimplies for the two quarters, 2.8--MR. AXILROD. For the two quarters it's about 5-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, for the two quarters on average. Butit would imply [quarterly average growth rates], assuming [a fairlysmooth trajectory month-by-month], of 2.8 and 8.2 percent, right?MR. AXILROD. That's right. And alternative C, Mr. Chairman,goes to the bottom end of a range that is 1/2 point lower than thecurrent 3-1/2 to 6 percent range, should the Committee be consideringthat. Even so, that would imply month-by-month growth in M-1B on theorder of 6-1/2 percent, again given the low starting point of June.Of course, if there should be any upward revision in that figure andif you're thinking of the level as the ultimate target, it would tendto lower that growth rate; and a downward revision would tend to[raise] that growth rate. That would give you growth of 1-1/2 percentin the third quarter and 6 percent in the fourth quarter, againveering toward the monthly growth rate by the time of the fourthquarter, and it would only give you 3 percent Q4 to Q 4 .Now, those are a lot of numbers, but if the Committee wouldindulge me with a little patience for a bit, I think it would behelpful, Mr. Chairman, to give two more sets of numbers that aren'tshown [in the Bluebook], because the upper ends of the ranges are notirrelevant in terms of announcement effects when the Committeereaffirms or changes or does whatever to its targets. Given what hashappened in the first half of the year, the growth rates in the secondhalf implied by the upper ends of the ranges are, of course, verylarge as you can tell. For example, if we had Q4-to-Q4 growth of 6percent, which is the upper end of the M-1B range, given what hashappened thus far this year, the monthly growth rate would be on theorder of 13-1/2 percent; that would give you quarterly average growthof 6 percent in the third quarter and 13-1/2 percent in the fourth.If the upper end of the present range were reduced by 1/2 point, say,the potential monthly growth to get 5-1/2 percent would be around12-1/4 percent from now on, with a third quarter of 5-1/4 percent,which looks reasonable, and a fourth quarter, as the arithmetic worksout, of around 12-1/2 percent. That gives you an idea of thedimensions that are involved.Finally, associated funds rate ranges were presented [in theBluebook] with the three alternatives. The only range that implies aneasing in the money market, from our analysis, is the rapid growthrates of alternative A, and that I think has been amply explained. Itcomes out of this dilemma involved in analyzing money demand relativeto GNP. If there is a further sharp downward shift in money demand or-60-7/6-7/81if GNP is indeed weaker than we have projected, then of course thatlower funds rate range of alternative A could well develop with lessrapid growth than is called for in alternative A. But under theassumptions that we have been working with, we have more moderatemoney market conditions associated with "A," while "B" and "C" implycurrent or somewhat tighter money market conditions on our analysis,again I stress, given the GNP projection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's apart from the difficulties ofany short-run interest rate forecast. According to the model theydepend upon a GNP projection, which may be unreliable; and, therefore,if we get a weaker GNP we can get much lower interest rates consistentwith any of these forecasts. Who would like to wade into this short-run problem? Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think it comes down to how one weighs therisks of growth in the aggregates in the second half of this year thatis too rapid and a repeat of what happened last year versus acumulative shortfall in the aggregates. We've seen the possiblebeginnings of [a cumulative shortfall] in June and July and I do givesome weight to that possibility. I would come out somewhere between"B" and "C" on page 15, preferring to err more in the direction of "C"than "B," but somewhere in that "B" to "C" area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman I would support alterative B.I like the idea of having a plan to hit the lower level of the rangeor to get close to it by November. I don't think I would want topublish that objective in the report we put out or, in other words,commit ourselves to being on that particular course, given thevolatility of these numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What alternative do we have other than topublish?MR. MORRIS. The alternative would simply be to state thatour objective for the June-to-September period is to produce thegrowth rates in alternative B, without stating explicitly that theyare designed--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, you would put in the 8-1/2 percent.MR. MORRIS. Oh, yes. But I'd just not say that these aredesigned to get us to the lower end of the range by November. Since Ithink the third quarter is going to be weaker than the staff isprojecting, this can probably be accomplished without as much interestrate pressure as in the forecast, so I would support a funds range of14 to 20 percent rather than the 16 to 22 percent shown.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have a comment on the funds range,Mr. Boehne?MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I would have something like 16 to 22percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.-61-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we can afford to do arepeat of last year and that seems to be a pretty widespread feelingin the Committee. It seems to me, therefore, that we have to befairly close to alternative C for the remainder of this year. I wouldgo for something between 6-1/2 and 7 percent [for M-1B]. We couldphrase it as "6-1/2 percent or slightly more" in the directive. Thatwould be consistent with a borrowing assumption of $1-1/2 billion inour view and would probably give us a fed funds range of 15 to 20percent. The midpoint of that is where we would likely come out,which would be a fed funds rate in the 17 to 18 percent area. Thatwould be my view, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I share the view that we have to avoid arepetition of '80 but we also have to avoid a repetition of '79. Itwould be the third year if that happened. I don't think M-1B byitself is all that important, but the appearance that it is risingrapidly would be very damaging. I think we ought to stress that moreweight is being attached to M2 and, in that context, I would say M2growth at 8 percent seems desirable with M-1B at 7 percent, let's say,and the funds rate range at 17 to 22 or 23 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the near-term growth rate[for M-1B] shown in alternative B would be about right and, as Steveindicated a moment ago, that would give us a fourth quarter '80 tofourth quarter '81 growth rate of 3.9 percent, which would put us alittle above the floor of our current range. I think the moreimportant question may be what we do with the federal funds raterange. As I have stated several times, I favor elimination of thesefunds rate ranges, and we have moved several steps in that generaldirection. We first widened them, and then we had the top and lowerlimits as points where we would check, and now we have moved into therealm where they are points where you may ask us to consult. I'd liketo go a step further and just eliminate those altogether. But Irecognize that that's probably not going to be the consensus of thegroup. So, I would put the range at about 14 to 20 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would opt foralternative C as shown on page 15 for both M-1B and M2 for theintermeeting period. Because of all the uncertainty that surroundsthe velocity and shift in demand for money and all the other boogie-men we seem to come up with, it seems to me that it is a time to focusa little more closely on interest rates. Thus, I would start out onthe side of not wanting to see interest rates drop very quicklythrough the remainder of this year, and a 16 to 20 percent range is mypreference for federal funds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 16 to 20 percent?MR. GUFFEY. I beg your pardon, 16 to 22 percent. The "B"federal funds rate range, but the "C" aggregates rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.-62-7/6-7/81MR. FORD. I come out close to "C" with the fed funds rangeof "B," as Roger has just said, or better yet widening the bandfurther or certainly not narrowing it because fed funds today I'm toldare trading at 19 percent. A couple of people have suggested that weput the cap at 20 percent; were that to lead the Desk under anycircumstances to start injecting funds after we walk out of here, thatwould undermine the whole philosophy or strategy that you laid out atthe beginning of the meeting. So, I think we either have to widen thefed funds range or for sure not lower its upper end to avoid givingany signals in the next few days of loosening policy significantly. Iam concerned about the target base drift question, which only oneperson raised--about where all of this leaves us at the end of theyear, depending on where we come out in the range, and how we adjustto that. I don't have the answer, but I want to share the expressionof concern--I think it was Willis who put it on the table--that weshould think ahead as to where this short-run decision we're makingtoday leaves us at the end of the year in terms of bringing theaggregates in line with the longer-range objectives that you have totalk about on the 21st of July. I just need more information from thestaff as to whether we face a base drift problem that is the reverseof the usual drift up. If I understood Willis right, he was implyingthat if growth comes in low and we have trouble getting M-1B up intothe range, we might have a reverse base drift problem. I don't knowabout that. I'd like to hear more. So, put me down for a little lesstight than "C," keeping the fed funds range about centered on where itis now, 19 percent, and either loosening that up or certainly notlowering the top.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just explore the implications. Yousay leave the federal funds where it is, meaning--MR. FORD. It's 16 to 22 percent now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, that's the range. But where wouldyou put the borrowing? If you lower the borrowing, the funds ratepresumably will come down. The borrowing this week was $1.4 billion.Was that what--MR. FORD. Yes, $1.5 billion seems consistent with that; I'mnot exactly sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we as members ofthe Committee are indulging ourselves a bit in picking and choosingfrom these various alternatives in trying to get a package here. I'dlike the monetary aggregates to come in low and interest rates to be alittle lower and the economy to keep going where it is. I don't knowif we can get there from here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a consensus on that?MR. SCHULTZ. No, I want the economy to be a little weaker.MR. GRAMLEY. I would suggest something along the followinglines: Using the aggregates of "B," a federal funds rate range of 15to 21 percent, a borrowing figure of $1-1/2 to $1-3/4 billion, and anunderstanding that if the aggregates fall short and that does not-63-7/6-7/81happen in the context of a weakening economy, we let them. I amprepared to see actual money growth well below where we are targetedso long as it reflects a downward shift in money demand. And that's,in effect, what I'm saying. If we get a continuation of the downwardshift in money demand and, therefore, low growth in the aggregates, Iwould not fight it. But I would like to see us arrive at someagreement that if in fact the staff is right and we get a reversion ofmoney demand to what normal relationships would suggest, we won't letinterest rates go up a long way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, I come down close to where Lyle does. Iwould put the federal funds rate at 14 to 20 percent and borrowingsbetween $1-1/4 and $1-3/4 billion. If [money growth] begins to fallshort, I would permit it, but I certainly wouldn't permit it to theextent that we did in May and June. I think we overdid it in movingdown on that particular path. Like Frank, I think the [nominal GNP]is going to be somewhat weaker than is being projected, and I'm notsure whether it's going to come out of the real side or inflation. Wehave had some short-term inflation gains that are going to betemporary and we may get a nominal GNP that's a little low over thisthird quarter; so we could get the 8-1/2 percent rate of real growthwith the 14 to 20 percent fed funds rate at this point. If growthfalls short because we don't get the rebound in money, that's onething; but if it's falling short because the economy is plunging, Iwill have a different attitude toward it. I assume that if we getinformation that the economy is either growing too fast or too slow interms of what we're anticipating, we will have a conference call.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Steve, what's the published fed funds band inthe last directive?MR. AXILROD. 16 to 22 percent. It will be published.MR. CORRIGAN. For the past 3 weeks in this past intermeetingperiod, what did you think the borrowing level was?MR. AXILROD. First we thought $1.6 billion; that was a weekago. This week we think $1.4 billion, but it's averaging $1.9 billionto this time. We thought consistent with $1.6 billion we'd have tosee the funds rate move down toward 18 percent and it didn't; and wethought consistent with $1.4 billion, the funds rate would be in the17 to 18 percent area and it isn't there yet.MR. CORRIGAN. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically, they ought to be givingaway federal funds tomorrow afternoon.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I'm in the area of "C" partlybecause I think we don't want to repeat 1980 but also because I havean eye on where we're going to start off 1982. Steve said that thequarterly average number toward the end of the year with "B" gets usup in the 8-1/2 percent area and that to me is troublesome. I getmore and more attracted to "C" with the advantage of Mr. Solomon's-64-7/6-7/81comment to the effect that, at least as they view the world, we couldget [the growth rates of] "C" with a funds rate of 15 to 20 or 21percent--either one would be all right with me--and an initialborrowings level of $1-1/2 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I ran out of names--no, Mr. Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. I think the economy is going to be a littleweaker in the third quarter and to me that's a consummation devoutlyto be wished for. I would not move too rapidly to offset a littleeconomic weakness; and under those circumstance I think alternative Cis as fast as we ought to go, not as slow as we ought to go. So, Iwould favor alternative C for M-1B and M2 and I would start theborrowings at $1.5 billion and put the fed funds range at 15 to 21percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. This platter of choices is almost enough togive us indigestion. Reverting to what Bob Black had to say in hisopening remarks yesterday about the June 17th conference call, I sharethe view that the weakness we accepted was a little more than I had inmind at the time. But after last year's M-1B growth of 6-3/4 percent,if I recall the adjusted figure, the 3-1/2 percent lower end of therange, if that's where we're going to end up this year, is an awfullysharp deceleration. The only way I can justify that in terms of notpushing the economy over the brink and creating a serious recession isthe evidence, reasonably persuasive, that there has been a downwardshift in the demand for money. I think it would be a great mistake ifwe ended up the year under that 3-1/2 percent lower limit, even givenwhat seems to be going on in terms of a downward shift in moneydemand. But to hedge my bet to make sure that we don't undershoot forthe year as a whole, for the June-to-September period I'd lean moretoward the alternative B specs, including the [associated] federalfunds range, than I would those of alternative C. Again, I would liketo raise the issue of whether we should at this time explicitly placemore emphasis on M2, which I would favor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just comment on this sharpdeceleration. I think it really is misleading. I looked at somefigures yesterday on the annual growth. We started out this year fromthe highest quarter we had last year, and it was an exceptionally highquarter. When you look at this in a broader perspective, taking allthe quarters into account, if we end up at the 3-1/2 percent lower endof the range, we're only slightly below the average we had for lastyear--on the order of 1/2 percentage point below as I remember thefigures. And we had an increase for the whole of last year of what?MR. AXILROD. 5.8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5.8 percent. If we end up at the bottomof the range in the fourth quarter, in a straight line from here tothere, the annual growth in M-1B would be what?MR. AXILROD. 5.1 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would only be about 3/4 of a percentagepoint reduction in growth from a year ago.-65-7/6-7/81MS. TEETERS. But we can always get those sorts ofpeculiarities.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my argument is that I don't thinkthat's a peculiarity. The peculiarity is the fourth quarter. Thefourth quarter happened to be the only quarter last year when we wereabove target, and it was an abnormally high quarter. If we say theworld begins and ends with the fourth quarter of last year, we get adifferent picture than if we say the money supply was lower during thefirst three quarters of last year than it was in the fourth quarter.Anybody putting in any kind of econometric equation puts in an annualfigure. Nobody just picks out one quarter to put in.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, to put this in a slightly differentlight, but I think it reinforces what you're saying: If we had drawnour cone not from where we ended up in the fourth quarter but from themidpoint of the range, [unintelligible] is 3-1/2 percent, which is nowthe lower part of our 1981 range. It would be a little above themidpoint of that range--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's another way of saying the samething. Or if we draw it as a channel from the end of the cone lastyear, as I sometimes draw it, we are now a little below the middle ofthe channel, or maybe quite far below in June. But for the first halfof the year as a whole, we're right in the middle of the channel.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If there were a credible way of de-emphasizing the fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth to formulatethe target--I don't know how--the right formulation would be year overyear in some broad sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought of doing that last year. Thereason I didn't was because it looked too damn difficult to get theannual average down. But it looks as if we have achieved it, or mayachieve it.MR. PARTEE. Possibilities.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that is in a sense more meaningfullyin economic terms. One can argue it either way. Obviously the year-to-year change is influenced by what happened last year. But justpicking out one quarter and saying that's the end of all existence isclearly not right either.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The scary thing is the psychologicalpressure on us [depending on] where we end [in any] fourth quarter.If we're seriously overshooting or undershooting, we're going to makethree times the effort--or at least we're going to be under that kindof pressure psychologically--to make a much bigger response than isgood for the economy, simply because it happens arbitrarily to be thefourth quarter and people will be judging us on the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have the figures, but if we lookedat the year-to-year changes in M1 now, they are still high, I think.If we looked at the first half of this year against the first half oflast year--MR. AXILROD. Oh, I don't have that.-66-7/6-7/81MR. GRAMLEY. I can look it up. Six months this year overlast year's is plus 6.3 percent. The second quarter of this yearrelative to last year is [plus] 7.4 percent.MR. PARTEE. Because it dropped out of bed in April.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MR. PARTEE. Wait until we get to the third quarter.MR. GRAMLEY. Then the year-over-year will be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it will narrow from now on with any ofthese numbers. By the end of the year we would be down just a bitbelow where we were last year.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's becoming a seasonal pattern.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Next year we'll straighten this out byputting back the first half of the year in the seasonal patterns thatwe left out and then it will all look very even during the year.Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I would opt for alternative B. And I wouldpoint out that in a way we're getting a deceptive look because we'retaking a snapshot as of June, which is the very low point, we hope, ofthe [downward] movement. After all, as a result of the cumulativeeffects of a minus 5 and a minus 10, alternative B gets us a third-quarter growth rate of 2.8 percent. Now, 2.8 percent is not a highmonetary growth number, so it seems to me quite a reasonable thing toshoot at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Quite true.MR. PARTEE. We'll have to decide on the fourth quarter alittle later. But, you know, it's a long time to the fourth quarter.We may well have a double-digit plus or a double-digit minus betweennow and then so we will be talking in an entirely different arena whenwe get to discussing the fourth-quarter average, which I wouldn't wantto see go up as fast as that 8.2 percent or whatever Steve has onthat. I also disagree with Lyle that we should not pay any attentionto shortfalls below the number because I can't tell whether there's ademand shift or not. That is, when we're experiencing it, it can beeither a demand shift or it can be a weakening in the economy; and themoney supply numbers can very well predate the weakening in theeconomy somewhat so that we're not all that aware of it. But we'renot talking about a very strong economy when the auto companies reportan annual sales rate of 5.4 million and wonder whether they cansurvive to the end of the year. That's not a strong economy. It'salso obvious in housing that we're not talking about a strong economy.Builders are going out of business every day. So, I don't want totake a lot of risk of a cumulative shortfall. Remember, if we put Mayand June together we have as much of a drop as the April drop lastyear, which really galvanized us, perhaps improperly, into action.So, I think we shouldn't accept a substantial shortfall from thenumbers that would be occasioned by alternative 2. I guess the fundsrange could be 15 to 21 percent. Interestingly, I had greatdifficulty finding what the funds rate range had been over the last-67-7/6-7/81period when I read the Bluebook; it wasn't in the usual place. We'vedeemphasized it to the point that we don't even report it now!Assuming it was 16 to 22 percent, which is in the crossed out sectionof the directive, 15 to 21 percent seems all right. I wouldn't wantto see the borrowing target above $1.4 billion, which as I understandit is where we are currently in this period. I don't think we oughtto raise the borrowing target above what it now is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative B. Itseems to me that if we pursue alternative C, we run a substantial riskof not getting M-1B back even to the lower part of the target range.We just may not get back to the range. Alternative B gets us back tothe range by November and we're still on the low side, so alternativeB makes more sense to me. And I would go with a federal funds rangeof 16 to 22 percent and borrowing at $2 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $2 billion?MR. RICE. $2 billion. That's the borrowing that goes with"B." I'm being a purist.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that may be what they have in here.Okay.MR. RICE. That's what one has to expect with a--MR. ROOS. I would opt for "C" in its entirety. I just thinkwe [can't] afford to announce that we're going to tolerate aggregategrowth above the "C" figures. We must remember that these areadjusted. If you take off the adjustment, the rate of growth is evenhigher. But I'd suggest a borrowing assumption of about $1-1/2billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You may be right. These are adjustedfigures, certainly; and if we continue to get some growth in NOWaccounts, the unadjusted figure will be still higher. It's a pointworth making. I'm not so sure that we're going to get much growth inNOW accounts from now on. In the last couple of months we haven'tgotten much, but nobody knows, obviously. It may be that thesefigures are coming together. But the chances are you're right.MR. ROOS. I would just add that I was very much intrigued orimpressed with Fred's suggestion of reducing the bottom of the longer-term targets by 1/2 point, which would enable us to come up to thebottom of what we're seeking with this alternative C, if I understandit right.MR. BLACK. If we go with "C," we need to lower the bottom ofthe M-1B range.MR. ROOS. Yes.MR. SCHULTZ. To be consistent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a few more people who have totalk here. Mr. Boykin.-68-7/6-7/81MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would go with alternative C, aborrowing assumption of $1-1/2 billion and a fed funds range of 16 to22 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. I remind the group that we come back together inabout six weeks, so we are not casting this in cement for the next sixmonths. I'd be inclined to somewhere between "B" and "C" with thefunds rate range of 15 to 21 percent or something of that nature and$1.4 billion in borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehne, you bring up the cabooseagain.MR. KEEHN. Well, for the reasons that have been reasonablycovered, I would be in favor of alternative C with a federal fundsrange of 16 to 22 percent; and if mathematically the $1.5 billionborrowing level results from that, I'd be in favor of that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see where we are. Obviously,we're between--MR. GRAMLEY. Let me ask for a staff interpretation of theconsistency of a borrowing number of $1-1/2 billion with a midpoint of19 percent on the funds range. I thought when we last talked about afunds rate in the 19 to 20 percent area we were talking aboutborrowings of about $2-1/4 billion. I think we're talking aboutnumbers here that are just inconsistent with one another.MR. AXILROD. Well, we wouldn't know. The money supplynumbers, depending on developments in the economy, could beconsistent. But we wouldn't think that borrowing of $1-1/2 billionwould be consistent with a funds rate of 19 to 20 percent. We thinkthat implies lower funds rates.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We would argue somewhat differently.We believe that borrowing of $1-1/2 billion implies a fed funds rateof 17 to 18 percent. We'd be about a point--MR. SCHULTZ & MS. TEETERS. That's what he said.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought he said 19 to 20 percent.MR. SCHULTZ. No, he said it would not be consistent with 19to 20 percent.MR. PARTEE. I don't think your numbers are terriblyinconsistent [with the staff's numbers], Tony.MR. SCHULTZ. That's why I picked the 15 to 21 percent fundsrange for a borrowing [assumption] of $1-1/2 billion.MR. RICE. And $2 billion would be consistent with what kindof funds rate?-69-7/6-7/81MR. AXILROD. Well, it had been running in the 18-1/2 to 20percent area, or more like 18-1/2 to 19-1/2 percent. That's adiscount rate structure.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you still using a rough rule ofthumb, Steve, that a $100 million difference in borrowing represents1/2 of a point?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's very rough.MR. PARTEE. It's rough on amount and timing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the funds market has been rathermixed up for some weeks now, really beginning around Memorial Day, Iguess, as Paul Meek suggested. It is mixed up partly because thestaff said weakness in M-1B should bring a pretty prompt easing and ithasn't happened, so they don't know where it should be. We havesentiment ranging from "B" to "C" with some emphasis on "C." I sharethe concern about just the publication effects of saying we want toaim for 8-1/2 percent over any period of time. I would not mind a bigrebound in July, if we could sneak it in there and get it over with.In fact, that would be the desirable result. But we're starting Julyfrom a very low base and I don't know what the chances are of gettinga very high growth rate in July, considering how low we're starting--if last week's figure is borne out when we get the final numbers. Anumber of people have mentioned M2. I would be strongly inclined,whatever we say about M1, to stick something in the directive thatsays we don't really want to see M2 going outside its range. Thatprovides something of a fail-safe. Having done that, we swallow thepictorial effects of any of these things. So, we're someplace between"B" and "C." For the borrowing assumption, $1-1/2 billion seems tobe about where we are now; it's not too bad to start with. The realquestions are the ones that Lyle and others raised about what happensunder various contingencies. The most straightforward way to play it,I suppose--if we decide on an initial borrowing level of, let's say,$1-1/2 billion at the moment, which is lower than the staff says isneeded to restrain the money supply over the whole quarter--is to takeit symmetrically. If the money supply began rising faster than isprojected here, we would simply let the mechanical [process work]; wewouldn't change the nonborrowed reserve path but would let borrowingsrise. It depends upon what happens to M2, but if M2 is behavingitself, we would just let borrowings rise, which would mean a rathergradual rise in borrowings to a higher number. And we'd do thereverse if it's falling short, which would mean a rather gradual fallin borrowings. If it fell short, we'd bring the caveat on M2 intoplay. If M2 were rising very fast, that might trigger a change in thenonborrowed reserve path.MS. TEETERS. You mean to lower it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if M2 was high, we'd lower the path.Or if it was low, we'd raise the path.MR. WALLICH. But why start with what seems to be anunrealistic relationship between borrowing and the funds rate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's unrealistic to you? What would yousuggest? I don't know. You didn't suggest anything, I guess.-70-7/6-7/81MR. SCHULTZ. He suggested something very high.MR. WALLICH. I suggested a high funds rate, but I didn'tknow what the borrowing assumption was that would match it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have a borrowing number down foryou.MR. WALLICH. I didn't put one down because I don't have therelationship in mind. But it seems to me that it should be closerperhaps to $2 billion than to $1.5 billion, or somewhere in the middlethere.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't been at $2 billion for a longtime, theoretically, and we've had a decline in the money supply. Wewere at or above $2 billion on the borrowings at the beginning of someweeks. But we haven't been aiming for a $2 billion number for a monthor more.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We believe that there have been somehang-ups in the fed funds market recently and that if we stay at thisborrowing level we will see the fed funds rate get lower over a periodof time--I don't know how long--at the same borrowing level.MR. CORRIGAN. A question to Paul Meek: Do the market peopleperceive that the 18 percent surcharge rate is a de facto [floor] onthe federal funds rate? It shouldn't be, but is that the perception?MR. MEEK. I don't think it's perceived that way. I havesome feeling that with that 18 percent rate it may be a little harderthan it otherwise would be for the rate to go much below 18 percent.MR. CORRIGAN. If you're selling federal funds--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's true. It's harder togo below but I think the experience is that it will go below. It'sjust that the higher that rate is, the higher the funds rate will be.If we cited the target in terms of a quarterly average, itwouldn't look frightening because that's going to be low. Suppose weput that in the directive. Can you give us your evaluation of thepros and cons of citing the target that way, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. If you put it in the directive along with thegrowth rate for June to September, I think it would have diminishedimportance. It would just call to the market's attention that this isnot such a high growth rate month-by-month. If you put it in withoutthe growth rates month-by-month, unless we understood what it is theCommittee intended for the growth rates month-by-month, there would besome difficulty in targeting. That is, if July came in very strong,the quarterly average would really depend on the projections forAugust and September. So, if that average were the sole target, wewould be back in the arena of simply making the money marketconditions depend to a great extent on how the staff happened to seethe projections, right or wrong, in the months and weeks ahead.Whereas if we had some idea of the implicit monthly targets that theCommittee preferred, then we would not be so dependent on projections.-71-7/6-7/81MR. PARTEE. I don't think we ought to operate on a quarterlyaverage, but it would be very reasonable to talk about 8 percent, orwhatever we have in mind, for June to September and to say that wouldmean a second-to-third quarter increase of about 2-3/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You raise some question in my mind aboutwhat kind of quarterly pattern you have in mind.MR. AXILROD. What we normally would put down is a straightline. But this time, as you can see, we put a little more in July andslightly less in August and September simply because we expect thesocial security payment in the week of July 8th to add a couplebillion dollars in that week and 1 percentage point at an annual ratefor July as a whole. That's probably excess perfectionism, but it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be right if we were startingfrom a reasonably high level or a normal level. But we need anawfully high figure in that first week just to get any growth in July.MR. AXILROD. July 8th doesn't show an increase from July1st. If July 1st is at the low level, then we'll have a very low Julyprobably. And if the Committee adopts 8 percent for the quarter--wedidn't project a very high latter part of July--presumably an easingprocess would be needed.MR. PARTEE. Right away I'd expect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just don't know how this works outarithmetically. But I have some concern that if we don't have areally big increase in the week of July 8th, we are starting July solow that we'd have to drive the borrowing down to $700 million orsomething to have any chance of getting there.MS. TEETERS. Well, isn't that what you're--MR. AXILROD. We're very dependent on tomorrow's figures.There are such big [differences] implied.MS. TEETERS. If we don't get that rebound in the week of the8th, then we're off the bottom of the chart, aren't we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd like to get a rebound. I just don'tknow what we'll do if we don't get it. I devoutly hope that if infact we have a big decline this week, we'll get an offsetting increaseor a little more next week.MR. BLACK. That touches upon the reason I want to lower thetop of that range somewhat because I foresee that we would have tohave very high rates. And if the range had been dropped, it would bemore acceptable to the market.MR. PARTEE. This is the old principle of aggregates on thehigh side and interest rates on the low side.MR. BLACK. If we don't lower the top bound, we could have12.4 percent growth between June and December on that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll return to that question.-72-7/6-7/81MR. BLACK. Well, I would just like the market to know wearen't even thinking about that. And if we hit the middle of therange, we could have, as I suggested, 10.4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can return to that argument at thenext round.MR. BLACK. I was trying to help you with your problem; I wassaying that it doesn't look as bad against that background as it doesif we don't lower that top.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We could put a footnote in that we'renot seriously thinking of getting to the top.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In some sense the specifications here areeasy enough. It's just how we should act if we go off course that isa little more difficult. The specification seems to me to besomething like--well, just to use a round number--7 percent. We maywant to have a small range and say provided that M2 is within itsrange. I don't see why borrowing somewhere around the present levelof $1-1/2 billion isn't reasonable.MR. RICE. But is it consistent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The staff says no. Or, what is coming outof the machine says that we have to have a higher borrowing level.But I don't know. A lot of skepticism was expressed around the tableabout whether in fact we do need a borrowing number that high.Balancing my general feeling about where the major risks lie, giventhe shortfalls that we have had, I don't want to run an undue risk ofa further shortfall. Borrowing of $2 billion would produce, at leastI would think, a 20 percent federal funds rate around this time. I'mnot sure we want to be that tight; and 20 percent is what the staffsays that $2 billion would produce.MR. RICE. I thought $2 billion would give us 18 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 18 percent on the funds rate?MR. RICE. That's what Steve just said.MR. AXILROD. With alternative B, we say the funds rate wouldbe in the 19 to 20 percent area. That's in paragraph 22.MR. RICE. But in answer to my question just a minute ago, Ithought you said 18 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two billion dollars is literally higherthan what we have had for a month.MR. AXILROD. Well, [$2.1] billion was the average level ofborrowing last month. It only fluctuated a bit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd have to have one week of $2.3 billionor something.MR. AXILROD. In June, borrowing ran $2.0, $2.2, $1.9 and$2.3 billion; then it dropped in the first week of July to $1.7-73-7/6-7/81billion and it's running $1.9 billion thus far this week with someexpectation of a drop-off.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been higher than I thought it was.MR. SCHULTZ. At any rate, $1.5 billion should certainly beconsistent with a lower funds rate than we're experiencing right now.MR. AXILROD. That's what we think, if we get it.MR. SCHULTZ. Theoretically, yes.MR. AXILROD. Theoretically, a lot lower on borrowing and thefunds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can be a little higher on theborrowing, but I think that's taking a chance of the money--. Thesedifferences are so small. Let me try 7 percent and $1-1/2 billion.SPEAKER(?). What was the second number?MR. SCHULTZ. Borrowings of $1-1/2 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And 15 to 21 percent. I'd be happy with15 to 20 percent, but 15 to 21 percent seems to catch more people.What else do we need to know? And the caveat on M2.MR. CORRIGAN. Does that mean that M2 is within its range forthe year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Right now it's at the upper end ofthe range, so it means M2 growing at 9 percent or a bit less.MR. CORRIGAN. The implication is that it has some relevancefor whether or when we change the nonborrowed path?MR. ROOS. If we have the top of the fed funds range at 21percent and it reaches 21 percent and the Desk starts injectingreserves, won't that be as--MR. SCHULTZ. That's not the way it works, though.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not what they will do. We willjust have a consultation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That caveat on M2 may be very easilytriggered.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're right on the margin of it now.There's no question about that.MR. PARTEE. Especially with the wild card [certificate]coming at the end of this month, we could almost--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't object to it, but I don'twant to underestimate the importance of that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's very important.-74-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though M2 grew only 5 percent ineach of the last two months, that's because M-1B was negative.Therefore, if we get M-1B--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To have a very high M-1B figure and haveM2 within the 9 percent would be very unlikely.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, if the caveat is triggered--andit is very likely--we may end up seriously falling short of the 7percent objective.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What has the growth in the nontransactionspart of M2 been in the last couple of months at an annual rate? Doyou have such a number?MR. AXILROD. Yes, the question is whether I can find it. Itwas running 7-1/4 percent in May and 10 percent in June; both of thoseare a lot lower than it ran in the previous months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the arithmetic is, but Ipresume the nontransactions part of M2 could run at approximately 10percent with this kind of M1 figure.MR. AXILROD. That's right; it's about 75 percent of M2.MS. TEETERS. What about Chuck's point about the lifting ofthe Regulation Q ceilings on the longer-term CDs? We could get asurge in some of those.MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, but we're likely to have some offsettingweakness in the money market funds.MR. PARTEE. Or it could come out of the securities markets.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What we need is an M-2A and M-2B--atransactions component, shift adjusted--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shift-adjusted M2 numbers.MR. BALLES. Updated seasonally.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't intend this to be quite asprecise as you're talking about. We can't judge M2 that closely. Thefigures come in a little late. But if M2 is running 9-1/2 percent--and we won't even know it [currently]--that's within our range oftolerance. If it's clearly running high, it's very important--MS. TEETERS. But shouldn't we take a look as to why it'srunning high?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Inevitably we have to [unintelligible].Well, let me try this. Have I mentioned all the variables: 7percent, $1.5 billion, 15 to 21 percent, and a strong M2 caveat.MR. PARTEE. With any kind of target number for the period?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7 percent for M-1B.-75-7/6-7/81MR. PARTEE. For M2 I mean.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M2 I think it would be rather explicitthat we're talking about 9 percent or less. If it got over 9 percent,we'd be concerned about it.MR. PARTEE. Restrain it if it's over 9 percent?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean 9 percent for the nextintermeeting period.MR. FORD. It's over 9 percent now.MR. PARTEE. No, he means for the period ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We [tried to draft] some wording. We cancome back to the precise wording, but let me see what Steve has: "Inthe short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregatesconsistent with growth in M-1B from June to September at an annualrate of 7 percent"--or whatever number we put in--"after allowance...,provided such growth is consistent with M2 growth remaining around theupper limit of or moving within its range for the year." Everybodyknows that's 9 percent, I presume.MR. WALLICH. That's really between "A" and "B," when most ofthe discussion has been for between "B" and "C."MS. TEETERS. It's a combination of all three of them. M-1Bis between "B" and "C;" M2 is between "A" and "B;" the borrowings areat "A;" and the interest rates are between "A" and "B." You guysscrambled the whole mess!MR. PARTEE. We could conceivably have a very weak M-1B thatwe would encourage getting weaker because our M2 constraint is at theupper end--MR. WALLICH. I think M2 is the more critical variable now.MR. PARTEE. You don't mind minus numbers in M-1B?MR. WALLICH. I mind very strong numbers in M-1B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think any of these relationshipsis all that precise but it's true that, according to the staff'sestimate, if we got 7 percent, the 9 percent M2 constraint wouldn'toperate.MR. AXILROD. We have a relatively restrained growth in thenontransactions component, not very different from last month. It's alittle lower actually in most cases than the June growth. It's prettyrestrained.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, what does this mean for M-1B? Howweak would M-1B have to get--how far below 7 percent would it have tobe--before it would trigger something?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the answer is: I don't know. Butif you accept the staff's analysis here, they would say there's no-76-7/6-7/81problem. Their estimate is that if we get 7 percent on M-1B, M2 willcome in at 8-1/4 percent. It has met this--MR. BOEHNE. I could conceive of a situation where we couldend up with M2 approaching the 9 percent upper limit and the bottomfalls out of M-1B.MR. WALLICH. I think that would be more a reflection on M-1Bthan on the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's precisely what this would say. Wewouldn't worry very much about that shortfall in M-1B if M2 is risingrapidly. That's what we would be saying.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I'd have some problems with another monthor two of negative growth in M-1B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with the negative growth in M-1Bwe've had an M2 figure of 5 percent or so. So, we're not likely toget a combination of 9 percent on M2 and a negative M-1B.MR. BLACK. If we get 7 percent, it's still coming in belowthe lower limit of our long-term ranges. It takes 7.4 percent to hitthe lower limit. I don't know whether we really want to set it thatlow just from the standpoint of appearance because it's deliberatelysaying we're not going to hit our target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so concerned about thequestion of what the appearance is.MR. BLACK. Well, I prefer Fred's suggestion. Or Willis'suggestion could take care of that aspect, if that's what we want todo with it.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, the proposal is not quite as constrainingas I would like. I still prefer a straight alternative C, with alittle lower figure on everything; but you're halfway between "B" and"C" on both M-1B and M2.MR. PARTEE. It's not halfway; it's closer to "C."MR. SCHULTZ. Well, okay, you're right; it's closer to "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm happy to go all the way to "C," ifthat's where you people want to go.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't.MS. TEETERS. That's too stringent.MR. PARTEE. I can't even [unintelligible] accept what we'vegot.MR. BOEHNE. Is there some way to build in that a littleweight would be given to weakness in M-1B? It's all loaded the otherway.-77-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how much you want to buildin. But to the extent you want to build some in, you have the staff'sestimate, for what it is worth--and the staff's estimate is always thebest technical analysis that can be provided--that M2 is going to comein below this constraint if M1 is really weak.MR. BOEHNE. Well, as I recall, for June we started out withan estimate of plus 5 percent and ended up in the negative at minus 10percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, did I understand your explanationright that for whatever number the Committee chooses for M-1B, if itruns weak and required reserves go down and M2 stays at 9 percent orsomething like that, the borrowing would tend to come down and we'dadhere to the nonborrowed path and vice versa if it went up? I wasnot sure exactly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure exactly either, because wehave 19 different permutations and combinations. I didn't go quite asfar as what you said. I said that if M1 were coming in weak, we wouldjust let the natural result come in on the borrowings. I haven'tfaced explicitly what we would do if M1 is in fact [weak] and M2 isabove 9 percent. I suppose at some point if M2 got strong enough--there's some shady area there--we would have to reduce the nonborrowedreserve path.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At that point, I think we'd want aconsultation, if we really had a head-on collision between too weak anM-1B and too strong an M2, because of the caveat you're building in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, there are lots of circumstancesin which we'd have enough of a conflict that we would have aconsultation, but the clear implication is that we would let M-1B getweaker than 7 percent if M2 is running strong in the short runpending--MR. GRAMLEY. One thing that I think would [address] theconcerns of a number of people is [to agree that it] would be a signalfor a consultation also if we were to see some significant weakness inincoming economic statistics and at the same time a weak M-1B number.MR. WALLICH. Let me give you an argument that's against myown case. If interest rates should come down, M2 probably wouldaccelerate because money market funds would gain relative to marketinvestments. That gives me some pause in the mechanics of theconstraint.MR. PARTEE. You know, M2 growth in the second quarter was10.8 percent.MR. SCHULTZ. But if the economy weakened, even thoughinterest rates were coming down, in fact there would be some forcepushing M2 up, but at the same time M-1B is likely to be---78-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't handle every possible contingencyhere. The ultimate answer has to be we would have a consultation ifthings go askew enough.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, would you want toconsider that we would have an understanding on this M2 caveat but notinclude it in the published directive?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd like to get it in the publisheddirective, frankly, because I am hesitant. Whatever the M1 figure,the arithmetic of what we publish is going to look high, and I'd liketo get something in the directive that says we're not going wild inincreasing the monetary aggregates. And the way to do that is to getM2 in there.MR. GRAMLEY. I think your earlier suggestion of perhapsputting something about the quarterly average in the operatingparagraph would be very useful.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would that create a precedent, Lyle,for later quarters when we don't want to put in a quarterly figure?MR. ALTMANN. We have done it before.MR. CORRIGAN. We could say that just in terms of settingthis objective, the Committee noted that the quarterly average wassuch and such. That would clearly divorce it from any operationalsignificance.MR. WALLICH. Will you qualify your M2 constraint in thesense that unless there are special factors causing it to rise--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're getting into an area where there aremore things than we can write into the directive. If there arespecial factors causing it to rise, we better consult. But what we'retalking about here is a relatively brief statement that eventually isgoing to come out in the public and we're talking about the best wayof expressing it. We can be straightforward and just say we'relooking for M2 growth of around 8 to 8-1/2 percent; that's what thisdraft says.MR. WALLICH. And let it overshoot if it does? M2 at 8percent would suit me.MR. SCHULTZ. That's what I argued for before, Henry; I ranthat up the flag pole and there were some who didn't salute.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the more traditional way of doingit--just to say we want x percent on M-1B and 8 or 8-1/2 percent onM2. You think the staff is wrong, Mr. Solomon?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. Given what we've been saying,I don't see how we're only going to get one point more growth in M2than in M-1B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I cannot resolve that technicalargument; I don't know what the answer is. I suggested the way Isuggested because I think we probably want to be in a posture of not-79-7/6-7/81 -80-easily looking at overshoots of the broader aggregates. And that'swhat this attempts to express.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I prefer your caveat to spelling out8 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. I much prefer language that would suggestsomething below the upper end of the range.MR. FORD. Paul, you read us just a small part of thesuggested language; I take it there's a lot more on both sides of itthat doesn't leave the impression, as that one paragraph does, thatthis whole decision--even though it's the most conservative choice--sounds expansive. You have 7 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think there's enough problem inthis language that we ought to fiddle around with language duringlunch and get wording that we're satisfied with. But the substance ofit is what I'm suggesting. Have we had enough discussion? It's 1:00p.m. and I don't see anything better at the moment than the 7 percent,$1.5 billion, 15 to 21 percent and the caveat of M2 staying within therange basically.MR. FORD. It's a helluva formula!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many find that acceptable?SPEAKER(?). Voting members only, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess a lot of people find itacceptable. If nobody has anything better to suggest, let's have avote.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesMr. Boehne YesMr. Boykin YesMr. Corrigan YesMr. Gramley YesMr. Keehn YesMr. Partee NoMr. Rice YesMr. Schultz YesMs. Teeters YesMr. Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have sandwiches out here. Let's take alittle time to begin eating the sandwiches and return to the longer-run discussion in the light of the shorter-run decision.[Lunch recess]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we more or less solved the problemof where we are for the rest of this year--that's implicit in thedecision we just made--which is around the lower end of the range forM1 and around the upper end of the ranges for M2 and M3 and [credit].I'm not sure that needs a lot more discussion. What we have to decide7/6-7/81is whether to change any of the ranges for this year and what to dofor next year. On next year, there isn't a tremendous amount ofdifference in the alternatives the staff has given us. I share thepredilection cited by a good many people that we probably shouldn'traise M2 and M3, which means that M2 would be lower than cited in anyof these alternatives by a full 1/2 percentage point if we neitherlowered them nor raised them. My own feeling about M-1B, though I'mnot even sure at this stage whether we will call it M-1B next year--I'm assuming we can be rather general and just call it M1, but it'snot adjusted--is that we are left with an unknowable about what thenontransactions component of M1 means conceptually. One can argue, asI guess Steve argued--I'm not sure he quantified it--that having thatcomponent in there and the fact that it is household transactionsaccounts at best, means that it has a higher growth trend than theothers and that, all things equal, [its growth] ought to be what--1/2to 1 percent higher on this combined basis?MR. AXILROD. Well, our calculations are a little lower thanthat. It depends on the ratio one expects at the end. Maybe 0.3 to0.5 percent is a little too specific, but it's 1/2 point or lower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I also worry a bit about the opposite ofthat. We have a lot of nontransactions [balances] in the initialadjustment of M-1B, but when people get [funds] in there and lookaround at all these attractive rates in the market, they may take itout over time, which artificially depresses that aggregate.MR. GRAMLEY. May I just ask what the logic of this is? Isthis just an empirical result or is it an argument that the incomeelasticity of demand for household deposits--MR. AXILROD. It's essentially that. It's higher than thedemand for other transactions deposits in M-1B. And with theincreased weight of the household balances in M-1B, this is an effortto see, for any given growth rate in M-1B prior to the increasedweight, what this would mean. So, 5 percent might mean 5.3 percent tostart with but, of course, we would reduce it 1/2 point thereafter.But's that's purely mechanical; the increased savings deposits may becompensating balances for all I know and not really--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The burden of my comment is not that weknow any of these things empirically or logically. The burden is that[we have] all these uncertainties. I'm basically agreeing with FrankMorris; I'm going a long distance [in that direction] but I don'tthink we can abandon M1 because people would question our good faithif we abandon M1 at this point, given all the emphasis on it. I thinkwe have to end up giving them a target for M1. But I don't see why wecan't make a radical change and make it a 3-point range instead of2-1/2 points and just tell them there are all these uncertainties inboth directions. So what I would be inclined to do--I don't knowwhether to call it alternative III or not--is to take that 2-1/2 to5-1/2 percent range [under alternative III], which gives us areduction of 1 percentage point on the lower end of the range and 1/2percentage point on the upper end of the range from where we now are,and leave the others unchanged tentatively.SPEAKER(?). We're back on what page?-81-7/6-7/81SPEAKER(?). 14.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's about what a lot of people aresuggesting, but I would cast my vote on widening the M1 range a bit.You might want to say a word about M3, Steve. You told me you havethe feeling that it may be a little high here or that it could becomfortably lowered. I don't know whether we want to do that or not,given the--MR. AXILROD. Well, just to be clear on these ranges, we hadcentered them in alternatives I, II, and III on our projections of themidpoints [of the associated M1 ranges]. The alternative III range,therefore, has a midpoint of 8 percent [for M3 and for alternative Iit's] 8-1/2 percent. And with the Committee willing to say thatgrowth in the broader aggregates could be in the upper ends of theranges, it would not be too difficult to lower the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent range to 6 to 9 percent because we're not projecting growthabove that [upper limit]; our midpoint is not above or even very nearthat 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For both M2 and M3?MR. AXILROD. Well, particularly for M3. If you lowered theM2 range to 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent, the top of that range is reallyroughly the "midpoint." It's not a case where the top of that rangewould be uncomfortably near the midpoint we're actually projecting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just be clear. Your analysis saysM2 would grow faster than M3?MR. AXILROD. No, they're growing about the same. But ifgrowth is about the same next year, I would say that if you can standthe 6 to 9 percent range for M2, you can also stand the 6 to 9 percentrange for M3. But for M3 that would be 1/2 point lower than the rangeyou now have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. Well, that's an alternative thatwe could consider then. It gets us another reduction in one of theseranges.MR. PARTEE. Why wouldn't we hold off making that change?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could.MR. PARTEE. We could do that in January, if it still seemedto be relevant.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think you're right. We have tokeep--MR. PARTEE. Yes.MS. TEETERS. Why announce any reduction now? By Januarywe'll have a much better idea of which way we're going.MR. PARTEE. That's what I said.-82-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only reduction that this would involveat this point is M-1B.MS. TEETERS. I don't think we even need to reduce the rangefor M-1B at this point.MR. WALLICH. If we don't, aren't we saying that we now thinkwe're not going to reduce it?MR. PARTEE. Because we'll have it so low this year--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me restate that. I said M-1B; what Istated [earlier] is that we are just calling it M1. It will beconceptually the same as the present M-1B, but it would be anunadjusted number.MS. TEETERS. Then it would be 3-1/2 to 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm saying 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent but3-1/2 to 6 percent is the present range. Well I don't know if it is;it's 3-1/2 to 6 percent or 6 to 8-1/2 percent, depending upon whichway you look at it.MR. ROOS. How would that relate to our present range, whichis 3-1/2 to 6 percent? Is that unadjusted or adjusted or--?MESSRS. PARTEE and SCHULTZ. That's adjusted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the argument is purely intellectualbecause I don't think we have any empirical evidence. If you took theAxilrod analysis, you would say that the effective range is reduced byanother 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point because of this growth factor thathe builds into the total. If you gave weight to my suspicion thatthat wouldn't be true, it might even be the opposite. But who knows?My suspicion is that people have excess money in M-1B now, unadjusted,that might be withdrawn.MS. TEETERS. Is Steve saying, on purely technical groundsbecause of the technical factors he's referring to, that if we wantedno change we'd add 1/2 percentage point to the range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. AXILROD. Conceivably, if you wanted to make someallowance for the fact that household deposit balances may have ahigher income elasticity than balances of nonhouseholds.MR. GRAMLEY. This would mean you are moving the midpoint ofthe range down by roughly 1 percentage point and possibly more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It means moving it 1/2 percentage pointmore than you otherwise would.MR. GRAMLEY. And the movement down from the present figureis just 3/4 of a percentage point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In terms of the midpoint, that's correct.-83-7/6-7/81MR. PARTEE. On an unadjusted basis wouldn't 3 to 6 percentbe sufficient?MR. GRAMLEY. I would be much more comfortable with 3 to 6percent. I think we're building trouble for ourselves. You're right,Mr. Chairman. We'll probably not [unintelligible] today when therelation between money growth and GNP is going to revert to somethingmore nearly normal, given the reduction of inflation. But that isn'tgoing to happen all at once; it's going to happen progressively. Ifthe rate of inflation comes down and nominal interest rates fall andwe keep real interest rates where they are, the target next year--eventhe same target--will be more binding in terms of its meaning foreconomic activity than it was this year. And that's going to beincreasingly the case, if one takes into account the fact that it's--MR. SCHULTZ. But the midpoint between 2-1/2 and 5-1/2 is 4percent, which is above where I certainly hope growth will be thisyear. So, in fact, if we adopt 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, we areactually allowing for more growth than we're likely to get this year.MR. GRAMLEY. But that ignores the shift adjustment that hasbeen taking place. This year we will be adding roughly if we haven'talready--if the staff is right and we have no further shift in moneydemand--about 2-1/2 percentage points of money growth, effectively,that doesn't show up in the numbers. And one needs to take that intoaccount. There is just as much effect on the economy from a 1percentage point drop in money demand, given the money supply, asthere is by adding 1 percent to money supply, holding demand constant.It has no different effects on output, employment, prices, oranything. And we just can't count on this concealed money growth;sometimes we don't even want to recognize it ourselves, but it ishappening. It's not going to continue to happen unless this processof innovation develops new steam.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, don't you think the process of innovationis going to continue, though, to some degree? The momentum involvednow--MR. GRAMLEY. To some degree, yes. But the staff has pointedout that this process of innovation is stimulated by the move ofinterest rates to new peaks. Following new peaks we have this burstof innovations which then settles down. We had it last year in thesecond quarter; we had it in 1975-76; we had it again in the firsthalf of this year. And while it will continue, it will be at a muchslower rate.MR. WALLICH. I thought theory said that the incomeelasticity for transactions balances was a good deal less than unity.MR. GRAMLEY. It is. It's about .75 by most estimates.MR. WALLICH. Then we would expect a continuing rise invelocity, wouldn't we?SPEAKER(?). Why?MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, for velocity, sure. It's only a questionof the rate of increase in velocity. There's a trend factor that-84-7/6-7/81would take place even if there were no innovations because the incomeelasticity of money with respect to real income is less than 1.MR. WALLICH. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have copies of this that you candistribute, Mr. Altmann?MR. ALTMANN. Yes.MR. PARTEE. In addition, we have the shift adjustmentquestion, Fred. Since we're going to give them a plain figure, thatadds something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have to do that. But at somepoint fiddling around with a very small adjustment--MR. PARTEE. I would very much like to do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can change our minds at the end of thisyear, if we think a big shift is going on.MS. TEETERS. But in the past we haven't changed our minds atthe end of the year. We feel stuck with what we do [at this meetingeach year].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He's just talking about calling it M1rather than doing a shift-adjusted--MS. TEETERS. Oh.MR. SCHULTZ. But the other side of it is that we wouldcertainly, we hope, get substantially less nominal GNP next year thanthis year.MR. PARTEE. Remember, though, that we have to say whether ornot this is consistent with the Administration's 12 percent nominalGNP growth [forecast].MR. SCHULTZ. Well, it isn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we have a--MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, but listen: When you talk to[Administration officials] in private they are very clear about thefact that they really don't believe in these numbers that they arepublishing here at midyear. They say it quite directly. They havesaid it to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have unreconcilable inconsistencies inthat respect, I guess. There's a great question as to whether it'sconsistent with their GNP forecast. On the other hand, they willpresume that the money supply is declining from year-to-year. So,we'll have to say we are inconsistent with that assumption if we--MR. PARTEE. Yes, they [assume] rising velocity, too. Well,maybe it will go up.-85-7/6-7/81MR. SCHULTZ. I know, but they just have wild numbers.Privately they say quite directly: Don't pay much attention to thesemidyear figures we are coming out with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I recognize all the problems, but it's alittle hard to say we're not going to reduce the target next year inany respect.MR. GRAMLEY. 3 to 6 percent would be a reduction of 1/2percentage point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But on the nonbinding end of it.SPEAKER(?). On the floor, not the ceiling.MR. WALLICH. We used to do that--nibble at the upper edge ofone and then next time at the lower edge of the other. I figured outit took ten years to bring about a moderate reduction. I think wehave to go across the board.MR. SCHULTZ. By across the board, do you mean on all theaggregates or on the top and bottom of M1?MR. PARTEE. Top and bottom.MR. WALLICH. I think, barring technical inconsistencies, allof them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only other decision we have to make,as nearly as I can see based upon the earlier discussion--tell me ifI'm wrong--is [on M1]. Nobody talked about--well, maybe somebody did,but the great majority did not--changing the M2, M3, and bank creditranges. We had this debate. We had a predominant view, which was notto change anything. But Mr. Schultz raised some arguments, and one ortwo others did, on reducing the [M1 range] this year, which may havesome bearing on this. That's the only other decision I think we haveto make here.MR. MORRIS. Except that Steve told us we can reduce M3 nextyear.MR. PARTEE. Next year.MR. AXILROD. It seemed, within these numbers, relatively--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right; we could do that. So theopen questions are M-1B this year, M1 next year, and M3 next year ifwe're sticking with the 6 to 9 percent for M2 next year, which seemsto be reasonably satisfactory. These differences are small but,unfortunately, the one that is critical is the Ml range for next yearjust in terms of public appreciation and the psychology of gettingsomething down.MR. BALLES. I have a question on that Mr. Chairman.Obviously we're making some provisional statements on the 1982 ranges,but at what point in time do you foresee our moving to the actual M-1Bas compared to the shift adjusted?-86-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am hoping--MR. BALLES. I can see us going on forever and ever ignoringwhat the actual is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've run out of speed on thisalready. It has exceeded my tolerance for having any faith in theadjustment now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You'd start it for next year,wouldn't you?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope that we will find in the next sixmonths that there isn't much difference between the two and thatagainst that background we'll say "Forget about it next year." Iwould plan to say in the testimony as background for whatever numberwe put in here that we don't think [the shift] is going to besignificant next year, so we are very tentatively assuming it's notgoing to be. But if it still looks significant by December, we'llhave to give you a different judgment. However, we are assuming inthis very tentative way that it's not going to be significant nextyear.MR. ROOS. If that's the case and if these next six monthsare critical and we will have another opportunity to change what we'regoing to do for '82 next February, in order to reassure the marketsand to be consistent, why don't we say this time that we're going toreduce the numbers on M1 by 1 percentage point at both ends? And ifat the end of the year the picture is different, we can still make anadjustment next February with less problem, in my opinion, than we'dhave if we come out with testimony on July 22nd that we're really notgoing to continue our 1 percentage point reduction each year. I thinkthis is an important time to state once again what we're doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to make sure you realize thearithmetic of what Mr. Roos said: If we reduce the range by 1percentage point on both ends, it would be 2-1/2 to 5 percent.MR. ROOS. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's horrendous. One would have toassume an increase in velocity of circulation of something on theorder of twice--or 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 times--the normal secular increasein velocity of circulation. That is too heroic an assumption to make,Larry. The fact that we've come in comfortably so far is strictly dueto this rather fluky situation. If the staff is right and we don'tsee that, and we just have the normal situation continue for the restof the year, if I'm understanding this right, we would still come inat about what--5 + 3, Steve? Is 5 the increase for the first half?MR. AXILROD. For which aggregate?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For the velocity of circulation.MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The growth plus the normal.-87-7/6-7/81MR. AXILROD. That's right; the excess is more like 5 to 7.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. The chances of repeating thatsituation don't look very good. If I were a betting man, I would betthe chances are maybe 1 out of 5 that we're going to get that kind ofgrowth in velocity next year.MR. WALLICH. We seem to assume that growth in velocity is aspecial event due to definable changes in technology. But if peopleare circumventing the need for transactions balances right and left byusing money market funds and overnight arrangements and so forth, thenreally all that is happening is that M-1B is becoming a smaller partof the transactions balances. And its velocity isn't really ameaningful figure; it's just a statistical number relating M-1B toGNP. But it doesn't exert any constraint. That is what I fear may behappening, although one can't be very sure. But that makes a rise invelocity more probable than thinking of it in terms of a specialinnovation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that much of a rise seemsunlikely to be repeated next year because we won't have, I assume, asbig a growth in money market funds starting from the present base aswe had this year.MR. SCHULTZ. But we don't need anything like that kind ofrise next year, depending on what one is assuming on nominal GNP. If[GNP growth] is in the 9 to 10 percent range and [money grows at the]midpoint of 4 percent and normal velocity is 3, that would give you anextra velocity of 3 rather than 5. You can play with numbers likethat. I don't think you--SPEAKER(?). A lot of that is possible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is we don't know. We're allgiving grist to Mr. Morris's mill.MR. PARTEE. Well, what does M2 mean?MR. GRAMLEY. But you could also argue that M-1B doesn't makeany difference. Whether our money supply comes in at 2 or 3percentage points above what is otherwise stated, what difference doesit make if we have more money or more velocity? It all accomplishesthe same objective.MR. SCHULTZ. No, I wasn't making that kind of--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, you slip into that sort of argument thatsomehow the economy will always manage with whatever money we put out.If M-1B is that elusive in terms of its relationship with GNP, thenthe proper interpretation is that we ought not to be targeting M-1B.We ought to be looking at what we think is relevant.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I think you know that I have less andless confidence in M-1B; I give less and less weight to it.MR. BLACK. One thing that has been overlooked is theassumption that the inflation rate will be as high as the staff has-88-7/6-7/81said. If it's lower than that, one doesn't have to make such heroicassumptions about the increase in velocity.MR. PARTEE. And if it's higher than that?MR. BLACK. Well, then you have to be really--MR. ROOS. If our primary purpose at this moment--maybe thisisn't our purpose--is to impact inflationary expectations, we wouldhave to announce, in understandable terms, a reduction in the rate ofgrowth of the narrower aggregates. I don't think it's realistic tothink that we can say we're only going to shade down M1--if we'regoing to call it that--very slightly because we think something isgoing to happen to a thing called velocity or the money demandfunction. When I read these financial letters, I seldom see anyreference made to these more technical aspects of what we're trying todo. They talk about our published ranges in simple terms and whetheror not they think we're going to be able to achieve them. So, I thinkthey are two different things. The technical aspect of what we'redoing is something different from the impact we're trying to make oninflationary expectations. And the latter has to be done in a simplemanner and has to involve a discernable reduction in the actualfigures from the current 3-1/2 to 6 percent to something that to lessknowledgeable and less technically oriented people looks like acontinuation of our resolve to reduce these ranges gradually.MS. TEETERS. There are two other problems here, though.It's going to be impossible for us to raise the number. Suppose weget a repeat of last year and get a sudden expansion in the moneysupply over the fall; we will end up with a high base. Then we willface the problem we faced at the end of last year as to whether we caneven meet the targets that we set for ourselves in July. And if welower them too much--by a whole percentage point, say, or even if welower them at all at this point--and then in February we really needto raise them 1/2 percentage point, we're not going to be able to doit. A second consideration here is that if we get the ranges too low,we will never be able to get within them and we'll lose credibilitybecause we can't achieve our targets. We have to balance whetherwe're going to achieve the targets as well as whether we're ever goingto have the opportunity to raise them, which I don't think we are.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Obviously there's no perfectsolution, but I would argue that the right balance to strike is onethat retains our credibility in terms of continuing to squeezeinflation. Certainly there's a widespread perception in the countrythat the Federal Reserve is very strictly committed and dedicated tomonetary restraint. I think we can achieve that with only a 1/2 pointreduction; I don't think we need a full point reduction. There is acontinuity in policy with a 1/2 point reduction and it lessenssomewhat the problem that Nancy is talking about. If we end up at thelow end of the target this year, or even with some undershooting, wehave to start from that point; we can't go back to where we weresupposed to be. Then it's quite a tight target. So, my sense ofbalance between the expectations of the country for us to continuethis policy in a persistent way and the danger that it's going to betoo tight is to strike a balance with a 1/2 point reduction. Now, Idon't particularly care if we lower the floor a full point because Idon't think that's the meaningful constraint. I have a slight-89-7/6-7/81preference for a 1/2 point reduction on both the floor and theceiling. But if you want to lower the floor a point, and you don'tthink we're going to get criticism because we're widening the range,[I could accept that]. You were telling me that Senator Proxmire waspushing you to narrow the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At midyear. But I see some positivebenefit to widening the range to explain to them that these numbersare not so solid and reliable. It's a symbolic recognition of thefact that there are great uncertainties about M1 and what M1 meansthese days.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we should lower theceiling a whole point. That really is risking a major problem in theeconomy in terms of our not making--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've heard the arguments on bothsides. Having heard both sides, I conclude that 2-1/2 to 5-1/2percent is still the right compromise. I feel somewhat open-mindedabout M3. Let me just try 2-1/2 to 5-1/2, 6 to 9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent, but I am perfectly happy to try the same [M1 range] and 6 to9 percent for both M2 and M3. What are the preferences between thosetwo?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If it doesn't cause any more problemsto lower M3 a half point--MR. AXILROD. That's what it looks like at this point.There's no guarantee on what it will look like in December.MR. PARTEE. We don't need to do that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What about not doing it now butwaiting to see the situation?MR. AXILROD. Last year, Mr. Chairman, I believe theCommittee lowered M2 at midyear and then raised it back.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that what we did? I thought we raisedone of these.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. I think it was M2. Youlowered it at midyear and then at the beginning of last year--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we have precedence for that. Let mejust ask the preference between those two approaches. There are othercombinations and permutations, but let me just see how those two go.Everything the same with 2-1/2 to 5-1/2, 6 to 9, but a 1/2-pointdifference on the M3 range. Who is for the leaving the M3 range at6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, given that choice.MR. SCHULTZ. I think Chuck made a pretty good argument fornot doing it now and taking a look at it later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many have a reasonably strong feelingabout the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent versus 6 to 9 percent? Well, amongthose registering feelings anyway, the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent commandsa little more support. Now, let me just ask a general question. Does-90-7/6-7/81anybody else, after hearing this debate on both sides--on lower orhigher, visual, substance, or uncertainty--want to propose anotherchange? If not, I am going to go ahead with the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2, 6 to9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.MS. TEETERS. I would much prefer 3 to 6 percent on M-1B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There have been preferences expressed onboth sides, but let me just ask--MR. RICE. How about 3 to 5-1/2 percent?MR. GRAMLEY. It's only the upper limit that is reallybinding.MS. TEETERS. Yes, except that we--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are other possibilities. There's awhole range of numbers we can put down--different higher limits,different lower limits, whatever.MS. TEETERS. We have never responded when [the growth rates]went down to the bottom; we only respond when they go to the top.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there some reasonable contentment with2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent?MR. SCHULTZ. Do you want a show of hands?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, [unintelligible], let's justreserve that for the moment. That's tentative. Now, what do you wantto do about this year? I've been on both sides of this issue and willremain on both sides of the issue. The argument, as I understand it,is: Why horse around for 1/2 percentage point and raise questionsabout fine-tuning and all the rest. If we go that way, I think wehave to say something about being comfortable on the low side howeverthat is precisely expressed.MS. TEETERS. [Comfortable] for M-1B. We're uncomfortable onthe high side for M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right.MR. PARTEE. Given what we voted for on the short run, Ithink we really ought to reduce the lower end. Growth is going tocome out awfully low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other side is: If we lower it, wehave a target that is more attainable on the low side, consistent withthe decision we made earlier. It's less frightening on the up side.It comes down, in part, to how convinced one is that if we saw asudden radical move in the other direction so that the upper side isthreatened, we'd be prepared to pull out even more stops than weotherwise would, given that we went out of our way now to lower it.MR. CORRIGAN. That's the decisive thing. I don't like thisfine-tuning; that argument is the one that is a real potential trap.-91-7/6-7/81And I just don't see why we want even to run the risk of findingourselves in that position.MR. GRAMLEY. We gain so little by lowering the lower end ofthe target. [M-1B is] running below the lower end of the target andeverybody is saying right now "Gee, the Fed is doing great." If itended up the year below 3-1/2 percent, I doubt that anybody would beseriously concerned about it as long as the economy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have anything to add to thisargument? Does anybody want to make a final statement that's going tobe persuasive on this score before I ask for preferences? Or doesanyone want to make a statement that's not going to be persuasive butthat they want to get off their chest?MR. BLACK. I'd like to make one statement. What we have--MR. PARTEE. On the top half.MR. BLACK. No, I am going to leave that one alone. What wehave voted for would involve a rate of growth of 3.9 percent betweenthe fourth quarter of 1980 and the fourth quarter of 1981. No, wait aminute; I'm okay. I got mixed up.MR. ROOS. It's an expression: I'm okay, you're okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else want to make astatement? One choice, as I understand it, is to leave the rangesunchanged but say something [specifically] about being low in, ormaybe even below, [the M-1B range] if necessary to remain comfortable.But we are not unduly uncomfortable on M2 and M3. We would expect tobe high in the M2 and M3 ranges. That's one approach. The other isthat we'd still say that we're going to be high in the M2 and M3ranges but in recognition of the undershoot in M-1B, in effect, we arelowering its range by a half point. Those are the two choices.MR. PARTEE. Lower both ends [of the M-1B range] by a halfpoint?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd lower both ends by a half point if wewere doing it. I don't think we can widen the range in the middle ofthe year. Part of the purpose in lowering it actually is to constrainus on the up side and indicate that we are constrained. So, those arethe two choices. They seem to be quite evenly balanced, in myjudgment. Who does not want to change them, with that explanation?That seems to be the wide consensus, so I guess we don't movethem.MR. SCHULTZ. And I made such a beautiful argument!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a beautiful argument.MR. PARTEE. Sometimes that happens.MR. SCHULTZ. Some get rained out.-92-7/6-7/81MR. ROOS. Hey, Fred, I changed my vote; I voted the[unintelligible]. I looked at it again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He would have changed my vote, too. Butwe are still in the minority. Mr. Axilrod raises a question, whichreraises a question about what we just said before. I am hesitant torecite it to you but I will out of a feeling of loyalty. He says thatin general we are putting some additional emphasis on the broaderaggregates and the decision for next year doesn't lower any of thebroader aggregates. Is that going to diminish the psychologicalimpact? I guess that reraises the question of M3. Does anybody feelstrongly that we should reconsider the question of M3? If not, wewon't. So, what we have here is: No change this year with theexplanation that I cited; for next year 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percenttentatively for M1 period, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent for M3. Nobody discussed bank credit, which is still what--6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent?MR. AXILROD. It's 6 to 9.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we at 6 to 9 percent? Oh, yes, it'sthe same. I see. So, 6 to 9 percent on bank credit.MS. TEETERS. We don't have to vote on the whole package [forthe two years] do we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At this stage, I think yes. It's clearthat for 1981 there isn't going to be any change.MS. TEETERS. Are we just voting for '82?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's do it separately. It mightaffect somebody's vote, I guess. Shall we formally vote on '81? Allright, we will have a separate vote on '81.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We earn our salaries!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a footnote in my mind to all ofthis, that if the figures for the next two weeks come out widelydifferent than our current expectation, I think we need to have aconsultation and relook at all these decisions. So, I will make a[mental] footnote. Maybe we ought to put in our record that we aregoing to consult at--MS. TEETERS. That will give you time before your testimony.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we will have a consultation beforethe testimony to confirm all of this. Maybe just put it like that,neutrally. But I don't expect any change unless we get some radicallywild figures in the next two weeks. Now we are just voting on '81.MR. CORRIGAN. Leaving the targets as is.MS. TEETERS. Yes.MR. SCHULTZ. We're not changing '81.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Exactly.-93-7/6-7/81MR. BOEHNE. We could say it both ways!MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz I guess I have to vote "Yes."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Have you ever dissented before? Nowis your time.MR. SCHULTZ. I was worried about how I would look if Idissented.MR. WALLICH. They'd think you want it easier.MR. SCHULTZ. No, that's not the problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can explain your vote.MR. SCHULTZ. I'll vote "Yes."MR. ALTMANN.Governor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. That leaves us with 1982. This isall going to be described as tentative. The coloration around it isclear. It's 2-1/2 to 5-1/2, 6 to 9, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2, and 6 to 9percent, which is no change for any of the ranges except for M-1B.MR. BALLES. What was the rationale, Mr. Chairman, on thethree-point spread, just so we understand that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The rationale is "modified Morris." Isthat clear? There's a lot of uncertainty about what is going tohappen to M1 in terms of the technical interpretation of the figure.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the press headline will be:"Volcker uncertain."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the problem in explaining.There's so much invested in this now. It's difficult to go up thereand say we don't have any faith in these figures. It happens to bethe case. We have more credibility, a lot more credibility, saying itwhen they are low than when they are high. Do you all remember whatyou are voting on?MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne Yes-94-7/6-7/81President Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, I guess we are finished. Oh, no.Will you hand out this directive language? Let us suspend the OpenMarket Committee meeting for the moment and spend a little time onthese other things. And while you are uninterested in this otherconversation, you can read the directive language and we will reassessthat language in 15 or 20 minutes. Let me try and run through some ofthese other things rather quickly. I have a note here that you areprepared to report on our readiness on the pricing, Governor Gramley,if you would do that.[Secretary's note: The Committee's discussion of thedirective language was not recorded. The language adopted, of course,has been published in records of the Committee.]END OF MEETING-95-