Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 6, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Wednesday,May 6, 1981, at 2:30 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was atelephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C.,except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of thoseparticipating.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. Teeters(New York)(Philadelphia)(Dallas)Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), Black (Richmond), Ford(Atlanta), Timlen (New York), and Winn (Philadelphia),Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey (Kansas City), Morris (Boston), and Roos(St. Louis), Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ofKansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns (Dallas), Danforth (Minneapolis), Ettin,Keir, Mullineaux (Philadelphia), Prell, Scheld(Chicago), Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account5/6/81Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. Doyle (Chicago), First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of ChicagoMessrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland),Eisenmenger (Boston), Fousek (New York), Keran(San Francisco), Koch (Atlanta), and Parthemos(Richmond), Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, Boston,New York, San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond,respectivelyMr. Gambs (Kansas City), Assistant Vice President,Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofMay 6, 1981CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [I'm not sure] if you heard me talking toMr. Kichline about whether he knew anything new about business[activity]. He told me "not much," but I think he ought to tell uswhat he knows.MR. KICHLINE. Well, with regard to auto sales for the monthof April, sales on our seasonals were at a 5-3/4 million unit annualrate, which is about 2 million units below the rate in March. Theonly other information we've picked up relates to some very earlyinformation on worker hours in manufacturing for the month of April,and that seems to have risen a bit. We would infer from that and frominformation we know on auto production and some other physical productdata that industrial production probably will be rising 1/4 to 1/2percent or something like that for the month of April.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody else has anycomments on the business situation at present. Nobody has any strongsense of conviction out there?SPEAKER(?). No is right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will turn to Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have some very tentative newnumbers on the aggregates. They have the normal tentativeness for aWednesday; they will change by tomorrow and perhaps a little more byFriday. The preliminary data for the week of April 29th had suggesteda decline of $1 billion from the week of the 22nd. The more completedata, which might be somewhat firm--that's the week we're going topublish on Friday--now suggest a decline of about $3-1/2 billion fromthe week of the 22nd. That would be followed, I hasten to add, by anincrease, if the numbers hold up, of about $3 billion in the week ofMay 6th. This looks offsetting, but in a real sense the level of theseries for both the 29th and the 6th is lower than had been built intothe paths. So, the level of the series is lower on average by about$2 billion in both weeks, April 29th and May 6th. The changes are, asI mentioned above, about offsetting. This figure would give us ashift-adjusted April rate of growth--I can't be very precise--probablyon the order of 14 percent or something like that. And that would putthe April level of M-1B almost right smack in the middle of theCommittee's 3-1/2 to 6 percent long-run shift-adjusted range. That,of course, is somewhat higher than the Committee had been aiming at byApril, but it's still well within the range.I don't have any new data for M2 yet for April, but the datawe had as of Friday would have had the level of M2 in the monthsomewhat above the Committee's long-run growth range, viewed as atriangle. M3 in April is also somewhat above the range. And bankcredit growth, which is [uncertain] because we don't have goodestimates yet for April, by March had been moving down toward therange. I don't believe that the growth in April will be very farfrom, and probably will be lower than, the 9 percent upper limit ofthe Committee's range. So, I think by April it's possible that bankcredit will be at or near the upper end of its range. We have beenrunning with a reserve path that would imply in the current week5/6/81borrowing of around $2 billion. Borrowing started out very highearlier, before the weekend, and it has been running about $1-1/2billion since then, as banks have had large excess reserves thatthey've been working down. In consequence of this, as you know,within the week there was some easing; we've had a drop in the fundsrate from the very high levels it had reached earlier. It, too, hasbeen easing down as banks have adjusted their positions within theweek. But, Mr. Chairman, perhaps Mr. Sternlight would want to commenton the particular developments in market rates that have followed thediscount rate move.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, as the Committee members know,the markets reacted to the discount rate move with fairly sharp rateincreases. Rates had already been moving up in the wake of the verytight conclusion to the previous reserve week, the week ending the29th, and then when the money supply number was published Friday,there was a further upward rate move. And after the discount rateaction on Monday there were still further increases, leaving themarket in a very demoralized state, I'd say, early yesterday morning.From that point, things seemed to gel better; sentiment turned aroundto some extent. But there has been a lot of worry about whether theTreasury would get any kind of decent bidding for its three-yearauction. It turned out to be very substantial bidding at the ratesthat developed as that auction went on. The [auction average] ratewas a record high, 15.8 percent. But earlier that day the market wastalking about 16 percent or higher. Today the atmosphere continues toimprove. The 10-year auction has been held, with offering rates ofaround 14.55 or 14.60 percent, again fairly good. And market rateshave come down from the peaks they hit yesterday morning: The 3-monthrate, which had touched 17 percent, is down to about the 15-1/2percent area; the CD rate had touched 19 percent for the 3-month issueand now it's around 18-1/2 percent. As Steve mentioned, we had a highfunds rate at the beginning of this week, which I think was probablymore a function of an extremely tight ending of the April 29th weekthan of our own effort to control reserve restraint on the system.The funds rate had been averaging 20 percent on Thursday and Fridayand then it worked its way down, partly with the help of substantialborrowing over the weekend. The funds rate today started out around17-1/2 percent and it's around the 17 or 16-1/2 percent area thisafternoon. That's all I have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had rather special circumstances inthe money market affecting the federal funds rate for some weeks,where the banks either had not borrowed and then came in at the end[of the maintenance week] or had not borrowed and had run reservedeficiencies. This week we've had the opposite pattern of borrowingearly in the week in a very tight market and the banks are now beingleft with excess reserves. Just for the moment, it's a somewhateasier money market. Steve described generally where we are on theaggregates which, to summarize, is on the high side on the broaderaggregates--where we've been all along, or for the last couple ofmonths anyway. They are not moving particularly strongly at themoment but they are on the high side. M1 is right in the middle ofthe long-run path, if you consider that significant, but above wherewe want it to be at this point. We have reduced the nonborrowedreserve path for other than multiplier reasons in the light of the-2-5/6/81higher-than-desired total reserves, leaving us with something in theneighborhood of $2 billion of borrowings.I'm not sure that any great decision has to be taken here.In terms of the target, I think we have to recognize that at themoment we're running high, but we meet formally again in a few weeksand we will reassess that target. I'm not sure that there's any needto put down another target formally for the next two weeks. Werecognize that we are high; we recognize that in our operations. Wedo have a federal funds checkpoint, or whatever, which is 13 to 18percent. It has generally been fluctuating above that in recent days.And, today, I think we have to recognize that somehow or another. ButI would suggest that we don't have to take any decisions on moneysupply targets per se. We would recognize that we are running highand describe the situation--I'm just thinking now in terms of what wemight say in the brief paragraphs we write [in the policy record]about a telephone consultation--and recognize that we've made someadjustments in the reserve path. And there we are. There is alwaysthe question of the precise reserve path and where we are, if anybodywants to comment on that. I'm not sure I see anything in these mostrecent money supply figures that suggests any big change in that. Wecan certainly maintain that kind of borrowing level regardless of thefact that these last estimates are a shade lower than our previousestimates.MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne. I have a question. Steve,what is your best guess on money growth in May?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may interject before Steve answers:It's not worth a damn. But he can answer the question.MR. AXILROD. I was going to say it's very much a guess, butwe see, of course, a diminution from April. If I had to put a rangearound our guess, I would say the rate of growth for May is probablyin a range of 6 to 9 percent [for M-1B]. Something on that order ofmagnitude would still leave us with a pretty high growth rate in M-1Bfor the [second] quarter on average. If we had growth a lot higherthan that, we'd begin to get zero velocities instead of a smallpositive coming out of that.MR. ROOS. Steve, Larry Roos. What do you anticipate totalreserves to be next week at the end of the week?MR. AXILROD. Next week?MR. ROOS. I mean this week.MR. AXILROD. One second, Larry, and I'll tell you. I don'tknow whether you really want the total reserve figure for the currentweek, but for the three weeks ending May 20th--that's the week justpast, the current week, and next week--it looks as if total reservesmight be around $40,960 million. I can give you the weekly figures.The path for total reserves is a little over $40,400 million. Thatis, for this period of three weeks, actual total reserves appear to berunning about $500 million above what the path for total reserveswould call for. And in each week of that period, it's not toodifferent from that.5/6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But below the previous three-week period?MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm looking at unadjusted figures, butthat would be higher than the preceding four-week period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't write down what you said, but Ithought you just gave a figure that was lower.MR. AXILROD. No, the path is running lower than the totalreserves demanded. The actual total reserves appear to be runningabout $500 million or more above the path for total reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are above the path. But what figuredid you give for the three or four weeks just ending?MR. AXILROD. Well, for the three weeks ending May 20th, Igave a figure of $40,960 million. For the preceding four weeks, theaverage level of total reserves was $40,027 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but you gave the projected level oftotal reserves for the next three weeks.MR. AXILROD. The projected level is $40,960 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's for the period just ending, Ithought you said.MR. AXILROD. No, for the period we're in--the three weeksending May 20th.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, May 20th. Okay.MR. AXILROD. The April growth in total reserves will turnout to be quite low, with the way the lagged reserve accounting comesout and the sharp drop in excess reserves at banks, which will holddown the growth of total reserves. The monetary base in April grew ataround a 6 percent annual rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether I'll need this. Anyother questions?MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I had assumed thatyou were going to suggest changing the federal funds range. Is ityour judgment that the Manager can live with the federal funds rangefor the next two weeks?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was just fooling with somelanguage as to what we might report. I'll tell you what I havewritten down here. Don't hold me to this word for word, but tocapture the sense of it I would say: We held a consultation on May 6.The Committee agreed that in the period between now and the nextregularly scheduled meeting on May 18th--that's only two weeks we'retalking about--the reserve paths should continue to be set on thebasis of the money supply path established at the last meeting. It isrecognized that actual money growth may be high for a time relative tothat path, in view of the recent performance of the aggregates. Inthe light of this approach, the Committee recognized that short-termmarket interest rates might well fluctuate around levels prevailing in5/6/81recent days, which by implication says we're not [constrained] by the18 percent, and the Committee agreed to consult further if themonetary growth rate does not abate.MS. TEETERS. In other words, we're leaving the range inplace but piercing the ceiling as necessary. Is that the idea?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This particular version is written on theassumption that we've had our consultation, related in part to thefederal funds rate range, and we say that we anticipate the rate isgoing to be around recent rates, which carries us into the 18 to 20percent area by implication. But it just does it by implication.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is the advantage of doing itthat way?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I just think it avoids controversyabout what the new limit is. I don't mean controversy in theCommittee particularly, but just that these people who look at what wesay with great precision would say that we really were aiming at 20percent or whatever.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, Lyle Gramley. I think you have astronger case for the way you want to do this. We've been trying toargue that these are not ranges that imply a constraint; they are acheckpoint. And what we have done, if we go this route, is that wehave demonstrated in effect that this is not a binding range but acheckpoint. By implication, we have consulted with one another andhave agreed to let the Manager continue to operate in ways that arebased on reserve growth and not on interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have expressed my feelings moreeloquently than I did, Governor Gramley.MR. MORRIS. Well, the last time we did this, Paul, it causeda lot of confusion in the street when the record of policy actionscame out. A lot of people were very much confused as to just what thedevil did happen at our telephone meeting, since the range wasn'tchanged but at the same time the federal funds rate was 2 percentagepoints below the lower end of the range. So, it seems to me therewould be less cause for confusion if we just changed the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I had that in mind with thisproposal, Frank. My own conclusion is that the net result of thatlast [episode] was highly constructive. Now, opinions may change onthat, but by doing something a little different I think we may finallyget them to look at it in a little different way. This is only meantto reinforce that feeling. I was just a little afraid that if weeither use the word "suspend," a slightly awkward word, which is onething we can say, or if we say [the upper end] is 20 percent, theywould go back and say: "Well, it really is a constraint." That's whyI tried to avoid it. Something precisely along the lines of GovernorGramley's reasoning is what I had in mind. But it's a psychologicalpoint in terms of how people read it. My conclusion was that it wouldbe less confusing doing it this way because I really do think that itwas worth the few days' confusion it caused that other time.-5-5/6/81MR. ROOS. This is St. Louis. I would agree wholeheartedlywith you, Mr. Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, you said in your language, if Iremember correctly, that we expect interest rates to be roughly thesame as in recent days. Is that correct?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "To fluctuate around levels prevailing inrecent weeks" is what I happen to have written down here.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The recent weeks doesn't mean to me--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Recent days" [is actually what] I have.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. "Recent days," right. So, I guessnobody except us would know that that's 18 to 20 percent. It dependsupon how many days one looks at. If we're talking about the last twoor three days, then you're right. But if we're talking about five orsix days, then that would imply something lower than that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think so. The problem would bethe opposite, if anything. It happens to be lower today. How manydays ago did the federal funds rate hit--MR. AXILROD. Well, going back, on Tuesday, April 28th, whichwas a little more than a week ago, the effective funds rate was 17percent; the day before that it was 16 percent. Then on the next dayit got to 19 percent, then it was 19, 20, and 18-1/2 percent; andpresumably today it will be 17 percent or so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say in the last week or so, if thatmakes it better.MR. FORD. Paul, this is Bill Ford in Atlanta. I, too, wantto say, if I'm reading you right, that I think this is a move towardtrying to put across that we are deemphasizing adjustments in theinterest rate or fine-tuning it. That did create some confusioninitially, but the message is getting through to so-called Fedwatchers not to overinterpret every little tick or movement of the fedfunds rate. You might consider tacking on a sentence at the end, inlight of the comments we just had on confusion about which days wemean, to underline further the fact that we are continuing to stresskeeping the aggregates under control and deemphasizing the importanceof these particular trigger points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do have a phrase at the end--I think Iread it: "And the Committee agreed to consult further if the monetarygrowth rate does not abate." I just wanted to get some reference inthere to monetary growth in terms of the targets. There is nothingmagic in these words or the particular formulation. We could say"agreed to consult further if necessary to maintain adequate restrainton the rate of monetary growth" or something like that.MR. FORD. That would be great. That would make it clearerthat we're moving in that direction and not paying a whole lot ofattention to the particular point level of the fed funds rate.5/6/81MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne. As long as we're expressingopinions--and I guess reasonable people can differ--I found the lastexperience thoroughly confusing. And most people who watch the Fedfound it thoroughly confusing. I must say that I think the approachthat you suggest, Mr. Chairman, is going to add to confusion. So,I've got to go along with Frank Morris. I think we'd be better off tosay we're going to have a funds rate ceiling rate of 20 percent orsome explicit number. What you've said may have a great deal ofmeaning to us, but I suspect that there are going to be lots of[different] interpretations in the market. There will be moreconfusion. So, I would favor being more explicit.MR. GUFFEY. Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. Roger Guffey. I would join Frank Morris and EdBoehne. I think we've effectively told the market that the fed fundsrate is only the point at which the Committee will consult. Andanything beyond that, I think the market is discounting. They don'tknow when we consult. If, as you have suggested, we have essentiallydone away with any point of consulting, I don't have any problem atthis time because we only have ten days before the next meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I don't think I really have, Roger, ifI may just interrupt. This is all filled with subtleties in somesense; pay your money and take your choice. But this says werecognize that market interest rates might well fluctuate aroundlevels prevailing in recent days or in the past week, whatever thewording is. I think, by implication there, if the rate were widelydifferent from that, it would be an excuse for consulting. Then itgoes on to say explicitly something about the aggregates. So, I don'tthink we've lost any sense of consulting here. I don't know that itwill be necessary in the next two weeks, but I would read this to meanthat if things were drastically different, particularly on the upside, we would consult.MR. GUFFEY. Maybe the market was a bit confused after theysaw the record before. And I guess I'm a bit confused as to why weestablish a range if that's true. You've tied this language, as Iunderstand it, to some projected rate of money growth for the periodahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I am saying is that I think it hasboth in there.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I'd feel more comfortable saying we had aCommittee meeting and reestablished the range at 15 to 20 percent. Ithink that is consistent with what Frank Morris and Ed Boehne justsaid.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do that. It's a matter ofpreference. My own judgment, in this particular instance, is that itwould be more confusing and not less confusing in one sense. I thinkwe really have the [better] market [understanding now] after someconfusion. The confusion is not entirely absent now; it's a questionof which way to diminish it. Doing something that sounds quiteconsistent with what we did last time, I think, will put us ahead of5/6/81the game and not behind it. That has no implications to me for whatwe do with the range at the next Committee meeting. We can obviouslydiscuss that, but I think that's something we can discuss when we'rehere face-to-face [at the next meeting].MR. BOYKIN. This is Boykin. Paul, I would support thatdecision versus actually changing the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to be clear, what I'm a little afraidof--whatever language I played with for all of three minutes beforecoming in here--is that if we change the range, the confusion willcome down to [why] we set a range for such a short period of time.The market will say: "Well, what the Committee tried to tell us lasttime really isn't right. They really have a great concern about [thefunds rate], particularly if they were worried about it for a two-weekperiod. And they put it right on top of the present market rate; thatmust mean that what they tried to tell us last time wasn't true."That's what I'm worried about.MS. TEETERS. This is Nancy Teeters. This is much morespecific than the February 24th language. In that we simply agreed toaccept some shortfalls [in the growth of M-1A and M-1B]. In this onewe're mentioning both the monetary aggregates and the interest raterange, without specifying what it is. So, I think there's lessconfusion than there was in the February 24th [directive].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what we're saying is that there isno perfectly nonconfusing way of doing this. The question is: Inwhich direction do we want to go? I just have the gut feeling thatlanguage that establishes a new range for such a short period, againstwhat we just did, will create the confusion in the opposite direction.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, what if we insert into yourlanguage something that says we recognize that rates are likely toremain at the levels they have been in recent days and that makesinoperative the upper end of the range until the next meeting.MR. BALLES. Paul, this is John Balles. I think Tony Solomonjust made a very good suggestion. Without confusing the market wecould say something about raising the range specifically, sort ofundoing it. I think I would like a more explicit statement than youread that we are eliminating the upper end of the range until the timeof the next meeting. They would understand the federal funds range--MR. CORRIGAN. This is Jerry Corrigan. I must say I come outat just the opposite way from what John has just said. If you lookback prior to February 24th, for almost two years we've been trying toconvey the message that the funds rate band is a consultation point.We've also been trying to convey the message that when it has beenhit, consultations have been held and in one way or another,explicitly or implicitly, and when the forces have dictated, weeffectively have waived it. I think that putting new numbers aroundit in the context of the current situation works in exactly theopposite direction; it reinforces the view that we're playing footsieswith the funds rate. To me the language the Chairman has suggested isclear enough. It does by implication say that something in the areaof 20 percent is fine. But by implication it also says that somethinglike 25 percent isn't fine, and if we found the rate moving in that5/6/81direction, we'd have another consultation. I think that's what themarket, at least as I read it, is looking for. And that's the messagethat we've been giving them, or trying to give them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no trouble in principle with whatTony and John are suggesting. The trouble is that it's very hard toput it in language that does not say: Right now this doesn't makemuch difference, but ordinarily we take it very seriously. It's easyto read that into it. That's the only reason I came up with thislanguage, not that I have any disagreement in principle. That's whatwe're doing; we are suspending [the ceiling]. When we use the word"suspend," given the confusion that has existed, it sounds as if inother cases we would have been very apt not to suspend it. That's myonly problem with it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. But then what are you goingto do at the next FOMC meeting? Are you assuming that we're going tocome up with a range at the next meeting?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am, but we can obviously discuss it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if we're going down this road,it seems to me that an argument can also be made not to come up with arange at the next meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one can argue that.MR. SCHULTZ. This is Fred Schultz. I might want to arguethat. It seems to me that we do need to deemphasize this funds raterange. It appears to be giving us an awful lot of difficulty. It hasadded to the confusion in the market. Events are such that we do havethe opportunity to continue that deemphasis. I think we should goahead and take the opportunity, and I would hope that at the next FOMCmeeting we could have a very thorough discussion about exactly what wewant to do with that funds rate range.MR. RICE. I like the language as it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not consider that question at allprejudiced by this language. That's not the object at all for mepersonally.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, I don't have any trouble withthe substance, but I find the wording a little elliptical to myliteral mind. If, in effect, we are making inoperative the upper endof the range between now and the next FOMC meeting, I'm not sure thatthis language carries the implication that at other times we wouldwant it to be operative. If you're that insistent about not wantingto project that emphasis on the fed funds rate, it does prejudice--andmaybe rightfully so--the whole question of whether we have a fed fundsrange in the future or not, because I don't understand why you wouldhave that concern now and you wouldn't have that concern twelve daysfrom now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have the concern because weconsulted. I think it's useful to consult when these things happen.Well, I don't have any problem with your thought, if you can put in5/6/81some language that doesn't say the opposite. And that's my problem.I started out where you are. I don't know what that language is.MR. GRAMLEY. Lyle Gramley again. I was sitting here tryingto think of some wording that would be more amenable to the group.Perhaps we could say something like: "Recognizing that market ratesmay stay near the levels of recent days and that the federal fundsrate may be somewhat above the upper end of the range set at the lastFOMC meeting..."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That might do it. I was just thinking ofsomething similar: "In light of this approach, the Committeerecognized that short-term market interest rates might well fluctuatearound levels prevailing in recent days and that the federal fundsrate might exceed the range specified..." [I hesitate at] the word"specified;" I guess "specified" is all right.MR. GRAMLEY. The range "adopted"?MS. TEETERS. The "upper end of"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...the upper end of the range adopted atthe last meeting." See, it's when we get into words such as "adopted"or "specified" without saying what the directive does--that this isthe point at which we consult--that gets us into a little difficulty.MR. AXILROD. "The range indicated"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The range indicated for consultation atthe last meeting." Maybe that's a way to do it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think that language is animprovement. It's a little less enigmatic.MR. ROOS. Paul, Larry Roos. I think it's almost impossiblefor nineteen of us to draft a statement. You have a general feelingof support for what you're trying to do and I vote that you just goahead in your own words.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is a reasonable comment. Wecan try to get some words that mention the range. That lastformulation didn't sound too bad to me off the top of my head. Idon't think it prejudices anybody; it just recognizes that the fundsrate is going to be above what we said was the consultation pointbefore, which is a factual report.MR. BOEHNE. I find the language that you just read to bemore acceptable than your original version. If whatever you drafttends to go in that direction, I wouldn't have any trouble.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the basic issue is whether we wantto do anything more; I guess that is an important issue. I wouldpropose no substantive new directive. I don't know whether we need toput anything down here except for that point. I would propose that wenot change the money supply targets. And, apart from what we say inthe language, you understand that we've tightened up on the reservesand we won't, at the moment, do it appreciably further. We would doit further just in the normal course of events if the data come in-10-5/6/81adversely. That is the way we intend to operate. If that'sunderstood, we can conclude.MR. GUFFEY. Paul, Roger Guffey again. About your statementthat we've tightened up: It would be the first time, as I recall,that anything would be in the record saying that we actually havereduced our nonborrowed target and that it was done not by theCommittee in a formal way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anything I've read saidthat.MR. GUFFEY. I must have misunderstood.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The paragraph I have in front of me heresays: We had a consultation. The Committee agreed that in the briefperiod between now and the next regularly scheduled meeting thereserve path should continue to be set on the basis of the moneysupply path established at the last meeting. It doesn't say whetherwe lowered it, raised it, or moved it sideways.MR. GUFFEY. Okay. With the comment that you made--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was recognized that actual money growthmight be higher. We have, of course, reduced the nonborrowed path.I'm just saying that it doesn't say in this operative paragraph [thatthat was] the conclusion of our discussion.MR. GUFFEY. So the fact that the nonborrowed path for theintermeeting period has been lowered will appear no place in therecord, then?MR. AXILROD. No. Factually, President Guffey, the numberswe have now suggest that nonborrowed reserves in April declined ataround a 13-1/2 percent annual rate. But that's just a fact. Itwouldn't say in the record what particular mechanical devices got itthere, if it went there.MS. TEETERS. Are you planning to put in a paragraph on theconsultation of last week?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't planning to. We didn't have anyoperative decision. I guess since we weren't planning to then, weshouldn't plan to now. I don't know what it would say. I'm lookingat a paragraph here that Steve has written just as background. Ittalks about constrained availability of reserves and so forth. Thisis just something he might put in as background; it doesn't say thatthe reserve path was reduced. It says that pressures on reservepositions were growing and reserves were constrained. I don't knowwhat precedents we have in the Committee record, but we certainly musthave language of that sort.MR. AXILROD. This would be consistent with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's nothing in here that says we madean explicit decision about the nonborrowed reserve path. Any othercomment? In fact, I suppose this paragraph will go out to you forreview in the normal course. Don't these consultations---11-5/6/81MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. It will only be a paragraph or sosaying where the aggregates are and that banks have come underincreasing pressure and so forth. The operative language was what Iread you. Okay?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if we have something we haveto vote on.MR. BERNARD. It doesn't seem so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not quite clear to me that we need avote.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, in effect, what we've done--nomatter what the language is--is that we've suspended the upper end ofthe range. Does that require a vote or not?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we do last time? We didn'tchange the range. Did we have a vote? What did we vote on?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought Murray Altmann said lasttime that what we did required that we be recorded.MR. AXILROD. I think there was a vote, but I can't rememberfor certain.MR. GUFFEY. If you're talking about the last telephonemeeting, I don't believe there was a vote.SPEAKER(?). Not the last telephone meeting, the last--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. February 24th.SPEAKER(?). The last time we [went beyond] one end of the[funds rate] range.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can have a vote. I don't knowwhat the pros and cons are. The operative sentence here is thereserve path: that the money supply path established at the lastmeeting is unchanged. That's what we would be voting on plus thisother language. If you want to vote on that, I think we can vote.What you're voting on is that the money supply path is unchanged andthe language indicating that we recognize that short-term interestrates are going to be around their recent levels and that thatinvolves a higher rate than was in the checkpoint provided before.MR. AXILROD. Might involve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Might involve. Is that clear?SPEAKER(?). Yes.-12-5/6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have a vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Gramley YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesPresident Winn YesIt's unanimous.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you.END OF SESSION-13-