Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 22, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 22, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehnKelleySegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey and Melzer, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum,Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account9/22/87 -2-Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Eisenmenger and Hendricks, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland,respectivelyMessrs. Balbach, Broaddus, T. Davis, and Ms. Tshinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof St. Louis, Richmond, Kansas City, andand Atlanta, respectivelyMr. R. Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Judd, McNees, and Sniderman, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston,and Cleveland, respectivelyMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing a list of people present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Ann-Marie Meulendyke, Manager, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof September 22, 1987CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, all.SEVERAL (in unison). Good morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The fact that several people respond in unison with "Good morning" suggests that there is unanimity and agreement among the individuals present.


Passage number 3.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody be good enough to movethe minutes.SPEAKER(.). I move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if someone would be kind enough to move the minutes.


Passage number 4.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Objections. Approved. Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions objections being approved by Mr. Cross, indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 6.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 7.
]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Comments. Any motions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only mentions "Comments" and "motions," but does not provide any information or context to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 8.
MS. SEGER. May I ask just one question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger requests to ask a question, indicating cooperation rather than conflict.


Passage number 9.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Sure" does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 10.
MS. SEGER. How much actual trading is going on in theforeign exchange market for what I would call corporate business use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 11.
In other words, not just trading for the sake of trading but for--MR. CROSS. Right now we have the feeling that corporationsare not doing very much. It varies a great deal, of course, buttypically the total turnover in the market is many, many multiples ofwhat the final users get. It may be 10 times as much. But right atthe moment we don't get a sense of a lot of corporate activity takingplace. It may be that they are holding off, for the kind of reasonsthat I mentioned. It may be that they are waiting to see if anythingemerges out of these dealings around the time of the IMF meeting. Or,from what I hear this morning, there is some expectation being talkedabout that the G-7 might do one thing or another that would give somegreater strength to the dollar. They may be holding off for thesekinds of reasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing possible reasons why corporations may not be engaged in much trading activity.


Passage number 12.
MS. SEGER. I remember before when there was all thisturbulence, a lot of corporate traders did just sort of sit it out andhold off on decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a past occurrence without expressing any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 13.
MR. CROSS. At times they do this. They can be very bigplayers in this game, too, and they can do a lot of churningthemselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that "they" (referring to a certain group or entity) sometimes engage in the mentioned activity and can be significant participants in the game. This statement does not indicate any conflicting opinions or disputes.


Passage number 14.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In general, based on a number ofthese periodic surveys that have been done, the thinking is that thepercentage of transactions that will in some sense be related to theunderlying exchange of goods is very, very small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage is stating a general consensus that is based on various surveys. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
MS. SEGER. That isn't what I would suggest at all. I amjust trying to sense what the attitudes in corporate America might be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger is simply expressing her own perspective and trying to understand the attitudes of corporate America.


Passage number 16.
No, I don't think--9/22/87MR. CROSS. This always seems to be a pretty important timefor an assessment. We have the sense that they come back after LaborDay and reassess their position; and they may be doing that right now.Frequently, in recent years, we have seen trends begin shortly afterthe summer holidays and after Labor Day. As I said, it may be thatthey are holding off to see if anything emerges from these meetingsnext week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and observations about a certain time period without arguing or disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 17.
MR. GUFFEY. There is some comment in the press saying thatthe G-10 or the G-7 had adjusted their target levels from 140 or 160to 131.50. Is that rumor, or is that--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is asking for clarification on a specific piece of information.


Passage number 18.
MR. CROSS. That's total conjecture. There was a rumor lastweek of exactly that--that the target range had moved down. And thenthere was a rumor two days later that it had moved up. The dollarwent down a little when the first rumor occurred and moved back up alittle when the second rumor occurred. But these are all purelyimaginative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the information about the target range of the dollar is based on rumors and conjecture, indicating that there is no disagreement or contention present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 19.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have a motion; do I have a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is potential contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "do I have a second" implies that the speaker is seeking someone to agree and support their motion. However, if no one responds or if there is hesitation, it may indicate disagreement or a lack of consensus.


Passage number 20.
MS. SEGER. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 21.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, we'll assume thetransactions are now ratified. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 22.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is expressing gratitude towards the chairman.


Passage number 23.
]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply asks if there are any questions for Mr. Sternlight.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
MR. MELZER. Peter, you reported on the first 11 days; thereis apt to be a pretty large borrowing spike Wednesday. How would youexpect that to be interpreted in this environment. This is a periodthat has had some technical problems with the tax date, so I guess youare not going to be able to conclude much from that either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that there might be a significant increase in borrowing on Wednesday, but also mentions that the technical problems with the tax date may make it difficult to draw conclusions from the situation. Therefore, there is a difference in opinion or uncertainty about how to interpret the borrowing spike.


Passage number 25.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't be surprised if there were somekind of a spike. I don't know what the average would work out to be.We'll be seeking to put in reserves, so that if our estimates areclose and our estimates of the demand for excess are close, theaverage will come out around the $600 million level. There is alwaysan element of uncertainty as to just how far a spike takes you. But Ithink there is a lot of realization in the market that this is a verydifficult period for reserve management.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily presents the speaker's thoughts and plans for managing reserves during a difficult period.


Passage number 26.
MR. JOHNSON. Peter, you mentioned the market being nervous.I agree that there is still some of that, but I think we did achieve--though I realize it hasn't been fantastic--some flattening in theyield curve out of the discount rate move. Even though the long endwent up to around 9.80 percent at one point, it has settled downaround 9.60 percent; and we have seen a larger move on the short endof the market than we have on the long end, even though it hasfluctuated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is acknowledging some nervousness in the market but agrees that there has been some flattening in the yield curve. He also states that there has been a larger move on the short end of the market than on the long end. Overall, he is expressing his perspective and observations without any disagreement.


Passage number 27.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think if you measure it just from the timethe discount rate moved, there would be some flattening. The shortrates came up more than long rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of opinion by Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 28.
 I think if you looked at the9/22/87whole intermeeting period, it is about similar at the short and longend of--MR. JOHNSON. I wouldn't do that because [unintelligible] itcould have been some fear of Fed tightening preceding it. But I thinkthe tone seems to be more inflation fears or psychology, or thedollar, and everything else, more than just--. I don't know how yousort all this out. But still it does appear that there has been someflattening achieved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 29.
MR. STERN. On the other side of that coin, and at the riskof some overstatement, I had the impression that the discount ratechange was received with a combination of indifference and resignationmore than anything else. Could you comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any clear contention or disagreement. It only presents the speaker's impression and asks for a comment on it.


Passage number 30.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I am not sure what to say. I wouldn't saythat there was a very widespread expectation; there was someexpectation of the move, and there were even some people who werethinking in terms of a larger move. And, initially, there were somewho expressed disappointment that it wasn't larger, although I wouldhave to think that a small, vocal, minority was expressing that view.I suppose there is a sense in which [your observation] is true; peoplewho recognized that the dollar had been under pressure and was likelyto be continuing under pressure have come to expect that our ratestructure and our policy formulation process will be under that kindof pressure. So there was that element of resignation to the process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their perspective on the expectations and reactions to a certain move.


Passage number 31.
MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, is there an expectation in the marketof further tightening by the Fed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about market expectations.


Passage number 32.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Not in any imminent sense, but I think thereis an expectation that the dollar is going to remain under pressure,given that we have this awful trade balance picture; and that would bethe kind of atmosphere under which there would have to be furtherpolicy response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage presents an opinion held by Mr. Sternlight, stating that there is an expectation that the dollar is going to remain under pressure due to an awful trade balance picture. This is presented as a statement of fact rather than a disagreement or contention between multiple parties.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
MS. SEGER. Peter, did I understand you correctly when thequestion was asked about the market response to what might happen toborrowings before this maintenance period is up. Did you say youthought we could come in around $600 million without stirring thingsup. Isn't the arithmetic to get $600 million in this period such thatit would require tremendous borrowings today and tomorrow. And ifthose borrowings occur in the context of the knowledge of this meetingdate, I think [market participants] might make something out of thatrather than just saying, well, it is one way to get the average towork out right. I don't think they know what we are shooting for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. MS. Seger disagrees with Peter's statement about the market response to borrowings before the maintenance period is up. She argues that the amount of borrowing needed to reach $600 million would require significant borrowings today and tomorrow, which she believes market participants would interpret as significant.


Passage number 34.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It would take some bulge in borrowing to getup to the $600 million [average]. I don't have yesterday's figureyet, but borrowing had been averaging $460 million through Sunday. Sothere would have to be some bulge, probably, on the final day. And asI said, if you ask the people who follow these things closely, most ofthem would probably think of us as using $500 million, although somewould say a range of $500 to $600 million. If they saw a number like$600 million coming out, some of them might regard that as indicativeof a little firmer aim than they had estimated earlier. On the otherhand, they also were aware that it was very tough to manage reservesin this period. So, I don't know that they are going to jump9/22/87immediately to any very strong conclusion if the borrowing comes outat $650 million, or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and speculation about borrowing figures and the potential reactions of people who follow these things closely.


Passage number 35.
MS. SEGER. Yes, but if there is all this nervousness ingeneral, and if you average, let's say, $625 or $650 million, with $2billion of borrowing on Wednesday--which happens to be the day afterwe meet here--there must be weirdos, anyway, who will think maybethere is a connection. Maybe in New York they may figure all thisout, but there are a few other market participants outside New Yorkwho might make something out of that whole sequence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the possibility of a connection between nervousness and borrowing in the market.


Passage number 36.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Just because of the juxtaposition vis-a-visthe Committee meeting date, possibly more [than a few]; but I thinkmore of them would just tie it to knowing that Wednesday is thesettlement date of the reserve period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Sternlight regarding the possible reasons for certain actions.


Passage number 37.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there will be critical questionsregarding what happens, not so much on Wednesday, but because thattype of spike is very difficult to interpret; they will look atborrowing very closely in the next maintenance period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a prediction or expectation regarding critical questions and close scrutiny of borrowing in the next maintenance period.


Passage number 38.
MR. KEEHN. Peter, you suggested that the increase in long-term rates is a combination of factors, with inflation being one.But, in the combination of factors, how persistent is the inflationconcern and is it just one of those issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on the persistence and significance of inflation as one of the factors contributing to the increase in long-term rates.


Passage number 39.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the concern is very much tied to thedollar. And when concern about the dollar [is high], the market ismore concerned with what would tend to happen with respect toinflation. The market has been reasonably well impressed with theactual price index numbers that have come along in the recent period.But they do worry that, in the course of redressing the trade deficit,we are going to be imposing more demands on our resources--that theremay well have to be further adjustment in the value of the dollar andthat that will do things to import prices, and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of the market's concerns about the dollar and the potential impact on inflation and import prices.


Passage number 40.
MR. KEEHN. But it is more that side as opposed to domesticpressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Keen is simply stating that there is more pressure coming from an external source rather than domestic sources.


Passage number 41.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think that even with the tradepicture, it is partly domestic pressure because, as you are redressingthat trade imbalance, you'll be putting more pressure on domesticresources.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the trade situation and how it will affect domestic resources, without conflicting or contrasting with any other idea or viewpoint.


Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides the title or position of a person ("President") and their ethnicity ("Black"). This does not indicate any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 43.
MR. BLACK. Following up on Chairman Greenspan's comment,Peter, suppose that in the next maintenance period you do come inpretty close to $600 million and the market now expects $500 to $600million. Would you expect much rate movement if you got closer tothat figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a hypothetical scenario being discussed.


Passage number 44.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I would expect a modest firming. My guessis that you would get funds rates averaging in the 7-1/4 to 7-3/8percent area. I think we are averaging 7.15 or 7.20 percent so farthis period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of one person's expectation or guess about future funds rates. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 45.
9/22/87MR. PARRY. Peter, has there been much discussion of theimpact of higher interest rates on Treasury requirements. One hears alot of discussion from the Administration recently about the deficit,at least in fiscal 1987, being somewhat lower than their estimatesbecause of revenues going up. But I don't hear much discussion of theimpact of higher interest rates on future requirements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply raises a question about the lack of discussion regarding the impact of higher interest rates on future Treasury requirements.


Passage number 46.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I have not really heard discussion of thatparticular factor. However, while people are well pleased with thedeficit coming out this fiscal year at $160 billion, or somewhatunder, there is deep concern that without the Congress gettingsomething together on fiscal restraint, it will be heading up by $20billion or more next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two different concerns: people being pleased with the deficit coming out this fiscal year, and the deep concern that it may increase next year if Congress does not take action.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments or questions. Ifnot, I will entertain a motion to ratify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking for any additional comments or questions and suggesting the possibility of ratifying a motion if there are none.


Passage number 48.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "So move it" is a directive or command, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
MR. JOHNSON. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The presence of the word "Second" implies that there is another person or statement preceding Mr. Johnson's, suggesting the possibility of contention or disagreement between the two.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Objections. Approved. Mr. Prell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 51.
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I can berelatively brief this morning. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker believes they can be relatively brief.


Passage number 52.
]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Prell. Questions for Mr.Prell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude and a request for questions addressed to Mr. Prell.


Passage number 53.
MR. FORRESTAL. The only thing that kind of jumped out at mein your forecast this time, and I guess this has been there before, ison the real export side. You are showing a marked deceleration of the[trade] deficit; real net exports, for example, going from [an annualrate of $131 billion in] the third quarter of 1987 to $63 billion inthe fourth quarter of 1988. Most of the other forecasts that I haveseen would not indicate nearly that much progress. Can you tell mewhat that dramatic improvement is based on. Is it basically on theexport side or in the diminution of imports or a combination of both,or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question seeking clarification and understanding.


Passage number 54.
MR. PRELL. Well, the greater strength is clearly on theexport side. As we go out through the forecast period to the end ofnext year, we have very modest increases in imports; indeed, we wouldexpect that real merchandise imports, not only [nominal] merchandiseimports, will be going down slightly, largely in response to the pastand prospective depreciation of the dollar. We are also anticipating,of course, that domestic spending--consumption, in particular--will begrowing rather slowly, so we won't be sucking in great volumes ofimports because of the continuation of the kind of demands we haveseen previously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting a forecast and explains that they expect imports to decrease slightly due to the depreciation of the dollar and slow domestic spending. There is no contradictory information or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 55.
MR. TRUMAN. I don't think that should govern[unintelligible]. If you look at outside forecasts that go intodetail on real exports you will [not] find that much differencebetween [unintelligible] and exports over the forecast horizon fromours. Generally, they do show very substantial declines over theperiod. DRI, for example, has something very close, almost shockinglyclose, to what we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that there is not much difference between their forecast and the outside forecasts when it comes to real exports. They are citing an example from DRI as evidence.


Passage number 56.
9/22/87 -6-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 57.
MR. HELLER. Mike, you spoke about the sharp increases inbusiness equipment spending. How does that break down betweenadditional capacity and efficiency enhancing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification on how business equipment spending is divided between additional capacity and efficiency enhancement.


Passage number 58.
MR. PRELL. That's very difficult to get a handle on. Theanecdotal evidence--or if you want to characterize it in more solidterms than that, the kinds of survey information that are gathered byMcGraw Hill and others--suggests that vis-a-vis historical experience,a distinctly above-average percentage of this planned spending isdesignated as being for replacement, modernization, and so on.Clearly, in many industries there is plenty of capacity; in othersthere is less. And one can identify some areas of significantexpansion of capacity, with additional plants being built. But,generally, as we are looking at it, the major thrust will be oncontinuing to reduce costs, to modernize product line, and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing survey information and anecdotal evidence about planned spending and the focus on reducing costs and modernizing product lines. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 59.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is most likely to show up first inincreasing lead times on the delivery of materials. In other words,leaving aside the question of where the pressures are, that's thefirst sign that you are going to get something of that nature--thatis, capacity expansion. There has got to be some evidence on the partof the company that it is having difficulty in maintaining deliverieson a relatively quick pace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 60.
 Am I correct in assuming that there hasnot really been any major change, or that there has been a slightincrease--MR. PRELL. For materials, the lead times have beenlengthening. I think, implicit in your comment, is the question ofwhether they have increased to levels that are not comfortable, and Isuspect that the strategy in many firms has been to run with a littletighter capacity than they might have in the past. And they may notbe uncomfortable with what they are seeing. In the capital goodsarea, average lead times don't seem to have lengthened much yet; andthat is probably consonant with the evidence that the capacityutilization in equipment producing industries is not especially high--not what one sees in some nondurable material areas, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that lead times for materials have been lengthening, but they also suggest that firms may not be uncomfortable with this change. They also mention that lead times for capital goods have not lengthened much yet. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or contention.


Passage number 61.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage only mentions the name "President Parry" without providing any context or information to suggest any kind of disagreement or contention associated with this person.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 62.
MR. PARRY. I would like to ask two questions about yourassumption with regard to fiscal policy. This time, as has been thecase in the past, there is an assumption that there are spending cutsof around $25 billion. I think there is a substantial risk that thatwill not materialize. Some work we have done suggests that if policyis accommodative and you don't get that $25 billion deduction inspending, that it could add approximately a percentage point to growthin 1988 and a half percentage point to inflation. Would you thinkthat to be roughly [the magnitude].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry is expressing skepticism about the assumption of spending cuts of around $25 billion, suggesting that they may not materialize. He presents his own analysis that suggests if the spending cuts do not happen, it could have a significant impact on both growth and inflation.


Passage number 63.
MR. PRELL. I take it you are going to zero on the deficitreduction action with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward question about the topic of deficit reduction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
MR. PARRY. You don't get the $25 billion reduction; you getzero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, contradicts the claim that the reduction is $25 billion by stating that it is actually zero.


Passage number 65.
9/22/87MR. PRELL. I think that is probably a little higher than ournormal econometric results would give us, but it is clearly thedirection in which we would go. At this point, the $25 billion lookslike a reasonable ballpark figure, given what is being discussedcurrently in a compromise--a Gramm-Rudman revision that would besomething like $23 billion, with no loan sales or that sort of thing.But I suppose there are still some risks that it would be less thanwhat we have and the result might well be somewhere in between thatzero and the $25 billion that we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 66.
MR. PARRY. One further question: I notice the change in theassumption you have made with regard to the size of the deficit. Iguess it would primarily be the higher interest rate assumption overthe forecast horizon. Does that feed back into income. In otherwords, is the loop closed in the model so that you get higher growthof disposable income as a result of the higher interest payments onthe deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Parry is asking a question to clarify the assumption made regarding the size of the deficit and its potential impact on income.


Passage number 67.
MR. PRELL. Well, the forecast isn't generated by a model,per se. As we go through and estimate the income flows, we definitelydo take account of the interest rate path that we've assumed andprojected. And we do have substantial growth in personal interestincome over the projection period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining how the forecast is generated and how they take into account the interest rate path in the projection. There is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement about President Boehne.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
MR. BOEHNE. I would like to follow up on Bob Forrestal'squestion. Basically, the U.S. strategy for turning the trade deficitaround is to shrink the value of the dollar and to get our tradingpartners to grow faster than we are growing. We have done fairly wellon the dollar, but we haven't done so well on growth abroad. It's anappealing strategy, but it strikes me as being somewhat novel if youlook at the history of these kinds of adjustments. What has happenedmost often is that the country that has the deficit ends up with arecession. In other words, you reduce domestic demand below what ishappening abroad and you also get downward adjustments on thecurrency. And I would think that the longer it takes for us to make aturnaround in the trade deficit--as we get month after month of thesedisappointing trade figures--that it would put additional downwardpressure on the dollar. And it might also begin to raise expectationsthat, well, as nice as it sounds to try this rather novel strategy, inthe end, the U.S. is going to have to go through kind of a wringer, asmost other countries do. My real question is: How much of a novelexperiment are we really running in light of what is happening inother countries and what has happened over history. I am having ahard time thinking of a country that hasn't turned around this kind ofa trade deficit without a fair amount of suppression of domesticdemand. And the question is not aimed at [criticism]; I like theapproach that we are on. But it does strike me as somewhat novel onthe broader stage of history. I would just like to see if that isright or if we have had lots of company with this experiment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests that the strategy of shrinking the value of the dollar and relying on other countries to grow faster than the US is a novel approach that has not been successful in the past. They question whether this strategy will lead to a recession and argue that most countries that have had trade deficits have had to suppress domestic demand to turn it around. However, they also state that they like the approach being taken.


Passage number 70.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, the truth of the matter is, PresidentBoehne, that there are some examples where this has been successful.A lot of them come from the early 1980s and, of course, during thatperiod where you had essentially [slow growth of] GNP without goingthrough a recession--that is essentially the question you are asking--in a relatively short period of time. There are several examples in9/22/87the early 1980s and, of course, those were [unintelligible]. Theother side of the equation, which you mentioned, is faster growth inthe rest of the world, which was then the United States. And thereare some other examples. We did look at this record about 18 monthsago and that is basically what it showed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Truman is acknowledging that there are examples of successful economic growth without going through a recession, while also considering the factors that contribute to faster growth in the rest of the world. There is no direct disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 71.
MR. BOEHNE. Are these sizable countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking about the size of the countries.


Passage number 72.
MR. TRUMAN. Germany and Japan [unintelligible]. We tend toforget that they had deficits in the late 1970s and at the beginningof the 1980s. They moved from small deficits to very large surpluses.One feature of the forecast is that, while we don't have a recessionin a GNP sense built in, we do have relatively slow growth in domesticdemand. In fact, we have a quite dramatic slowing of domestic demandbuilt into this forecast. In some sense, as Peter was saying earlierin answer to your question, that's part of the process--the processthat makes room for this external adjustment in an environment inwhich growth of production as a whole is kept relatively high butdomestic demand growth is low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information about the economic situation in Germany and Japan and discussing the forecast for slow growth in domestic demand.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The passage only mentions "President Guffey" without any context or further details.


Passage number 74.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of questions forMike with respect to the sections that caught my eye in the forecast.You mentioned that a further decline in the dollar was assumed in yourforecast. As I remember, the Greenbook only made reference to adecline much like that projected in the last Greenbook. Further, as Iremember, that decline was 10 percent on an annual basis, and most ofthat had been completed in the first half of the year. Am I correct,or is there further decline assumed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is simply asking for clarification and confirmation of the information provided in the forecast.


Passage number 75.
MR. PRELL. I guess I wasn't clear. The assumption is thatthe dollar will decline further over the forecast period. For ourpurposes, we put in a straight line path that averages about 10percent, at an annual rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Prell is simply clarifying his statement and making an assumption about the decline of the dollar over a forecast period.


Passage number 76.
MR. GUFFEY. My second question has to do with yourassumption about rising interest rates in the fourth quarter. To bevery specific, do you have a level of interest rates in the fourthquarter that you assumed in this forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking for a specific detail.


Passage number 77.
MR. PRELL. It isn't necessary that there be a precisecourse. We put in a smooth trajectory that moves the federal fundsrate, for example, into the 8 to 8-1/2 percent range by next spring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 78.
MR. GUFFEY. In the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply introduces Mr. Guffey without any context of a disagreement or any opposing opinions.


Passage number 79.
MR. PRELL. We would be approaching it by the end of thefirst quarter. I don't want to be too precise about this. If therewere flatness over the next few months and more increase later on, wewouldn't be able to distinguish the economic effects in the forecastfor the period as a whole. But we do have a gradual rise here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that if there is a gradual increase in the future, it may not be distinguishable in the overall economic forecast.


Passage number 80.
MR. GUFFEY. My last question has to do with your commentabout inflation picking up--I guess that's in 1988, if I read theGreenbook numbers correctly, because your forecast has it actuallydeclining in the last quarter of this year, as measured by the fixed-weight index or the deflator itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact and asking for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 81.
9/22/87MR. PRELL. There's a difference in our forecast between thedeflator and the fixed-weight GNP measure. In the fixed-weight index,we have 3-1/4 percent for the third quarter and 3-1/2 percent for thefourth, whereas there's a deceleration from 3-1/4 percent in the thirdquarter down to 2-1/2 percent in the deflator. The difference thereis the peculiarities of weighting shifts that occur in the GNPdeflator; and the decrease in oil imports, which have a relatively lowweight in the deflator, actually tends to depress the GNP deflatorrelative to the fixed-weight measure. Basically, we have a fairlysteady second-half inflation, as we see it; it's lower than in thefirst half, in large part because of lower food and energy priceinflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the different forecasts for inflation based on different measures.


Passage number 82.
MR. GUFFEY. So is it fair to say, Mike, that inflation inthe second half, and particularly in the last quarter and maybe eveninto the first quarter of 1988, is reasonably stable in your forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen from the use of the word "fair" in Mr. Guffey's question, which implies a desire for confirmation or agreement.


Passage number 83.
MR. PRELL. In some underlying sense, there is a fairlystable picture between the first and second half, but that's in thisgame of stripping away food and energy prices, which obviously areaffected by special nonmacroeconomic influences in the short run. Ofcourse, there are peculiar things that affect other sectors, as well.But, basically we have a fairly stabilized underlying trend, and someincrease next year in the rate of price inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents one individual's perspective on the stability in price inflation.


Passage number 84.
MR. PARRY. But the underlying inflation must pick up quite abit, because you have a marked acceleration in labor costs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry is making a statement about the necessary increase in underlying inflation and the marked acceleration in labor costs.


Passage number 85.
MR. PRELL. Some people would take that as an indicator ofthe underlying rate of inflation. And yes, we do, as compensationaccelerates significantly next year. In that sense, the underlyingtrend is picking up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that some people would interpret the indicator as a reflection of the underlying rate of inflation, and that compensation is expected to accelerate significantly next year, which would suggest that the underlying trend is picking up.


Passage number 86.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the title "President Black" and does not provide any information or context to determine if there is any contention or disagreement related to that title.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 87.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, most of the comments have beendirected at particular parts of the forecast. My feeling the lasttime was that the economy would be somewhat stronger than theGreenbook was projecting, and the staff, indeed, have moved theirforecast in that general direction. So, we have very little quarrelwith what they have done. We think the main driving force is going tobe an improvement in net exports of goods and services; and plant andequipment expenditures, particularly in the equipment area, alsoprovide a pretty good push. If we were to guess, we would say therisk might still be that the forecast is a little low. But reallywhat bothers us, I guess, is the feeling that they might be right onthis forecast. In saying that, I'm focusing on the inflation ratethat they are projecting for next year--when it goes up to 4-1/2percent. I think we ought to be able to do better than that for nextyear, and we ought to target something less than that. A 4-1/2percent inflation rate could easily become 5 percent; and 5 percent isnot really reasonable price stability. So, rather than thinking theymay have overestimated, we're afraid that they might be about rightand have come up with some results that are a little too strong on theprice side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses disagreement with the inflation rate projected by the staff for the following year. He believes that the forecasted 4-1/2 percent inflation rate is too high and that a lower rate should be targeted for price stability.


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention Governor Seger and therefore there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 89.
9/22/87MS. SEGER. Yes, I just have a couple of questions that aretied to a few matters that we discussed yesterday at pre-FOMCbriefings. These involve whether or not we have completely factoredin the rise in interest rates that we have already seen, plus whollyfactored in the increases that we think are yet to come. Inparticular, on housing starts, which as of last month were at a 1.6million annual rate, we know that there are problems with high vacancyrates in the multifamily area, at least in some parts of the country.The incentives built into that kind of housing have been shiftedgreatly by the Tax Reform Act. As for single family starts, at leastsome people say they are sensitive to interest rate changes. I guessI have a hard time believing that for 1988 starts will not fall below1-1/2 million. I hope they don't, but I am sort of skittish aboutthis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the speaker's concern and uncertainty about the future of housing starts.


Passage number 90.
MR. PRELL. It's purely conjectural at this point. Variouseconometric models would suggest that, over the relevant horizon here,you are probably dealing with an interest rate elasticity of about 1.We have a rise in mortgage rates from around 10-1/2 percent tosomething in the high 11's, [an increase of] roughly 10 percent. Wehave roughly a 10 percent decline in housing starts, from 1.6 millionto something around the 1.45 million area. In that sense, it's wellin line with the historical patterns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting information without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 91.
 The other thing that providessome comfort--MS. SEGER. Is that true for both the single family and themultifamily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement about the comfort provided by something, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 92.
MR. PRELL. Well, I'm looking at it in the aggregate:clearly, they are both to be affected by the change in interest rates.Looking at it from another angle, mortgage rates are back up to levelswe saw in 1985, and we had considerably higher housing starts then--inthe 1.7 million area. Now, we've probably gone through some catchupperiod in home ownership, but that number seems fairly reasonable tous, looking at the response we've seen just so far to the substantialincrease in mortgage rates. It hasn't made the market fall apartentirely. We may not have it quite right, but this is a stab at whatwe think is a normal response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 93.
MS. SEGER. What if it just means that the lags are longer.Maybe we haven't even seen the full impact of the spike we had back inApril or May, which was quite dramatic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a hypothetical scenario suggesting that the impact of a spike in April or May may not have fully manifested yet.


Passage number 94.
MR. PRELL. Well, clearly, we felt that we would be seeingmuch of that response by this summer, before we even elevated our rateforecast beyond what we had earlier. We only had a modest furtherdecline below the 1.6 million level in our previous forecast. As wehave taken the mortgage rates up more, we have lowered the housingstarts further. It's very difficult to say. As you noted, there areother influences at work, and there may still be some adjustment tothe tax law changes. There are still some problems of high vacancyrates in home rental properties in various parts of the country.Again, when you look at house prices, there too, the evidence suggeststhat, at least in many markets, there's still a pretty robust demandat these interest rates. And there is just no anecdotal evidence tosuggest to us that we are way off the mark in our assessment of demandpositions. Even the survey information suggests pretty high numbers-10-9/22/87of people whose attitude is that this is a good time to buy a house.That may be surprising, but that seems to be the pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and observations, including their own assessment of demand positions, the influence of mortgage rates on housing starts, and the survey information about people's attitudes towards buying a house.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 95.
MS. SEGER. The other question I have again ties intoyesterday's briefing, and relates to our heavy reliance on the tradeturnaround to produce a good 1988. If I'm reading the numbers right,about half of the real GNP growth, fourth quarter of 1987 to fourthquarter of 1988, is expected to come from improvement in net exports.Again, I think it's very, very difficult to get a $54 billion increasein exports in one year--namely, this year--and then tack on $57billion next year. That's just a lot to produce.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger expresses doubt and skepticism about the projection that there will be a significant increase in net exports in the coming year. She states that it is difficult to achieve such a large increase in exports and questions the feasibility of the projected numbers.


Passage number 96.
MR. PRELL. One of the main comforts we can find in thenumbers is that it looks to us like the trend in real exports has beenquite strong thus far. And based on our exchange rate projection andthe assumption that there are probably still lags in the order anddelivery process, that means that some of the improvement in exportsis still not fully evident. We think that we are forecasting,basically, a continuation of patterns that are already perceptible.In some respects, I think a greater concern, given our outlook, wouldbe that we get both the improvement in the net exports somehow, andalso get greater domestic demand growth. That puts still greaterpressures on resources than some people would have thought in thepast. We have two years now, in our forecast, of consumption growththat is really subpar historically. So, in a sense, we have thesethings put together in a way that gives you a rather smooth adjustmentto the picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply mentions President Boehne without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 98.
MR. BOEHNE. I don't have a question. I would just like tocomment on the outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is simply stating that he does not have a question and would like to comment on the outlook.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if you'll hold that for just a fewminutes. President Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking someone to hold something for a few minutes.


Passage number 100.
MR. PARRY. I just want to raise an issue to shed a littlelight on this concern about a slowing in the interest-sensitivesectors of the economy, such as housing. It seems to me that with theeconomy operating where it is, in terms of employment at least, if wedid not get that slowing in the interest-sensitive sectors of theeconomy at the same time we are going to get the strength in netexports, we would have a real problem. So, one can be concerned aboutthe implications for housing or for other sectors but the picturedoesn't really fit together very well if you don't get that kind ofslump. And I would assume that's the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Parry is simply raising an issue and offering his perspective on the potential consequences of a slowing in interest-sensitive sectors of the economy.


Passage number 101.
MR. PRELL. That's what characterizes our outlook and I thinksome of the comments around the table suggest that there is a hopefulaspect of this--that everything falls nicely into place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates agreement and a positive outlook.


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage based on the given information "Mr. Melzer." This is because the passage mentioned only one person without any context or further details to indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 103.
MR. MELZER. Mike, if this linkage between dollar weaknessand inflationary expectations isn't broken, and you weren't able, forexample, to achieve over the forecast period the 10 percent annual ofdecline in the dollar--let's just say that that becomes impossible--how would that affect the forecast in a broad sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a hypothetical scenario and asking about its potential effect on the forecast.


Passage number 104.
 In other words,-11-9/22/87if you couldn't achieve some of the external adjustment through theforeign exchange price mechanism--MR. PRELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing any contention or disagreement, but rather providing an explanation or clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
 In other words, the dollar--I wasn't clear what--MR. MELZER. What I'm saying is that the box we are in rightnow is that, as a practical matter, if we tolerate that dollardecline, it kicks off inflationary expectations. So, let's say thatyou just assumed that the dollar was stable. How would that affectthe forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "I wasn't clear what" suggests a lack of understanding or uncertainty, indicating that there is disagreement or confusion regarding the topic being discussed.


Passage number 106.
MR. TRUMAN. It depends a bit, I think, on what else is goingon at the same time. Much of the impetus to net exports from thedollar, at least as far as this forecast horizon goes, is what isalready in train. Less than half of the increase next year in netexports is directly traceable to a further projected dollar decline.But, presumably, if you didn't have the dollar decline, then youwouldn't have the same kind of pressures on interest rates. So youwould have less pressures in the interest-sensitive sectors of theeconomy. So you have some compensation in terms of the economy'soperation as a whole which, in turn, would tend to feed back again onthe net exports, so you would have less improvement in net exportstoo. But, there is a certain sense of [unintelligible] that isbasically the way we think about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely discussing the potential effects of a dollar decline on net exports and interest rates. They are presenting a logical sequence of cause and effect.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
MR. HELLER. Wait a minute. You say that interest rateswouldn't be rising; but you can also come up with that scenario of acontinued stable dollar that comes about because we are raisinginterest rates in this country. Then, how would your answer bedifferent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller is challenging the statement made by the other person by presenting an alternative scenario where interest rates in the country are raised, resulting in a stable dollar. This implies that the two individuals have conflicting views or interpretations of how interest rates and the stability of the dollar are related.


Passage number 108.
MR. TRUMAN. Under that scenario, maybe instead of a $50billion change in net exports you would have something like $20-$25billion. So you would have less than 1 percent of GNP in thisforecast, and that's well within the error. Mike put it that way inthe overall forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply presenting a scenario and discussing the potential impact on net exports.


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement relating to Governor Johnson.


Passage number 110.
MR. JOHNSON. I guess that was sort of what I was going toask. One other question I had in mind: I'm not a big "aggregatesperson" but, in line with this whole issue of aggregate demand, itstrikes me that this recent uptick in interest rates is going to havea further damping effect on the aggregates. I think that is fine, butat some point, you have to ask how much aggregate demand is plausiblein that scenario. I think you are restraining it. You have to comeup with some fairly implausible velocity growth numbers to getaggregate demand outside of a range that would present a real breakoutin overall aggregate demand. It seems to me that we have it prettywell cornered here. In the long run, you could have a couple of badquarters under that scenario but, given these recent moves in interestrates, what are we projecting on the broader monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and observations about the impact of interest rates on aggregate demand. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 111.
MR. KOHN. As you saw in the Bluebook, we are projecting thatthe rise in interest rates, which is not all that large but issignificant, would damp growth in M2 over coming months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a projection about the rise in interest rates and its impact on the growth of M2 over the coming months.


Passage number 112.
MR. JOHNSON. You have about 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states the percentage without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
-12-9/22/87MR. KOHN. If you abstract from September and you just havethe fourth quarter. Now we have this August-to-December target. Andthen for next year, under the assumption of further moderate increasesin interest rates, we would have M2 growth in the 4-1/2 to 5 percentkind of range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a target for M2 growth based on certain assumptions.


Passage number 114.
 That implies--MR. JOHNSON. Why would it pick up with higher interestrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 115.
MR. KOHN. Well, first of all, the rate of increase ininterest rates may not be quite as great. And there are some thingsthat seem to have been depressing M2 growth that we really couldn'taccount for this year and we are assuming that they won't be quite asactive next year. For example, the IRAs won't be around, and thatmight boost M2 growth a little; so, we have this assumed pickup ingrowth next year. If that came about, with our GNP projection thatwould imply about a 2 percent increase in velocity. But, remember,we're damping domestic demand here; we have slower domestic demandthan we have GNP, so if you look at velocity from that perspective, itwouldn't be quite as big an increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their projection for M2 growth and velocity based on certain assumptions.


Passage number 116.
 That's not all that large anincrease--MR. JOHNSON. That's sort of what I'm getting at. You haveit cornered a little, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement and a clarification by Mr. Johnson, rather than a conflicting exchange of ideas or opinions.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Could I raise a question about what theGNP demand numbers would really look like if we were to recognize thatthe way we calculate the numbers is a function of the fact that we areusing 1982 as a base period. I was looking at the fixed-weight GNPdeflator versus the GNP deflator, which tends to pick up a differencein the mix, which is essentially an issue of how far we are from thebase period to a large extent. If I were to deflate the nominal GNPby the fixed-weight index--which is roughly, but not quite, theequivalent of moving the 1982 base up to 1987, the current year--itseems as though we're getting a good deal less in the way of realgrowth. Let's take a case in point: the fourth-quarter over fourth-quarter change this year and next, with respect to the differencebetween the GNP deflator and the fixed-weight deflator, is .3 and .4,respectively. Assuming that the nominal is the same, that wouldreduce real growth. The problem I have with that, however, is thatI'm not sure whether the model is generating the real first and then,by implication, the nominal, or vice versa. How do you look at thatissue. In other words, how do we interpret that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation:

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a question and expressing uncertainty about how the numbers are calculated and how they should be interpreted.


Passage number 118.
MR. PRELL. Well, it's difficult to dissect this precisely,but I think we are dealing mostly with a process that looks at thereal first, infers from that the pressures on resources, which thenfeed back through a short-run Phillips curve relation to the wage andprice side. That's a stylistic characterization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining a process and providing a stylistic characterization.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's be very specific. In 1982, oilprices, and overall import prices, were much higher than they are now.Therefore, a rise in oil imports on the import side of real GNP is alarger subtraction with 1982 as a base than with 1987 as a base. Iguess I'm really asking if you were to restructure the total system sothat say, 1987, equals 100 instead of 1982, how would your real GNPlook in that context.-139/22/87Mr. TRUMAN. These two years, 1987 and 1988, oil importsdon't rise very much. You may get some effect on GNP to the extentthat you don't have the same rise in domestic production of oil orenergy, measured in 1982 dollars. But there's not much subtraction,even in our forecast, from higher oil imports from fourth quarter tofourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply discusses the potential effects of oil imports on GNP and how the calculations might change if the base year were different.


Passage number 120.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN" is simply a mention of someone's name and does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 121.
 Also, assume that the overall non-oilimport price deflator is significantly lower than it was in 1982,which, as I recall--MR. TRUMAN. If I remember, it was just about 100; maybe I'moff by a few points. The non-oil price deflator was running about100.3 in the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply recalling a specific statistic and mentioning that they might be off by a few points in their recollection.


Passage number 122.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which means that it's a relative issuethat the domestic thing is [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Which means that it's a relative issue" suggests that there is some context or explanation to follow, but it does not indicate disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 123.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, you would get some impact, I guess, fromthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the potential impact of something.


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason I raise the issue is thatit's becoming a very crucial question, not of statistics, but for realevaluation here. We are trying to determine to what extent the netexports are the crucial issue. We are getting some signals out of theindustrial production index. That is basically saying, if anything,that the cutting edge of the net export figures is much sharper, so tospeak--much more positive--than the GNP numbers are implying, becausewe are getting extraordinary strength in industrial production. Doyou read it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observations and asking for the reader's interpretation.


Passage number 125.
 Or is that--MR. TRUMAN. I don't know about extraordinary; maybe some ofthe comments earlier suggested that. One problem is that, to theextent you get this going on, you're producing things which, ofcourse, you're shipping abroad; and you don't see it showing up inconsumption and things like that. And that is part of the adjustmentthat President Boehne was talking about. You are not going through arecession actually, but you are going through a much slower growth in[economic] welfare, as measured in current consumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a potential issue with the economic situation.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We could be building inventories forexport, which affects the industrial production index but doesn't showup in the trade figures. I think implicit in all of this is that ifthe industrial production index stalls, it would raise some seriousquestions about this hypothesis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement but rather discusses the possible implications and consequences of a certain situation. It acknowledges the possibility that the industrial production index could stall and raises questions about the hypothesis being discussed.


Passage number 127.
MR. PRELL. I might just note that, while industrialproduction is growing much more rapidly than we think GNP is growingthis quarter--and the IP numbers must be regarded as still quitetentative--that growth is well within the range of variation in thatrelationship. And for the year as a whole, the gap is rathermoderate. So, at this point, we don't see a big disparity in thesignals coming from the industrial sector or industrial productionestimates and GNP, particularly when you start [unintelligible] GNPgoods output that most reasonably can be compared in industrialproduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis, but there is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 128.
-14-9/22/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mike before wego to the general comments. May I request that, in the generalcomments, you address one question that is bothering me particularly,and I think it's really crucial to the outlook. I would appreciatehearing any views you have on how to interpret the rise in long-termTreasury rates--that is, to what extent would you disaggregate therise into inflation premiums, or expectations instability premiums,and what part do you perceive to be real. By expectations instabilitypremiums I mean expectations that bond prices fluctuate sodramatically that, in fact, you're imposing a premium on the overallinterest rate. It strikes me that much of what we are viewing outthere, and how we view it, is going to depend to a very substantialextent on how we evaluate the various components in what is a fairlysignificant rise in the underlying bond rate. I think PresidentBoehne wanted to open it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply requesting views on how to interpret the rise in long-term Treasury rates. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
MR. BOEHNE. Let me just comment on the Philadelphia region.It continues to perform well above the national experience. NewJersey, Delaware and eastern Pennsylvania continue to have very lowunemployment rates. As a matter of fact, I think that if there's adrag on growth in these areas, it is that there's a labor shortage andbusiness firms simply can't keep up with production needs. Even thetraditional manufacturing areas in our District are showingimprovement, and unemployment is coming down in those areas as well.Both residential and nonresidential construction are very strong;retail sales are healthy, except for autos; loan growth is runningabout twice the national average; and real estate lending is growingabout three times the national average. So, we have a rather bullishregion that is being constrained mostly I think not by a lack ofaggregate demand, but labor. The concern that I have picked up in thelast couple of months, mostly in the business community, is a concernabout inflation. And I think it's being triggered by these laborshortages that people report, particularly at the entry level. If youlook at the help wanted ads in the newspapers, and just the helpwanted signs generally, they are at pretty high levels. While wageincreases have been reasonably moderate, I think a lot of people inthe business community are concerned that this is just the kind ofsituation that triggers a wage-price kind of spiral.On the national scene, I think the Greenbook numbers lookreasonably good. In terms of the risks--and I am being influenced bywhere I sit and the people that I talk to--it seems to me thatwhatever risks there were of having too weak an economy, or even arecession out through 1988, have shrunk considerably. I see the risksnow on the side of triggering some kind of a wage-price increase.There is one point, however, in the outlook that I think bearsmentioning, and that is that both the fundamentals and the tradesituation indicate a continuing downward movement in the value of thedollar. Indeed, this is reflected in the Greenbook forecast. We arein this "inflation/dollar" box, as you aptly put it a moment ago. ButI think that fundamentals have a way of winning out, even over centralbank policy. So, as we deal with these bouts of a falling dollar andfalling bond prices, we have to bear in mind that this is really whatwe expect. We expect the dollar to go down. And I think we have tobe careful that, as we deal with these episodes, we don't lose trackof the fundamentals. That leads to the question that you posed, whichis a very good question. I don't have an answer, but I have asuspicion that more of this increase in long rates is real than it is-15-9/22/87inflation. I say that because, if you look realistically at the factthat the U.S. is going to have to import lots of capital over the nextseveral years, as we have the last several years, I think that callsfor a certain premium over foreign interest rates. What we may beseeing here is some adjustment to what it takes to attract the kindsof funds that we need.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly describes the positive economic performance in the Philadelphia region and expresses concerns about labor shortages and potential inflation. The speaker also mentions the downward movement of the dollar and the need to attract foreign funds. There is no clear argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude from President Parry.


Passage number 131.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, with regard to your question aboutreal rates, we look at it in two different ways: first of all, througha model approach and, secondly, at the survey that is referred to asthe Hoey survey from Drexel Burnham Lambert. Both of these give us asimilar reading with regard to your question. In both of thoseinstances, much of the increase in nominal rates has produced anincrease in real rates. For example, the Hoey survey shows anincrease of only two tenths of 1 percent in inflationary expectationsbetween January and June. So, in effect, what we got was a very sharpincrease in real bond rates when we saw bond rates increase so sharplyin the April-May period. This has a big impact on our forecast--and Ithink also on the Board staff's forecast--because it does damp thegrowth of the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy. In somerespects, I draw a little comfort from that because we also havestrong growth in the net export area and, in effect, it is theweakness in the interest-sensitive sectors that makes room for thisgrowth in net exports.With regard to our forecast more generally, we estimate thatreal growth will average between 2-1/2 and 3 percent over the forecastperiod. We have actually shaded slightly our expectations with regardto net exports, but we still have real net exports contributingapproximately 1 percent to real GNP growth, both this year and nextyear. Also, and here we have somewhat of a difference with theGreenbook forecast, we have greater strength in consumption in nextyear's economy than the Greenbook forecast. That has something to dowith differences about the growth of real disposable income, if I'mnot mistaken. We are concerned about the inflationary impact, notonly of our own forecast but also that of the Greenbook. As you know,in the Greenbook forecast, inflation averages 4 to 4-1/2 percent, atleast in terms of the fixed-weight deflator; and we are not muchdifferent from that. But what concerns us is that, in some respects,the composition of that inflation in our forecast changes ratherdramatically. We are somewhere in a zone close to full employment, atleast according to our staff work, and thus, in our forecast and inthe Greenbook forecast as well, wage costs begin to accelerate. Tothe extent that the inflation in 1988 is more a function of what Iwould characterize as underlying factors and less a function of someof the temporary factors that we drew on this year, we think that theinflation problem will become more persistent. Finally, I do thinkthat in some important respects, the risks to the outlook are on theupside with regard to real growth and perhaps in inflation as well.My primary concern here centers around government spending because Ithink that the assumption of the $25 billion cut used both by us andin the Greenbook may not materialize. And if it does not, then we arelikely to get more strength from that sector than is included in ourforecast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their perspective on various economic forecasts and expressing concerns about inflation and government spending. They also make some comparisons to the Greenbook forecast, but there is no direct disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 132.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 133.
9/22/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the forecast, it hasbeen true for some time, and it's still true, that our staff work inNew York has the same overall result as the Greenbook forecast butwith an unchanged dollar and a slightly smaller adjustment in real netexports because we have a scattering of stronger elements of domesticdemand, including inventories. So, while the aggregate numbers lookvery'much the same, what lies beneath them is quite different insofaras the dollar and real net exports. Our inflation outlook, despitethe fact that we have the dollar stable, is about the same, or maybe ashade worse than the Greenbook.Mr. Boehne raised a question earlier in the discussion aboutthis overall adjustment process that I'd like to comment on justbriefly, and then turn back. I think, Ed, your question was: can itwork. Or is the scale of the problem so big that you can't get fromhere to there. When you look at the big three countries--the UnitedStates, Germany, and Japan--the fact of the matter is that byconventional standards the adjustment is well underway in the sensethat for both 1986 and 1987, and in our forecast for 1988, the growthin domestic demand in both Germany and Japan is stronger tosignificantly stronger than is the growth in their own GNP. In thecase of the United States, we still had domestic demand stronger thanGNP in 1986; but in 1987, and in our forecast and yours as well--although there are some differences there--you get a widening out suchthat GNP growth in the United States is something like a percentagepoint greater than growth in domestic demand. It is true that overallgrowth in Germany and Japan is perhaps lower than one would like tosee. But, the dynamics of the adjustment have set in, in what I thinkis not an inconsequential way. Again, the evidence in all three ofthe major countries is basically working the way the textbook says itshould. The problem, to some extent, is what Ed touched on earlier,and that is the scale of the adjustment that we are talking about andthe scale of adjustment that is needed. When you look at it in termsof the behavior of exports--and this is all relevant to the outlook,I'm just getting there in a roundabout way--we all know these numbersare lousy, but the numbers for July 1987 versus July 1986 indicatethat U.S. export growth really has been, I think we can say, almostspectacular. And it's not confined any more to a handful of productsor a handful of countries; it's pretty much across the board,including very sharp increases in exports even to Japan. The strengthof those export numbers in the context of the overall dynamics of theadjustment raises a couple of questions in my mind. What's offsettingit in part, of course, is imports. Our own imports are still very,very strong, across the board, with few exceptions--perhaps lumber.But, by and large, those imports are still humming and a lot of thatis price. Then again, how many J curves do we have to see in terms ofimport prices. That's one of the reasons why I like our forecast--atleast right now--better than I like the Board staff's forecast. But,when you put it together, it leads me to one or two possibleconclusions. One is that there really is something systematicallywrong with the trade numbers, at least as we see them month to month.The second is that the domestic economy is, in fact, stronger than wethink it is, or at least than the conventional measures are tellingus. My hunch is that probably both of those things are true: that thetrade numbers are messed up and that the domestic economy, ifanything, is actually a bit stronger than we think it is.-17-9/22/87Partly for the reasons I've just noted, I would certainlyjoin those who have already said that, in looking at the outlook atthis point in time, the risks are decidedly on the upside. I find ithard at this point to ignore the galaxy of numbers in the businessfixed investment areas, industrial production, orders, and labormarkets. They all seem to be to pointing in that direction, in acontext in which I really do believe that the margin of upside error,if you will, is really quite slim. I think you can now make a prettygood case that actual GNP is brushing up against potential GNP; labormarkets, no matter how you look at them, have to be at least near thedanger zone; and I think it's not hard to visualize at least someselective bottlenecks beginning to develop, for example, in nondurablegoods areas where we already see that raw and intermediate materialprices are rising. Now, we could get a little help. There is a faintchance, at least in the near term, that the oil price pressures couldbe downward rather than upward. That would be temporary, but that'spossibly a favorable straw in the wind. But when I put it alltogether, it seems to me that both the global picture as well as whatwe can derive from our own situation statistically lead me to viewthat the risks are on the upside.Now, on your question about the long-term Treasury rate, Mr.Chairman, I thought we were framing the question a little differentlythan maybe you were. I was prepared to answer this question: what doI think is driving the rate up. Is that what you are asking. I'm notsure it is the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 134.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The point is that, implicit in that, isthe breakdown of the components.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a point without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 135.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the breakdown of thecomponents to the increment and the breakdown of the components to thelevel may not be the same, though. But, let me try to answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply discussing a potential difference in breakdowns of components. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage is asking whether both of something is true or possible. This implies that there may be differing opinions or conflicting evidence surrounding the topic.


Passage number 137.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If it were the increment in thenominal rate, which is the question I thought you were asking, I wouldput virtually none of that on volatility, which was the middle factoryou raised. I would put the greater weight on inflation-relatedconsiderations, including the exchange rate of the dollar. But, I dothink there is something real there too; I can't be very precise as towhat. But I'd give zero weight on volatility, certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and providing their perspective on the question asked.


Passage number 138.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So this is your increment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "this is your increment," offering information or clarification about something without expressing any opposing views.


Passage number 139.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not provided.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has been volatile; therefore, itcan't be more volatile.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a logical conclusion based on the premise that something has already been volatile.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 141.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, but I would say that while Ithink the bulk of the increment has been driven by these inflation-related things, I also would say that the level of the real interestrate does come out higher. Maybe, just maybe, that's because there issomething happening in terms of the marginal productivity of capital.It's possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author introduces two different perspectives on the reason for the higher level of the real interest rate - inflation-related factors vs. the marginal productivity of capital. This indicates a contention or disagreement regarding the primary factor driving the increase in the real interest rate.


Passage number 142.
-18-9/22/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But, it's almost impossible to tell atthis time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be stating a fact or observation rather than expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 143.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 144.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "President Stern" does not provide any context or indication of a specific situation or topic being discussed.


Passage number 145.
MR. STERN. With regard to our view of the economy andconditions in the District, I think what we are seeing is quiteconsistent with something like the Greenbook forecast. In general,economic conditions in the District are quite good and have beenimproving consistently for some time. The only areas I hear anyreservations about have to do with residential construction, wherereports have tended to be mediocre, and with loan demand, wherebankers say there is no demand to speak of. Labor markets havetightened up a good deal, again, in general; but what is striking inthat regard is that there is not any discernible increase in the rateat which salaries and wages are rising as yet. Apparently, at thispoint, people are just taking the strategy of not filling jobs orfilling them more slowly than they otherwise would in thisenvironment. With regard to your question about interest rates and soforth, I guess I would not have a definitive answer either, but Iwould start with the dollar. It seems to me that we sometimes talk asif all declines in the dollar are equal. I don't start with thatposition. It seems to me that it matters a heck of a lot why thedollar is falling. For example, if we had fiscal policy in a positionwhere budget deficits were declining in a sustainable way over time, Imight predict that real interest rates were going to declinesustainably and, therefore, the dollar might decline in thatenvironment. I would say that would be fine; but I don't think thatcharacterizes the current situation at all. I think we are in asituation where, in fact, the adjustment is unlikely to come throughfiscal policy. Therefore, particularly in light of the June and Julytrade numbers, there are a lot of market participants who seem to feelthe adjustment is going to have to come through other policy steps inthis country. I think this is kind of what Mike and Ted Truman weretalking about earlier--if you are going to get continued improvementin trade, that requires higher real rates here to damp residentialconstruction, nonresidential construction, and so forth.Alternatively, of course, we may at some point get into the situationwhere we are not prepared for rates to rise in that fashion so that wesort of arrest the improvement in trade; that is, we get strongerdomestic demand and stall the improvement in the trade balance. Ithink that's the kind of box we are in as long as we have the fiscalpolicy outlook that we have. That situation seems to me to bediscouraging, as it has been for quite some time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily a description and analysis of economic conditions and potential factors affecting interest rates and the dollar.


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage "President Forrestal" does not contain enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It simply states a title or position without any additional context.


Passage number 147.
MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would start withthe region, by repeating what I said last month--that economicconditions in the Sixth District are really booming and seem to bestrengthening. The reports that we're getting from our directors andfrom other business people are extremely positive at this point andvery optimistic. And, it's fairly much across the board. Forexample, we are seeing increasing evidence of improvement in thetradeable goods areas, certainly in textiles. We are also gettingimprovement in apparel production. Paper production and chemicals-19-9/22/87also are doing a lot better, and I might say that paper and textilemills and factories are going just flat out at the moment in our area.We are now hearing about labor shortages, particularly in the textileareas, and there are some bottlenecks beginning to appear. Forexample, we have had reports of shipments of carpeting being delayedbecause of labor shortages. But having said that, at this point atleast, we have not seen yet any pressures on wages, since labor seemsto be moving from the slower-growth areas into the areas that arepicking up. So far, the wage pressures have not followed, at leastimmediately, from the labor shortages. Even on the commercialstructures side, we are seeing excess supplies of space being absorbedmore rapidly, and that is particularly true in the fast growing statesof Georgia, Florida, and Tennessee. Construction figures are up also.We are not only getting absorption; we are getting more construction,particularly in the hospital and warehouse operations. Risingmortgage rates have cut into the housing sector, particularly in themultifamily area. In Louisiana--I would single that out because we'vehad nothing but bad news for a couple of years in that area--we arebeginning now to get some good news, marginally better news. The rigcount is up and all of the oil and gas support services are beginningto come back on line.Turning to the general forecast, our forecast for the lasthalf of this year has strengthened a bit in comparison to what we hada month ago. Consumption seems to have picked up somewhat more thanwe had anticipated and we are seeing investment respond to higherplant utilization. Looking ahead to 1988, we are marginally lowerthan we were at the time of the last meeting, and just about in linewith the Greenbook forecast. The only difference we have with thestaff forecast is in the area of consumption which, of course, I'vementioned a couple of times before. And, as I indicated earlier, wedon't see quite the level of improvement in net exports that the staffis seeing. But when you net that out, we are pretty close for 1988.Also, I think it is significant, as far as our forecast is concerned,that we did not build into the forecast any tightening of monetarypolicy, which apparently the staff did. On the price side, again,we're pretty close to the Greenbook forecast. So, when I put all thistogether, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the forecast is reasonableand even a little optimistic. And I would agree with those who wouldput the risk on the upside rather than the downside.Now with respect to your question, I think there are probablyingredients of both. At least from where I sit, there is someinflationary expectation in these higher rates, but to a large extent,I think they are real. But having said that, it seems to me from thefew market participants that I've talked to, that there may be anelement of irrationality in the way the market is reacting. Thereactions to even minor declines in the value of the dollar areproducing higher rates than might have been called for. I don't knowhow to assess this, really; I'm just talking to a few people in themarket who are sitting in Atlanta and who have made this comment.They are saying, and I think there may be some validity to it, thatthere may be some over-reaction, although some other factors areinvolved. Now, if that's true, I think the policy implication is uponus, because they are going to be reacting perhaps adversely to thetrade numbers for August, which probably will not be very good. Wehave just done some work which would indicate that the seasonalfactors that are present in July are probably present in August as9/22/87well. So, we may get some equally bad trade numbers. And, as theGramm-Rudman fiscal policy debate goes on in the Congress and we don'tget anything out of that, I think there's going to be a reaction inthe bond market as well. It seems to me that the market is lookingfor every snippet of bad news that it can find and reacting to that,rather than trying to find something positive in the scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an overview of the economic conditions in the Sixth District and discussing their forecast for the future. They mention positive reports from directors and business people, improvements in various industries, labor shortages, and construction figures. They also discuss their forecast for the rest of the year and 1988, noting some differences with the staff forecast. There is no explicit disagreement or contention mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 148.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude to President Keehn.


Passage number 149.
MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. From a nationalperspective, our forecast is really very consistent with the staffforecast. I would say that we have been a little higher throughoutthe year and, therefore, the last revision by the staff brings itpretty much in line with our perspective.With regard to the District, whereas we have been a laggardthroughout this recovery, certainly, at this point we have turnedaround. The conditions and the trends in the District I think arevery favorable. Employment, for example, is very consistent with thenational numbers. Our unemployment is still higher than the nationalaverage, but I do think the employment numbers are coming along quitewell.I thought I would comment on just a couple of industries thatare important to the District that I think are going through aninteresting and positive adjustment. First, the steel industry is avery dramatic example of a shift that is taking place in a verytroubled industry: We have had in the Midwest just a whole host ofclosings, bankruptcies, and near-bankruptcies, and, in addition, someshutdown of capacity; but those who have survived and those who haveput some money into the plants, and have modernized them, certainly atthis point are doing very well. The decline in the dollar and theimport restrictions have helped tremendously, but the demand fordomestic steel is strong, and as a consequence, the plants areoperating at a much better rate. The demand for steel products seemsto be quite broadly based, and now is as strong as any time since1981. In getting to a point you raised earlier, many of theseproducts are on allocation; the delivery times are clearly moving upfrom eight to nine weeks, so there is a slowdown in the deliveryprocess. The service centers, as I understand it, are trying to buildinventories but are not able to do it; inventory is going out as fastas it comes in. And, not surprisingly, there is something of a priceincrease going on in the industry and the price increases for thefirst time in this cycle may really seem to be sticking. A tangiblesign of an improvement in this industry in the last six or eightmonths is that we've had an announcement of two new steel plants inIndiana: one a joint venture with a Japanese company, which is quite asignificant installation; and the second a stand-alone facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 150.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. These are both [unintelligible]integrated plants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the plants are integrated.


Passage number 151.
MR. KEEHN. No, the Japanese one, I think, is fairlyspecialized; but they are brand new plants centrally located.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 152.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Cold-rolling operations. Or importingslab.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions two separate options or activities: cold-rolling operations and importing slab.


Passage number 153.
-21-9/22/87MR. KEEHN. No, not importing--they are taking slab out of aChicago mill and cold-rolling it in Indiana. So, I do think it's anindustry that has gone through a tremendous transition. The otherindustry that is important to the District is heavy duty trucks--Class8 trucks. Sales this year, I think, are going to be 13 or 14 percenthigher than last year, and the outlook for next year is anotherincrease of 3 to 4 percent. These will go up to 125,000 to 130,000units and this is just a lot higher than what we were experiencingthree or four years ago. There is still a lot of capacity in thatmanufacturing process but, nevertheless, this is a business that seemsto have gotten better. Pricing is still tough, however.Nevertheless, from the District's perspective, it has been good.Let me say a quick word about agriculture by adding a littleto what I've said in the past: namely, conditions seem to havestabilized, albeit at low levels. Land values are beginning to move;transactions are higher, and in a couple of instances, significantlyhigher. But, the point I'd make on what I find to be a newdevelopment is that general business conditions, not just agriculturalconditions, in the area of Iowa seem to be better.Turning to the price issue, I must say that I find this avery, very difficult read. I keep hearing about price increases; I'vecommented on steel, but specialized chemicals, paper, paper products,brass, and copper all seem to be moving up in price. They don't showup yet in the CPI numbers. The competitive conditions for finishedproducts are very tough and people are being squeezed on margins; but,at some point, you just have to think that this is going to pokethrough. On the wage side, I'd add to the comments that we arehearing about shortages. We were up in Michigan the other day doing apresentation and some of the people were commenting that they justcan't get enough people to work in some of the operations there. Iwould think that, at some point, we are going to see something of anincrease on wage rates that's beyond what we've had over the last yearor so.Turning then, Mr. Chairman, to your question on long-termrates, which is a very, very key issue, like Jerry, I think it isawfully hard to analyze each part. But, I think that the underlyingrate of economic activity here is pretty good; it may be a little morerapid than we expected and, therefore, there may be some real pressureon rates. Also--and I can't analyze what part equals what--on theinflation side, I think there is growing skepticism out there; thereis concern about inflation, and something in the rate increase that wehave experienced certainly has to relate to that. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and stating their opinions on various industries and economic conditions. They mention positive trends in the steel and trucking industries, stabilization in agriculture, and potential increases in prices and wages. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I guess it's somebody's turn tosay something not quite as positive as we have been hearing. I guessit falls to my lot, being from the Eleventh District. I wouldcharacterize our economy in the Eleventh District as still somewhatsluggish and a little fragile, although there have been tentativesigns of improvement. Businesses around the District that serve anational or international market all seem to be saying that they areseeing some improvement. These would be primarily in electronics,livestock, chemicals, and defense. There is a little more optimismthere. The businesses that serve their own local area or region,-22-9/22/87though, say that their business remains flat; they really have notseen any signs of improvement. Obviously, there is a correlation inattitudes and sentiment related to oil prices, since oil is soimportant in our region. With the improvement there, and with theincrease in the oil rig count and additional activity going on, thereis more optimism. There is a little more activity in relatedbusinesses; all but construction-related manufacturing are growing.Agriculture is stabilizing, and cotton and livestock farming are doingfairly well. Our retail sales remain fairly flat. We continue toworry somewhat about the condition of our financial institutions.Pick up a newspaper and you'll still find reports of foreclosures andbankruptcies continuing. Last week in Austin, which was really thebright spot for the last several years in Texas, there was the postingof a foreclosure of a fairly major hotel-office complex that waspretty new. There were foreclosure postings in Houston, also, of twoor three fairly well known good projects. This doesn't mean theforeclosures will actually occur; the postings could be part of arenegotiation. Nevertheless, it is upsetting. We saw a report lastweek that Dallas had lost 40,000 jobs over the last year. That seemsawfully high to me, but those are the kinds of reports we are hearing.Though we hope that we are on a comeback trail--and, if oil priceshold, I think we will be--I don't think we have seen the bottom of ourcommercial real estate problem. I think we probably are going to beworrying about that for at least two years, possibly three, before wecan work through that.On the national picture, and possibly I'm somewhatinfluenced by our own Eleventh District, we would come out--lookingout through the rest of this year to 1988--a little below where theGreenbook is this time. Although we moved our own forecast upslightly, we didn't come as far as the Board staff has in theGreenbook. On the long-term rate, I don't know that I have anyparticularly useful insight into that except that the evident concernabout inflation does not seem to be quite as deep among the peopleI've talked to; certainly, in our District, there is not really[unintelligible] to the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin presents a more negative view of the economy in the Eleventh District, stating that it is still somewhat sluggish and fragile. He also expresses concern about the condition of financial institutions and the commercial real estate problem. However, he acknowledges that businesses serving a national or international market are seeing some improvement. Therefore, there is contention between the positive outlook of businesses serving a broader market and the more negative outlook of businesses serving the local area or region.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given phrase "President Black" does not contain any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply describes a hypothetical president's name without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 157.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm afraid I owe some apology forhaving discussed my thoughts on the state of the U.S. economy at atime you wanted to consign to questions. So let me just address thatlast question you posed as best I can, which is not very well. Ithink you have to look at the negative correlation we have had betweenexchange rates and long-term interest rates since the fall of 1986 toget an answer to that. There are three possible explanations: one isthat this has resulted from still a third factor, which is the rise ininflationary expectations. A second--and maybe the most popularexplanation of it--is that this decline in the dollar rate has been adecline in the real rate because of the persistently larger tradedeficits that we have had, and fears that this will be reflected inhigher import prices, which also will spill over into the prices ofgoods from those industries that compete with imports. And the thirdexplanation is that the rates may be high because the market isresponding to what it thinks we are likely to do; but if that is thecase, tightening would clearly be inappropriate because that wouldmean, I think, that a large part of that was real. My impression hasbeen that there really hasn't been that much response at the long end-23-9/22/87to actions that we have taken. For example, the response to what Ithought was a very strong statement via the discount rate increase andalso the raising of the borrowed reserve level was big at the shortend; but we didn't really have all that much response at the long end.So, that suggests to me that some part of this is probably real. Iguess I would end up with a view along the lines that Jerry firstoutlined, and some others have endorsed, that part of this is real andpart of this is inflationary expectations. I don't know what the mixis and I guess nobody else does. But, I believe both factors are atwork, I'm afraid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Black is providing an explanation for the negative correlation between exchange rates and long-term interest rates. He presents three possible explanations and states that he believes both inflationary expectations and real factors are at work, but acknowledges that the exact mix is unknown. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wish we knew the answer to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses a desire for knowledge but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 159.
MR. BLACK. I do too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses agreement.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Hendricks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 161.
MR. HENDRICKS. I like the comments made by Ed Boehne. Weare experiencing a bullish feeling with respect to business in ourDistrict. I'm really not sure how much significance, if any, shouldbe placed on this observation but, at a recent meeting of ourdirectors we did notice for the first time, perhaps, some concernabout risk on longer-term loans, and some adjustments in their basiclending policies, at the margin.With respect to our outlook, it's quite similar to thestaff's Greenbook forecast, but we still continue to see the consumerin a stronger spending pattern than indicated by the staff. We alsosee housing as less of a drag on the economy. We don't believeexports are going to be quite as strong as projected in the Greenbook.Despite the sectoral differences in the projections, we come out atabout the same place, with real GNP growing at about the same pace asthe forecast in the Greenbook. We would see that, however, beingaccompanied by some pretty strong wage and price pressures.With respect to your question, I don't know how much I canadd on that, but recent changes in the rates do appear to us to berelated to the rate of interest [needed] to attract foreign savings.We believe that some of the earlier increases that we saw might havebeen tied more closely to inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker sharing their observations and opinions on various economic factors, without engaging in a direct argument or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage alone. This is because the passage only mentions President Melzer, without providing any context or information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 163.
MR. MELZER. First of all, I would say that over the lastyear or so, performance in our District has been somewhat strongerthan the national average. Employment has been about in line, retailsales somewhat stronger, and I guess the most notable area of strengthhas been construction, both residential and nonresidential. Over thelast couple of months, I would say things have slowed a bit,relatively speaking. We haven't kept pace with the employment gainsnationally either in non-ag employment or manufacturing employment.Retail sales have held up well, relatively speaking. Residentialconstruction is in line with the national averages and nonresidentialis still somewhat stronger but growing at a much slower pace than itwas. Anecdotally, we've picked up some evidence of the same thingthat has been mentioned around the table today in terms of laborshortages. There was a company with about 90 semi-skilled employeesthat was shut down, and another big employer in St. Louis in town-24-9/22/87expected to pick up, I don't know, somewhere on the order of a thirdto a half of them. It ended up getting only five of them, becausethere were so many other people bidding. You hear that in other areasas well. One other thing I've heard in that regard is that companiesthat have generally been stable in terms of employment, or maybe evenreducing employment here, recently have added employees. There aresome noises about trying to negotiate some of the give-backs that wereobtained over the last couple of years. I've heard just one exampleof that; it's not widespread.On the broader outlook, while I have been, and continue tobe, in agreement with putting the priority on price stability versusgrowth, the projections that come out of our Bank, which are based onmoney-driven models, have been showing for some time--and I thought Iwould mention it this month--the risk of a sharp slowdown in theeconomy in 1988 and even the possibility of a recession. Given thebehavior of velocity and so forth, I think it is hard to evaluate thisexactly, but one of the things that people continue to feel reasonablystrongly about is the effect of a sharp slowing in money in relationto trend, if it is sustained for two or more quarters. And, it'sreally on that basis that we come up with this forecast. So, that's avery different view than previously expressed. I think it's difficultto evaluate because you can't know the effect of all the liquiditythat was put in over the last couple of years, and whether that mightcontinue to have a stimulative effect looking forward.One last point on the interest rate question: I suspect it'sa combination of an increase in inflationary expectations and someincrease in the real rate. The only other thing I would mention thathasn't already been mentioned is that we are at, or have passedthrough, a major inflection point in terms of the interest rateoutlook that's internalized in, say, the minds of traders and soforth; and people I would say, as we do, just follow markets quiteclosely, very quickly. But, in terms of broad-based behavior, I thinkthat really gets built into prices over a surprisingly long period oftime. I think one of the things we are seeing here is peoplecontinuing to adjust portfolios to a different interest rate outlook,and probably thinner participation in the market, at least on thebuying side, by final investors. So, I think there's a certainelement of uncertainty associated with this adjustment phenomenon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the state of the economy in their district and sharing their views on the priority of price stability versus economic growth. They also discuss the projections and concerns of a potential economic slowdown or recession in the future. There is no conflicting information or opposing viewpoints presented in the passage.


Passage number 164.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, I cannot answer this question as it is incomplete.


Passage number 165.
MR. ANGELL. In regard to long bond rates, I think what weare seeing has something to do with the development of an exchangerate policy that no one thought out that carefully ahead of time.It's unfortunate that there can't be some median ground betweenrecognizing that monetary policy needs to be adjusted to take intoconsideration foreign exchange developments and trying to pinpoint anddraw lines in the sand in regard to foreign exchange rates. If we hadbeen willing to make monetary policy adjustments before we drew thelines in the sand, we probably would have avoided some of thedifficulties we are now in. Nevertheless, the line got drawn in thesand. And when that happens, it is very difficult to unhitch during aperiod in which inflation expectations are on the increase--particularly, I think, when you have some commodity price pressuresthat would require stable exchange rates in order not to havecommodity prices rise. So, in that environment, it seems to me that-25-9/22/87long bond buyers are mainly anticipating what monetary policy andfuture short-term rates are going to be, and it's kind of a win-winsituation from their perspective, because they think that we mighthave to raise rates to support [the dollar in] foreign exchangemarkets or we might have to raise rates to resist inflation; andeither one works in the same way. Second, I think the long bondprices are affected today more strongly than they were ten years agoby a kind of speculative cycle. That is, at one point in time, longbond buyers really intended to keep the bonds. But we have developedan environment in which we have investors and fund managers whosesuccess is based upon their performance; and there are times when itdoesn't pay to be owners of bonds and, consequently, you're going tohave long bond rates move a little too far. In some ways, it doesn'tbother me to see long-term interest rates high. I think it wouldbother the U.S. Congress. I hope it would bother them, and I hope itwould indicate to them how much opportunity there is to help there bycontrolling spending.In regard to the Greenbook forecast, I really have nosignificant disagreement over the 1987 forecast. The staff has beenlowering their inflation rates for the second half of 1987, so I don'tsee much disagreement there. I do have three areas of difference inregard to the 1988 forecast. I disagree, I guess, with Martha andsome others who took one position with regard to real exports. I'mtaking another position: I believe real exports will maintain a longersustained growth path than is assumed in the forecast. I believe thatwe have many producers in the United States who have never learned tobe involved in international markets. But once the United Statesbecame such a huge importer, we began to change the whole nature ofthe opportunities that exist. So, we have many, many small andmedium-size businesses that have never taken that international marketseriously, and now they are learning that they do have to compete ininternational marketplaces at home and abroad. And so I think we havea long learning curve involved here. We have a lot of financialinstitutions that have not done very well with regard to recognizingexport lending. But I think that learning curve also will occur.Therefore, I expect that these present exchange rates will give us awonderful opportunity for a long period of export increases.As for my second disagreement with the 1988 forecast--and Iknow that Mike, or maybe Ted, mentioned the GNP deflator and itsstrange behavior--I would point out the staff's numbers on the CPI.In July, the staff had forecast a 60 basis point increase in the CPIfrom the third quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988. Nowthey are projecting a 150 basis points increase in the CPI. Now, thatreally is making things get worse rather rapidly. I think that's notlikely, first of all, because businesses have found that theenvironment is one in which you do not make profits by being able toincrease your prices but you do it by learning to control costs. So,I think we are in a different environment than we were. Second, wehave already gone through the big oil price increase, which the staffis telling us should have occurred earlier. About the second half of1987 is when it should hit us, and I think that has kind of passed us.Third, I think foreign exchange rates are not likely to fall by theamount [indicated in the forecast], because I would presume that themajority of this Committee would not believe that the inflationforecast that we have is acceptable and they would be willing to takethe steps that are necessary to not have those inflation rates-26-9/22/87materialize. Consequently, the dollar should behave quite well inthat environment.The third disagreement [with the forecast] is in regard totax receipts. I think everyone is underestimating the effects of theTax Reform Act, which is our first tax reform act since 1963. It isthe first time we have broadened the base while decreasing the rates.All the evidence shows that the tax receipts are coming in higher thananticipated. We are going to have tax receipts that are going to bethe largest percent of GNP in any peace-time year in our history. Notall that goes away with the one-time capital gains move, so I amsomewhat optimistic in that regard. I am certainly willing to takewhatever steps are necessary to make certain that the forecast for1988 isn't correct because, if it is, then it is absolutely essentialthat we have policies that would lead to a tremendous slowdown in thiseconomy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their own opinions and beliefs about various topics, but there is no direct opposition or argument.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage only mentions the name "President Guffey" and does not provide any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 167.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to be verybrief in view of the coffee being outside. With respect to the TenthDistrict, we do see some very, very modest recovery. Looking atvarious sectors of the economy, starting with agriculture: commodityprices are up; red meat prices are very good; government transferpayments are outstanding; and, as a result, there is some comfort inthe agricultural sector--or at least among those who are still in thesector. Lastly, I would say that our most recent survey indicatesthat agricultural land prices have stabilized, and there is a modestuptick in those prices as well. So, agriculture, from a very lowlevel, has a good outlook for the rest of 1987 and quite likely in1988, depending upon what the farm subsidy program will be in 1988.When you look at energy, the same is true: from a very, very low baseit looks a bit better. In July, for example, there were 373 rigsworking in the Tenth District as opposed to [unintelligible] in June.That's not much of an uptick, to be sure, and it is only 20 percent ofthe level that was achieved in 1982, which was the peak of the energyboom. So, it is still at a very low level. [Unintelligible]supporting a bit. Commercial real estate has been very depressed inDenver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa--those areas that built onexpectations [generated by] the energy and agricultural booms back inthe early 1980s, inflationary expectations, [unintelligible]. Thereis a very slow absorption rate of some very nice and new commercialstructures. In the Kansas City area there has been some damping incommercial construction, but nonetheless, it still looks veryprosperous. In some areas, there has been a bit of damping inresidential starts and sales, but activity is still above a year agothroughout the District in the aggregate. One last point that I wouldmake with respect to economic activity in the District would be on themanufacturing sector: the automobile industry is not working at fullproduction and, as a matter of fact, there continue to be layoffs inplants, particularly in the Kansas City area, in the GM plantsspecifically. There has been a bit of light at the end of the tunnelin the aircraft industry in the sense that sales most recently havebeen up in dollar volume but down in unit sales, largely because thesales are of jet aircraft as opposed to the smaller units.Let me just address, then, our view of the staff forecast.They are a bit more bullish than we are. We look for about 2-3/4-27-9/22/87percent growth not only for the remainder of 1987 but into 1988. Intrying to look at their forecast in relation to our numbers, I believethe difference is that they have a buildup in inventories in thefourth quarter that goes out into 1988. That may be the difference intheir forecast and ours, but it is such a modest difference that Idon't think there would be a lot to argue about. To be perfectlyhonest, I hope their forecast occurs. I don't feel there is much riskon the upside, however, of this getting away from us.Lastly, as to your question on long-term bond rates, Isuspect it is a part of all three of the things that have beenmentioned. I guess I would come out on the side of giving more weightto the view that it is an increase in real rates necessary to attractfunds to support this federal budget deficit as opposed to justinflationary expectations. The uncertainty created by all of thislargely accounts for it; how you disaggregate it, I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Eisenmenger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the passage only mentions the name "Vice President Eisenmenger" without providing any additional information or context, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 169.
MR. EISENMENGER. Turning first to the regional economy, wemay have the strongest regional economy in the nation, and I think agood monetary policy for the New England region would be analternative D. When you get together with our businessmen, all theycan talk about is the labor problem--that they can't get the laborthey need. We hear scattered reports that people are spinning offtheir operations in eastern Massachusetts or Connecticut and puttingthem in the depressed areas of northern Maine, or they are talkingabout putting them in other parts of the country. They are not movingtheir entire operation, but are moving pieces of it. However, I don'tthink New England is typical. We have an overall unemployment rate of3 percent, and in New Hampshire, it is 2.2 percent. And that is nottypical of the nation, which is 6 percent. So, you can't really lookat the world through our eyes.In our view, the Greenbook forecast for the U.S. economy inthe next 15 months is almost the ideal scenario. If we have asufficient guiding system to accomplish what that forecast suggests,that is almost as good as we can expect, considering the constraints.It is showing a real growth rate of something like 2-1/2 percent withthe overall employment rates and capacity utilization rates onlyslightly different than they are now, which would suggest we wouldhave only this minor uptick in inflation next year. And that is anideal scenario. So the question is: Can we get there. At least as weread it, there is not much risk on the downside any more. The neworders that are coming in, the industrial production statistics, andthe probable greater strength from foreign orders, suggest that thedangers of a recession, at least in the next 18 months, are prettywell washed away. On the upside--the possibility of having somethingfaster than a 2-1/2 percent real growth rate--we have set in train twoactions just in the last 25 days which provide us some insurance[against that]. And the staff talks about additional actions duringthe next year that--it is our best guess--would provide additionalinsurance. Our hope is that we can achieve the forecast that theGreenbook so optimistically puts forward. I don't think I haveanything to contribute to what other people have said on the long-termbond rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing the regional economy, unemployment rates, and the forecast for the U.S. economy. They mention that New England may have a strong economy and express their hope that the forecasted growth rate can be achieved.


Passage number 170.
-28-9/22/87MR. JOHNSON. What has the regional inflation rate been doingin New England.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply poses a question and does not involve any conflicting opinions or statements.


Passage number 171.
MR. EISEMENGER. Well, wage rates are moving up faster.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about wage rates increasing.


Passage number 172.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 173.
 But overall, I mean the broader--MR. EISENMENGER. Well, you would have to talk about pieces.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that a broader perspective should be considered, followed by a statement acknowledging the need to discuss specific pieces.


Passage number 174.
If you talk about the price of housing, we used to be--MR. JOHNSON. The Boston CPI.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the price of housing.


Passage number 175.
MR. EISENMENGER. When you talk about rental housing, itdoesn't show up that much. But, in fact, when you're trying to bringin professional people, you can't do it. All the businessmen wetalked to say they can't bring in anybody to buy a shack that costs$250,000; so there is no labor mobility in view of the housingshortage. Eventually, we will not have that housing shortage, as wedidn't have it in the long run in California. It may be three yearsaway. So there is not much mobility, despite the fact that we paysomewhat higher wages, because the real cost of living for someonemoving in and buying a house is almost impossible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their perspective on the housing shortage and how it affects labor mobility. They state that it is difficult to bring in professional people due to the high cost of housing, and that despite higher wages, the cost of buying a house is almost impossible for someone moving in. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 176.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I agree with most of the discussion onthe economy. It has been covered pretty well. I do think the economyhas clearly picked up strength, and there is very little downside[risk] in the economy now. It is clearly in an expansion phase at ahigher level than it was on before, but there's still an outstandingquestion--we've already discussed this and Mike went over it verywell--as to how much of this is production-generated by the externaleconomy and inventory building versus an overall expansion inaggregate demand. I think that is the key to what we would have to doon the monetary policy side. As I said earlier, I think that a lot ofthis seems to be trade-related. Some of it is not. I think there hasbeen a buildup in inflationary expectations. I am fairly pleased atthe moves we have taken; I think they were proper and should have theeffect of eventually moderating aggregate demand to a level consistentwith the forecast. Now, we are hedging against the plausibility ofwhat kind of velocity number you could expect to go with thoseaggregates. Like I say, I think we are close to having the thingcornered. The lags are long; we may have to go through a few quartersof some pressure before we see the other side of that. But, I don'tsee a lot of room for nominal GNP under the kind of monetary policy wehave now. The numbers don't seem to add up, except for maybe a coupleof exceptional quarters, in the short run. A couple of other points Ithink are interesting: in spite of our concerns about the tradesituation and the deficit--and I agree those are the major fundamentalconcerns--we seem to pass over those large deficit items. I thinkthat's because we are concerned more about the longer run; but we passover the really tremendous improvement in the budget deficit thisfiscal year over the last fiscal year, without a dime's improvement inthe current account. The amount of pressure that has been taken offhas to be relatively substantial. We have gotten no real reduction inthe current account and a $60 billion dollar reduction in the federalbudget deficit. That has to be an important factor. Now, whetherthat continues is another matter. I think that is the question. But,if anything, we have relieved pressures on the capital import side.Maybe we are making up that difference on the domestic growth side and-29-9/22/87the demands of government are shifting more toward the private sector.But we have seen the dollar come down and we probably have seen netcapital outflows.In terms of the question of long-term interest rates, I tendto think that what has happened is mostly inflationary expectations.I think long rates have gone up primarily due to that. My personalopinion is they probably overshot, and eventually things will settleback down a little in the market. As I said, the flattening of theyield curve from our discount rate change was somewhat comforting;even though we didn't actually see a decline in long rates, we did seea flattening. I don't see anything out there that would push up thereal rate dramatically. I think some of that inflationaryexpectation--I really don't know how much--is sort of a risk premium,but that could be put in the inflation expectations category. I don'tsee anything that shocked the cost of capital that would, in a way,raise the real interest rate. In other words, I don't see anythingthat has improved real returns on capital investment dramatically. Ifanything, the repeal of the investment tax credit in the tax bill hasreduced returns on equipment; and there probably has been animprovement in terms of inventories because of the lower corporaterate; but, overall, I don't see any big shock to the cost of capital.So, I think it is mainly inflationary expectations and, hopefully, itwill run off over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Governor Heller" is a statement of a person's position without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting information mentioned.


Passage number 178.
MR. HELLER. I still think the hallmark of the recovery isreally a better balance in the economy as a whole. The sectors thathave been strong in the past are not growing quite as rapidly, or areactually shrinking, and I think that is something that we should keepin mind. If you look, for instance, at the projections in theGreenbook for 1987 and 1988, you still see quite a few minus signs.Durables are contracting this year at a 2.3 percent rate; nondurablesare only up 0.8 percent; nonresidential structures are -2.7 percent;residential structures are -5.5 percent; and federal spending is -3.2percent. So, there are quite a few sectors that are certainly notcharacterized by boom conditions, while others like agricultural,business equipment, and so on, are doing quite well. As a result, youget that better balance. Also, as many speakers pointed out, thegreat improvement in federal revenues, together with the restrainedfederal spending, really does a lot on the fiscal deficit side andbrings a better balance on that score. I think it would be a mistaketo hold up the dollar with further tightening of monetary policy,because we would be inviting a slowdown in those sectors that, at themoment, are really carrying the economy: real estate would be furtherdepressed, and the capital sector would slow down. And, we also needthe exchange rate change that is projected in the Greenbook in orderto get that improvement in the trade balance that we are all hopingfor.Turning to the the long-term bond question, I agree with mostof the things that have been said before, but let me add oneadditional factor. If you look at the increase in interest rates thatwe have had over the last year, you see that there were noticeablysharper increases in the long-term Treasury bonds than in long-termmortgage bonds and long-term corporate bonds. I would put a lot ofthat, which amounts to 50 to 100 basis points, at the door of the many-30-9/22/87debt moratoriums that we have had, or the nonrenewal of the debtceilings, in the last five months. I think there have been four ofthose episodes; and that certainly must have a chilling effect,particularly on foreign investors who are looking at the United Stateswith a jaundiced eye and putting us in the same league with countriesthat can't service their debt. So, that certainly has been a factorcontributing to higher long-term Treasury rates in addition to thereal increase and the high inflationary premium we have had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinions and observations.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the given information "Governor Seger" is incomplete and lacks any context or content. More information is needed to make a determination.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 180.
MS. SEGER. In a prior life, I worked with corporateplanning, so I was just sitting here thinking of that in ourdiscussion this morning. First of all, when you work with corporateplanning, your bosses are always challenging your forecasts and theywill not allow--at least mine didn't allow--you to utilize a singleforecast. Or, if you did, they were always wondering about where theweaknesses were and whether or not something might hit them that wouldput them out of business. You are not allowed to bet the bank, or betthe company, on forecasts. So, I just wanted to mention a couple ofthings that I think we have to look at as we look ahead. One that Isort of hinted at it earlier is whether or not we are sufficientlyincorporating the interest moves we have already had into thisforecast. And if we are, are we incorporating the interest moves thatwe expect are yet to come. Also, there's the question: what if thedollar does not, in fact, decline more. So much of 1988 depends uponthe trade turnaround; and if we think a weaker dollar is needed toproduce at least part of that, then I think that is a vulnerability inthis forecast. Also, and this has been mentioned by Wayne Angell andBob Heller, I really think we are not paying much attention to thechange in fiscal policy. When you go from a $221 billion deficit to$160 billion--and I've heard this morning that it might even come inbelow $150 billion--that's a major change from one year to the next.I am not necessarily a Keynesian, but I do think there is such a thingas fiscal policy, and it certainly works with a lag. I remember thesummer of 1984, sitting around this table with many of the people whoare here today, and it was very easy then to simply project the trendsof early 1984, which looked tremendously strong. And, frankly, wemissed the fact that business was going to slow down; just about thetime we thought it was looking most terrific was when we got the 90-degree turn. I hope we are not doing that today.On the interest rate question, because I am an old lady Iremember being in financial markets before inflation was a big deal,mainly in the 1960s. And interest rates moved up; one of the reasonsthat long governments moved up involved simply the volume offinancing, which is, of course, tied to the deficit. And, as BobHeller said, recently we have had these problems with bumping upagainst the debt ceiling and postponements of auctions. Then, all ofa sudden, Congress gets religion and takes care of this, and you getfive auctions pushed through in a very short period of time, and thisjerks things around. And yet, if no one was talking about inflation,I think that would happen. It certainly happened in August. It'sprobably going to happen again in the next couple of weeks. Also,there is just uncertainty about what's going on, uncertainty aboutwhat we are doing here. I think we could help that problem if wereleased the minutes earlier so that people would not have to analyzeevery tea leaf to try to figure out what we're up to. I think that-31-9/22/87contributes to this situation. Also, there has been improvement incommunications and information flow. If you go back to the 1960s and1970s, not every person around America and around the world had a CRTon his or her desk. Now every gunslinger sits there and, whereas theyused to be told that the one thing to watch was M1, now they have beentold that the one thing to watch is the relationship between thedollar and the yen or the dollar and the mark in the foreign exchangemarkets. Most of these people are not economists; they are traders;and you give them two easy pieces of guidance and that is what theytrade on. So they contribute to this instability, I think, as you getthis transmission from the exchange market into the bond market withthe speed of light almost. There are just a lot more players and Idon't think they are necessarily really weighing what's going on inthe real economy; and neither do I think that they are doing athorough analysis of the inflationary forces at work or not at work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that her bosses challenged her forecasts and did not allow her to rely on a single forecast. She also raises concerns about whether the forecast is incorporating interest rate moves and the potential vulnerability if the dollar does not decline. Additionally, she mentions that she believes fiscal policy changes are being overlooked and expresses a concern about potential inflationary forces.


Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 182.
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It seems to me, asI've listened to the comments made around the table this morning, thatthere's a very, very strong centralizing character to the projectionsthat have been made by everyone--the Greenbook and the Districtforecasts. I think that they constitute, in their aggregate wisdom, avery responsible and good forecast; and I accept it. I would like tomake this comment: the projections arise, as they must, fromconventional economic analysis and historical experience; and I wouldlike to suggest that maybe we should be a little open and alert to thepossibility that there are some unconventional and untraditionalthings going on. Standing back from the trees and looking at theforest, I observe that we are about to end the fifth year of what hasbeen called a recovery. I'm not sure how long you call something arecovery, but this one is going to be five years old in another coupleof months; and I note that at the end of the fifth year the economyis, in fact, accelerating and inflation is declining by most measures.Inflation is projected to increase for some very good reasons, butright now you've got an economy that is accelerating and inflationthat is decreasing--which is pretty unconventional. Industrialproduction is going up at an accelerating rate; unemployment has beendropping very strongly and is probably now somewhere near its naturalrate. And yet, at the same time, we are seeing very, very smallincreases in the unit costs of production and a very flat producerprice index. In fact, last month, the PPI was zero. That seems to bea little unconventional and untraditional. On the trade balance andthe J curve, we are not getting the effects that would have beenexpected. They are stretching out; we still think they are going tobe there, but that has been behaving unconventionally. GovernorJohnson noted a few moments ago the fact that we have taken $60billion of fiscal stimulus out of the economy, and yet none out of thetrade deficit. And I think a lot of people would have been surprisedahead of time that those two things could have coexisted.Incidentally, as the economy is accelerating its growth rate, that isoccurring while $60 billion of fiscal stimulus is, in fact, coming outof the economy.I would suggest the possibility that inflation may behave inan untraditional way also. Maybe that also will stretch out and notaccelerate. I ask myself: What possibility is there that could occur.I see several possibilities. They are all soft, and I would hate to9/22/87have to try to defend any of them. But, for one thing, I suspect thatwe may be undermeasuring our productivity increase. We may be doingbetter than we know. I've talked to Mike Prell and some others aboutthis some. I think we have a much higher level of mobility in thiseconomy that is helping us deal with imbalances as they show up,rather than just suffer from them. For instance, instead of justaccepting higher wage costs in Boston, we are moving plants to therural regions of New England where wage costs are lower. That'smobility. A lot of bankers who are out of business in Texas are goingto places where the banking system is stronger. That's mobility.There's a lot of that going on and that didn't used to be there. Ithink we may be in an era of very intense competition from severaldifferent respects. For one, the U.S. is back. I think that ourindustry is waking up and beginning to compete. Governor Angell spokeabout that a few minutes ago and I agree with him. Also, there aremany more serious competitors in the world economy than just a fewyears ago. They are serious and they are fierce, and I think that isone thing that is going to tend to impede the advance of inflation. Ispoke at the last meeting of this group about what seem to me to bebasic long-running, underlying deflationary tendencies in the worldeconomy. I won't go back over that ground but I do think they arestill there. All this is to say that I would not quarrel with theprojection that we have over the next five quarters, but I'd like topique a little interest maybe--on the part of some of the researchdirectors around here, and some others, who are far better at thissort of analysis than I am--to see whether or not there are somediscontinuities going on that could be favorable discontinuities.And, I think we should be open to those sorts of possibilities andalert to them. Meanwhile, I think we definitely have to be ready todeal with these inflationary expectations and not let that genie outof the bottle unnecessarily. Thank you, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Governor. Now let's move onto Don Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 184.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As it turns out, andwith no coordination ahead of time, I swear, the initial part of mybriefing will deal with the question you asked and the answer willhave no more precision than any [unintelligible]. And then I want togo on and talk about perhaps some of the implications of any increasein the interest rates. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 185.
]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. I think it'salmost dinner time, so let's break for coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 186.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we better get back to the agenda.As to the general discussion, I find myself probably about in themiddle of much of what I have been listening to. The point I wouldmake at the moment is this: while the economy is clearly quite strong,I think the orders pattern and all the various elements we usuallylook at are fairly balanced; to a certain extent the outlook is beinggiven to us far more concretely than it usually is. This is moreclassic than one realizes. I grant what Mike Kelley is saying: thatthere is something different. There is always something different;something that does not look like all the previous ones. There isnever anything identical, and it is always a puzzlement. But there is-33-9/22/87nothing very unusual about this one. And, it seems to have fairlygood momentum. The main issue, however, which I think Governor Angellmentioned, is that we do not yet have any evidence of actualinflation. By that I mean as distinct from expected indicators. Thenumbers really are remarkably soft. While we can anticipate theelements of labor tightening--and I think it is probably quite correctto say that we would expect wage acceleration to occur and labor coststo run up--that has not yet happened. And what that suggests to me isthat, while we are tight and are likely to get tighter, we haven't yettriggered anything. I think that the time frame in which these eventswill occur is often somewhat difficult to pin down, and I mean by thaton both sides. It is quite conceivable that three weeks from now wewill all of a sudden begin to get some stories of significant wagepatterns emerging. The Wall Street Journal will usually show up onthe front page with a real [unintelligible] of stories about prices,profits, inflation, and the like, and that could very well be thefirst indication that something is happening. The point is that noone can write that story at the moment; it is not in the numbers.Consequently, as far as policy is concerned, where we are atthe moment strikes me as quite appropriate to the outlook. I don'tfeel terribly strongly about it, but I would be inclined to start offmerely by assuming that we stay at "B", and that we stay with the $600million on the borrowing requirement, if for no other reason than itis not a significant edging higher from where we are currently. Thereis very little doubt in my mind that we can do nothing to the extentof the accumulation of economic activity that is occurring. But Ithink it does position us in the appropriate place. Having said that,I don't see the need to phrase the directive, as we did the last time,with a tilt toward further tightness. I think for the moment it isprobably well enough to stay basically where we are. I don't knowwhere that will fit me in the rest of this group, but I'd love tohear. Mr. Vice Chairman, would you like to voice your opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is mostly the speaker's own observations and opinions about the current economic situation and their suggested approach to policy. There is no indication of direct disagreement or debate with other participants.


Passage number 187.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd be completely satisfied withthat formulation--that is, staying with $600 million borrowing andusing symmetric language. In a nutshell, I think that is where policyshould be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their satisfaction and agreement with the stated formulation and believes it to be the right approach for policy.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 189.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In a nutshell, I genuinely thinkthat is precisely where policy should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's personal opinion without any opposing viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information or context about President Boykin that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 191.
MR. BOYKIN. That's my policy prescription four square.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "MR. BOYKIN. That's my policy prescription four square" indicates a statement of agreement or affirmation, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 193.
MR. ANGELL. I am with the Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they are with the Chairman, indicating agreement or alignment.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 195.
MR. BOEHNE. I support your proposition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly expresses support for the proposition.


Passage number 196.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would support the proposition.I would prefer, however, to drop back to the $500 million borrowing-34-9/22/87level. You said it doesn't take us much from where we are currently,but if, indeed, $100 million equates to about 1/4 percent [on thefederal funds rate] you are looking at least at that amount more yetto take place that the market has not perceived. And, since themarket doesn't know we have been at $600 million, the $500 millionseems more appropriate to me, and that would be my choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is expressing his support for the proposition but suggesting a lower borrowing level of $500 million instead of $600 million. He provides reasoning for his preference but does not disagree with the overall proposition.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage merely states the name "Governor Heller" without providing any information or details that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 198.
MR. HELLER. I fully agree with these last remarks. I thinkwe are at $500 million and, therefore, we should probably stay around$500 million rather than do further tightening. Let me make onefurther remark: some data that I have just scratched up indicate that,yes, there have been [similar] episodes before. As a matter of fact,there is a precise duplication of our current situation as far as theexchange rate changes are concerned. And that is that Germany andJapan, between 1980 and 1985, had exactly the same drop in exchangerates. What was their policy. The discount rate was lowered in Japanfrom 7-1/4 percent in 1980 to 5 percent in 1985; in Germany it droppedfrom 7-1/2 percent to 4 percent in that period of declining exchangerates. Interest rates on three-month money dropped from 11 to 6-1/2percent in Japan and from 9 to 5 percent in Germany. As for the onething that we all worry about--inflation--the CPI in 1980 in Japan was8 percent and in 1985 it was 2 percent; in Germany it went from 5.4 to2.2 percent. So, I don't think that the exchange rate really shouldbe driving our policy. And in Germany and Japan, which successfullynavigated that period, the exchange rate certainly wasn't taken as acause to tighten monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, fully agrees with the previous remarks and presents data to support his agreement. He argues that the exchange rate should not be the driving factor in monetary policy, citing the examples of Germany and Japan as successful cases where the exchange rate did not lead to tightening of monetary policy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the time frame you were looking at,were they down more than we were in real terms in that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a comparison between the "they" and "we" in terms of being down. It suggests that there is a contrast or disagreement about the extent of being down in real terms during the specified time frame.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
MR. HELLER. In real terms what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, the differential betweenU.S. rates and German and Japanese rates in the time frame.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement explaining the differential between U.S. rates and German and Japanese rates.


Passage number 202.
MR. TRUMAN. Their long-term rates essentially rose duringthat period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about long-term rates rising during a particular period. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
MR. HELLER. They what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because Mr. Heller's statement "They what" suggests confusion or disbelief in what someone else has said, indicating a possible disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 204.
MR. TRUMAN. Their long-term real interest rates rose duringthat period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the long-term real interest rates rising during a specific period.


Passage number 205.
MR. HELLER. Real interest rates you are saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Heller is talking about real interest rates.


Passage number 206.
 I haven'tlooked at real rates; so far they have always been--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ours were coming down very significantlyat the same time, so it is really a question of [differentials]--although I don't disagree with you, as you know, on the statement youmade on the exchange rates at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that they haven't considered real rates, but agrees with the other person's statement about exchange rates.


Passage number 207.
MR. HELLER. So taking that into account--and for me it isimportant not to get overly tight on the exchange rate question--Iwould go with the $500 million, which is current policy, I wouldargue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their opinion without opposing or contradicting any other statement or view.


Passage number 208.
-35-9/22/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 209.
MR. STERN. I would favor "B" as you specified it, includingthe $600 million borrowing target. And I think I would have at leasta mild preference for retaining the current asymmetry in the directivefor two reasons. One is, as you have pointed out, we really can'tfind concrete signs of acceleration of inflation in the price or wagedata yet. And that, it seems to me, gives us an opportunity to doperhaps a little better on the inflation side than the Greenbooksuggests--to lower inflation next year, if we are a bit careful here;and I think that asymmetry in the directive would help on that score.Also, as I think about the near-term outlook--the next six weeks orso--it seems to me the risks are still likely to be in terms of dollarweakness, or some disruptions in the bond market that produce higherlong-term rates [associated with] signs of tightening labor marketsand growing concerns about acceleration of inflation down the road.The asymmetric directive positions us better should that materialize,and, as I said, that's more likely to be the risk in the very shortrun.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stern is expressing his preference and reasoning for favoring option "B" and retaining the current asymmetry in the directive.


Passage number 210.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you think we'll see it in some of thedata before then or just in qualitative--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is merely asking the reader's opinion or prediction about where the mentioned phenomenon will be observed, without presenting any conflicting perspectives or arguments.


Passage number 211.
MR. STERN. I doubt that we would see it in the wage or pricedata in that time horizon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Stern, expresses doubt about seeing something in wage or price data, but there is no opposing view or conflicting opinion provided.


Passage number 212.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So it is really a question of theevidence that emerges before the numbers begin to show.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the evidence is important before the numbers become apparent.


Passage number 213.
MR. STERN. Right. And people's attitudes about what isunfolding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made by "MR. STERN."


Passage number 214.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, there is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 215.
MR. KEEHN. I agree with alternative B, and I have apreference, at least, for the asymmetrical language as it iscurrently. Also, if there were going to be a bias, then I suppose thebest nuance for the bias about borrowing would be up rather than downfrom the $600 million level. But I do think changing the fed fundsrange from 5 to 9 percent perhaps would accomplish that bias.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although Mr. Keehn expresses a preference for alternative B and suggests a bias in borrowing, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 216.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So you're going look at "B", $600million, and you prefer a tilt upward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will look at "B", which is worth $600 million, and that they prefer a tilt upward.


Passage number 217.
MR. KEEHN. Right. I would be for "B", $600 million, and abias upward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their preference for option "B" with $600 million without any conflicting views being mentioned.


Passage number 218.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "President Forrestal" and does not provide any context or information to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 219.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, my preference is to maintainthe current stance of monetary policy and I interpret your formulationas being somewhat of a tightening, albeit fairly slight. The reason Iwould like to maintain a current stance at the moment is, first ofall, as you've indicated, we don't really see any evidence ofinflation in the numbers. But, more importantly, as I think I saidearlier, over the next several weeks we are going to get some numbersthat might produce more volatility in the market. We have thislinkage, apparently, between the foreign exchange market and the bond-36-9/22/87market; if we get a bad trade number again, we probably are going tosee a fall in the dollar, and that will be translated into higher bondyields. And that suggests to me that, at that point, we may need totighten a little; and I would prefer to wait until that time to doanything. So, my difference with you is fairly slight, I think; myformulation would be for borrowing at between $500 and $600 million,with the center of gravity probably in between there, and anasymmetric directive to take account of what I think is going tohappen and our need to tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Forrestal expresses his preference for maintaining the current stance of monetary policy, noting that there is no evidence of inflation in the numbers. He also suggests waiting for potential market volatility before making any adjustments. This is a difference in opinion, but the tone remains cordial and there is no direct disagreement with the Chairman.


Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're saying "B" with $500 million buta tilt upward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states that "You" are saying something about "B" with a specific amount of money.


Passage number 221.
MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, a tilt upward. It's a "B+" with anasymmetric directive. That's called fine tuning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I'm learning a new vocabularysitting in on these meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is learning vocabulary by sitting in on meetings.


Passage number 223.
MR. BOEHNE. You have only begun, I might say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the person has only just started or begun something.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We abrogate the English language everytime I come here, it seems. President Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be a statement expressing frustration or annoyance with the English language.


Passage number 225.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, at this meeting, I certainly couldsupport alternative B, but I do have a preference for alternative C,for many of the reasons that I mentioned in the go around. Theprospect, in my view, is for growth in aggregate demand at, or above,long-run potential. Given the fact that the economy is operating inthe zone of full employment, this strength in demand, in combinationwith the declining value of the dollar can be expected to put upwardpressures on prices. Also, growth in labor costs, which is part ofour forecast and that of the Board staff's as well, should lead to anunderlying inflation rate that is higher in 1988. Moreover, thisinflation prospect could be significantly worsened if the expectedreduction in Federal government spending does not materialize. Giventhat it takes a long time for our actions to affect inflation, it isimportant, in my view, that we not delay until inflation already showssigns of becoming more persistent. Finally, I'd make the point that,if I read footnote 1 on page 10 correctly, it looks to me like, in thenot too distant future, alternative C is assumed by the Greenbook, asit is in our forecast. So when we talk about the economy and itsperformance, and particularly the Greenbook forecast, please keep inmind that that assumes alternative C in the not too distant future.At least that's the way I read that footnote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his preference for alternative C and providing reasons for his preference, but there is no explicit disagreement with other viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The assumption, of course, is that youagree with that forecast. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "of course" indicates that it is expected or assumed that the reader agrees with the forecast.


Passage number 227.
MS. SEGER. I am in favor of no change in the reservepressure, which I guess is not really a stated option; I am somewhatbetween "A" and "B", $500 million borrowing target, and I would prefersymmetrical language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since no passage is provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 229.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think that in the short run therisks that we have here in the inflation area are more expectations-37-9/22/87than anything else, and we should maintain a posture against that, andmove against that. I think the economy can handle the slighttightening that going on to $600 million in borrowing would imply. SoI favor "B" with $600 million, and would like to see symmetricallanguage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Kelley expresses his opinion about the risks in the inflation area and his preference for a specific course of action, but there is no direct opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude to President Black.


Passage number 231.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, you might think in view of how Istressed the unacceptability of the forecast for next year that Iwould be advocating "C" as Bob Parry did, but I really think the stepswe have taken already have been pretty strong. In fact, we haven'teven implemented all we agreed to do last time, so I would not favoranything beyond "B", particularly since I think that there has been arise in real rates. Also, we have had pretty subdued behavior on thepart of the aggregates. But I wouldn't want the symmetrical part ofit because I just don't see the likelihood that we would want to easeduring this period. As a general rule, I'd rather it be symmetricalbecause I don't think we usually know; but I think something would beread into it if we eliminated the asymmetry this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black acknowledges that he stressed the unacceptability of the forecast for next year, but he believes that the steps already taken have been strong enough. He also expresses his opinion that he does not favor anything beyond option "B" and provides reasons for this. He mentions the rise in real rates and the subdued behavior of the aggregates. He does mention that he wouldn't want the symmetrical part, but clarifies that it is because he doesn't see the likelihood of wanting to ease during this period. Overall, there is no direct disagreement with any other opinion expressed in the passage.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 233.
MR. JOHNSON. I am sort of caught between the $500 and $600million, but I am basically comfortable with alternative B withsymmetric language. I had thought about $500 million with a tilttoward tightening for the same reasons that Bob Forrestal mentioned;there is something in that, too. But I don't feel strongly eitherway. I would appeal to Peter, though, that in maintaining $600borrowing--which I think is fine--we ought to do that as smoothly aspossible, and not give any obvious signals that might confuse themarket into thinking that this is a tightening move. It is going tobe perceived that way by some anyway, but I think that we ought to tryto do it in as smooth a fashion as possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson is expressing his opinion and offering a suggestion, but there is no direct disagreement or argument taking place.


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
MR. MELZER. I would align myself with Bob Forrestal'sposition: "B", with a $500 million borrowings target and asymmetriclanguage. The main thing that is influencing me is a longer-term viewand, I guess, trying not to get out of position. And I think BobBlack said it: any way you look at this--whether you look at rates, atthe provision of reserves, or at the behavior of the aggregates--overthe course of this year, we have taken some significant steps. And Iam not quite sure, as I expressed earlier, what the impact of that isgoing to be. But, being an old market participant, when everybodythinks the same there's a chance that it won't work out that way.Sometimes you get a little afraid of a consensus that is apparentlythat strong. Having said all that, I could certainly accept "B", witha $600 million borrowing target and symmetric language. But I have aslight preference for the position Bob Forrestal mentioned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Melzer, agrees with Bob Forrestal's position of "B" with a $500 million borrowing target and asymmetric language, while also stating that he could accept "B" with a $600 million borrowing target and symmetric language. This suggests that there is contention and differing opinions among the participants.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Hendricks, would you liketo comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "would you like to comment" suggests that there may be differing opinions or opposing viewpoints on a certain topic, potentially leading to an argument or debate.


Passage number 237.
MR. HENDRICKS. Our preference would be to line up fairlyclosely with Si Keehn's suggestion on the decision. We would go with$600 million, but would lean on the side of further tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It states that "Our preference would be to line up fairly closely with Si Keehn's suggestion on the decision," which indicates a willingness to align with Si Keehn's suggestion. The mention of leaning on the side of further tightening does not necessarily imply disagreement, but rather a preference for caution.


Passage number 238.
-38-9/22/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Eisenmenger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions Vice President Eisenmenger without providing any further context or details.


Passage number 239.
MR. EISENMENGER. I support you, Mr. Chairman: $600 millionand a symmetric directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for the chairman and the proposed amount of $600 million and a symmetric directive.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it is clear that there is a fairlystrong consensus here for alternative B, at $600 million on borrowing;there is a small support amongst the voting members for a tilt towardsomething stronger in the language, and something on the other side.I, personally, would go along with those vague notions of GovernorJohnson on the issue of not fighting the world to try to get $600million in this maintenance period, because it may be a futileendeavor. It may, in fact, give signals, which is a point thatGovernor Seger raised earlier in this meeting that struck me as areason not to specifically fight that number. But, as I read theinstructions that I've just been given, the language apparently shouldread: "In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, theCommittee seeks to maintain the degree of pressure on reservepositions sought in recent weeks. Somewhat greater or somewhat lesserreserve restraint would be acceptable depending on indications ofinflationary pressures, strength in the business expansion,developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior ofthe aggregates. This approach is expected to be consistent withgrowth in M2 and M3 over the period from August to December at annualrates of around 4-1/2 percent and 6 percent, respectively. M1 isexpected to continue to grow relatively slowly. The Chairman may callfor Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for DomesticOperations that reserve conditions during the period before the nextmeeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of 5 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges a consensus for alternative B, but also mentions a small support for a stronger language and something on the other side. However, the speaker personally agrees with Governor Johnson's vague notions and mentions the point raised by Governor Seger as a reason not to fight for a specific number. The passage mainly discusses different viewpoints and options, but there is no clear disagreement or contention among the speakers.


Passage number 241.
"MR. HELLER. Mr. Chairman, did you have symmetric language inthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a question being asked by Mr. Heller to the chairman.


Passage number 242.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, it's in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that "it is in there," without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 243.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Symmetric language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "symmetric language" does not inherently indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply refers to a type of language where elements are balanced or equal in some way. Without additional context, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement associated with this phrase.


Passage number 244.
MR. HELLER. I didn't catch it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller is simply stating that he didn't catch something, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 245.
MR. JOHNSON. It's "would" either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is stating that the word "would" can be used interchangeably in either way.


Passage number 246.
MR. HELLER. Are they both "somewhat".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 247.
MR. KELLEY. Both "somewhat" and both "would".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that both parties agree on the use of the words "somewhat" and "would."


Passage number 248.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Greenspan without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 249.
 "Somewhat greater or somewhat lesserreserve restraint would be acceptable depending on--"MR. KOHN. My comment, and it's my fault for putting it inthe Bluebook, is that the 4-1/2 percent for M2 sounds excessivelyprecise to me, given my knowledge of how these forecasts are puttogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a personal opinion about the precision of a forecast.


Passage number 250.
 I shouldn't have put it in there, I guess, and I wonderwhether--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean you would be precise for us butfor the public you don't choose to be precise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and questioning their own decision, without involving any other person or point of view.


Passage number 251.
-39-9/22/87MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any information or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 252.
 Yes, I wonder whether growth rates of from 4 to 6percent or something like that wouldn't--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean for both aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 253.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:

Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 254.
MR. KOHN. Yes, wouldn't that capture the spirit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with a statement or suggestion that is not mentioned in the given passage.


Passage number 255.
 Well, 4 to6 percent would encourage--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words you'd say "consistentwith growth in M2 and M3 over the period from August through Decemberat annual rates of between 4 and 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion and provides additional information to support that suggestion.


Passage number 256.
"MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions "MR. ANGELL," without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 257.
 I like "around" 4 and 6--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no. "Around" means a number--thatthere's only one number there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement clarifying the meaning of the word "around" in reference to numbers.


Passage number 258.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
 It says respectively, but you would take--MR. ANGELL. I know, but, Don, you have a different numberfor M3 than you do for M2, don't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "but, Don, you have a different number for M3 than you do for M2, don't you?". The speaker, Mr. Angell, is expressing a contradiction or discrepancy between the numbers provided by Don for M3 and M2.


Passage number 260.
MR. KOHN. Yes, it's 6 percent for M3 and 4-1/2 percent forM2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the interest rates for M3 and M2. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 261.
MR. ANGELL. See, really, around 4, and around 6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement; it is simply stating specific times (around 4 and around 6) without any conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, I see. Around 4 and around 6. Isthat what you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a clarification question to confirm understanding.


Passage number 263.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "yes" indicates agreement or confirmation, not contention or disagreement.


Passage number 264.
MR. KOHN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 265.
 I was actually thinking of 4 to 6, going to arange; but around 4, around 6 would be--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean 4 to 6 percent for both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "You mean 4 to 6 percent for both" implies that the person is challenging or disagreeing with the suggestion of 4 to 6.


Passage number 266.
MR. KOHN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The word "yes" does not imply contention or disagreement. It is simply confirming that there is agreement or acknowledgement.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what I thought you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This response does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It implies that the stated thought aligns with the speaker's expectation or understanding.


Passage number 268.
MR. ANGELL. But you're actually anticipating 4-1/2 percentand you're anticipating 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply addressing two different anticipated percentages.


Passage number 269.
MR. KOHN. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kohn's answer is correct.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
MR. ANGELL. I still think you could miss quite easily with abetween 4 and 6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, believes that it is possible to miss something between 4 and 6, while the other person in the conversation may have a different opinion but it's not stated in the given excerpt.


Passage number 271.
MR. JOHNSON. You want to say 4 to 6 percent for the M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is simply stating a percentage range for the M2.


Passage number 272.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage or context.


Passage number 273.
 I just asked him--MR. KOHN. Governor Angell's suggestion would be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply indicates agreement with Governor Angell's suggestion.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What did he say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only includes a question and does not express any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 275.
-40-9/22/87MR. KOHN. Around 4 percent and around 6 percent,respectively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only provides numerical values and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So be it. Around 4 percent and around 6percent, respectively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting two percentages without any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 277.
MS. SEGER. When the minutes come out do you think a lotwould be made of the fact that the fed funds range has been moved. Ican just see someone looking at that and saying "Well, clear the decksfor the next big tightening of the screws; batten down the hatches."SPEAKER(.). Well, we really didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply responding to a question about the potential reaction to the minutes being released.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states the name "CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN" but does not provide any information or context to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 279.
 We have set a range that is reallymerely plus or minus 2 percent from--MS. SEGER. I know, but people pick at everything that goesdown here; and I can just see a big deal being made of this move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a conversation between two individuals where one person expresses concern about potential criticism or scrutiny from others.


Passage number 280.
MR. ANGELL. But quite often we really attempt to kind ofkeep it centered, don't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is making a statement about how "we" often try to keep something centered.


Passage number 281.
 We don't like--MR. JOHNSON. This is what would have been consistent with$600 million borrowings, even before, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but the interesting issue would be:if we are now at 7 or 7-1/4 percent and then we came in with the old 5to 8 percent range, then I think that would really be a big signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical scenario and expressing their opinion about the potential impact of a certain range.


Passage number 283.
MR. JOHNSON. 4 to 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement or introduction of someone named Mr. Johnson.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But 4 to 8 would essentially be sayingthat--. You know, I think this reads perfectly. I think thisbasically says we are already here and we are not going anywhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and satisfaction with the statement.


Passage number 285.
MR. KOHN. In the past when we have done this, we haveexplained it as a technical adjustment to keep the actual rates moreclosely centered around there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Kohn is simply describing a past practice.


Passage number 286.
MS. SEGER. So there will be an explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Ms. Seger will provide an explanation.


Passage number 287.
MR. KOHN. Yes, there would be some explanatory sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply recognizes that there would be some explanatory sentence.


Passage number 288.
MR. ANGELL. But, I do think it is somewhat important that wefollow that suggestion of easing in to the $600 million so as not tocause the markets to believe that we have made a policy change at thismeeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is suggesting a method of implementing a policy change in a way that would not cause disruptions in the market.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think the general language on theactions we are taking basically would indicate that we did nothing atthis meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion on the language used to describe the actions taken at the meeting, indicating they believe that nothing significant was accomplished.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 290.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the statement "MR. ANGELL. Yes," which indicates a response opposing or contradicting a previous statement.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I hear the discussion, that is wherewe want to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the author's agreement with the discussion they are hearing.


Passage number 292.
-41-9/22/87MR. BLACK. Could we rephrase that and say we did not changepolicy rather than we did nothing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion to rephrase a statement without any explicit disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 293.
MR. MELZER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response without any context or passage. Can you provide more information or the actual passage?


Passage number 294.
 Although there will be a perception for a whilethat we did, I think, as the $600 million shows through--MR. KELLEY. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 295.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, Peter's skills will take care of that.SPEAKER(.). Good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson expresses confidence in Peter's skills, and the speaker acknowledges that with a "Good" response.


Passage number 296.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, we have watched him before, and he justknows how to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Angell, has observed someone who knows how to do something.


Passage number 297.
MR. KEEHN. Not really [unintelligible] instructions; itmeans he will just do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by MR. KEEHN that there are no complications or issues with the instructions given.


Passage number 298.
MR. GUFFEY. But he hasn't been too well the last twomaintenance periods, have you, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is simply pointing out that Peter has not been well in the last two maintenance periods.


Passage number 299.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I haven't been very good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight simply states that he has not been very good at something without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless there are further comments can wevote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement or request that requires agreement or confirmation from others before proceeding with a vote.


