Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 7, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 7, 1987, at 10:30 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehnKelleySegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rosenblum, Scheld,Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account7/7/87Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Promise1, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Zickler, 1/ Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Brady, 1/ Economist, Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Hendricks and Stone, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Philadelphia,respectivelyMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis, andMs. Tshinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of St. Louis, San Francisco, Richmond, Cleveland,Kansas City, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. R. Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Keleher, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof AtlantaMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Guentner, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof July 7, 1987CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's appropriate to say a word before westart about Arthur Burns' passing. He sat at this table with many ofus for a good many years. He sat over there about where Bob Black is;the seating has been rearranged since then. I don't know whether thathad any implication for policy when the Chairman sat over in thatarea. But he was a very forceful Chairman who had a great dedicationto the Federal Reserve and to this Committee. I think you have beennotified that there is a memorial service on July 22 at 11:30 in themorning at the Temple here in Northwest Washington. If people canmake that, I think it would be greatly appreciated. With that, we canget started and approve the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply providing information about a memorial service for Arthur Burns and discussing the seating arrangement at the table.


Passage number 3.
MS. SEGER. I'll move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting statements or points of disagreement.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a second. The minutes areapproved. May we have the report on foreign currency operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for a report on foreign currency operations.


Passage number 5.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Cross is making a statement, but it does not involve any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 6.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may interject before we discuss this:I was so preoccupied with Arthur Burns that I forgot to welcome MikeKelley to the table this morning. Sitting there, you're almost[unintelligible] now as a governor; so, I say welcome. The plan ofattack this morning and tomorrow is that I will interject thediscussion on this report on borrowing that you all have after Mr.Sternlight gives his report and we have the discussion on the Desk'soperations. That's the logical place to do that. We will break forlunch at about 1:00 p.m. and discuss extraneous matters informally, aswe usually do, and then go back into session. If we finish thisafternoon, fine; if we don't, we will reconvene tomorrow morning. Andif the discussion proceeds beyond 11:00 tomorrow morning, it will bewithout a Chairman, which may be an advantage for some of you. Let'sproceed to the questions or comments on Mr. Cross' report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement outlining the plan for the discussion and proceedings at a meeting.


Passage number 7.
MR. BOEHNE. Sam, on this re-emergence of two-way risks,would you categorize that as a fragile re-emergence or does it lookfairly good to you. How is it categorized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for Sam's opinion on how the re-emergence of two-way risks should be categorized.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
MR. CROSS. Well, I think it is still somewhat fragile. As Isaid, I think the market paid a great deal of attention to, and wasreassured considerably by, the willingness of the Federal Reserve tosnug because of the dollar. Looking ahead, it's not clear that themarket would feel that there will be the same kind of maneuverabilityor ability to untighten. I think, for the present, that we have quitea healthy sense of two-way risks in the market. But there is someskepticism; there are these feelings out there that some action willbe taken, either in intervention or another area, if the dollar movesup very far from its present level. And as I said, if that shouldhappen, I think what the trading community then would start to do withrespect to [unintelligible] on the downside. So, I think we have aperiod of stability now, or even firmness, and this may continue for aperiod. Looking beyond that, there is still negative sentiment aboutthe dollar because of the lack of any clear evidence of majoradjustment in our current account position. And I would characterizethe present sense of two-way risks as still rather fragile.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses skepticism and negative sentiment about the dollar, while also acknowledging the market's temporary sense of stability and firmness. This indicates a disagreement or conflicting opinions about the current state and future prospects of the currency.


Passage number 9.
7/7/87MR. JOHNSON. In discussions yesterday, the staff pointed outthat for the second quarter we could get more negative current accountnumbers, which could have some effect on that sentiment. I take itthe oil-price situation has been driving a lot of the current account;it has been dominated by that. Even though non-oil exports have beenrising, the whole thing has been overwhelmed by oil volume, to someextent. I take it the second quarter is going to produce a worseningcurrent account balance number and that might add to some of thesentiment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the possibility of a worsening current account balance number and its potential effect on sentiment.


Passage number 10.
 Is there any perception that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We just have one month of [data for] thesecond quarter right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply stating a fact and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS. We have one month of trade figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there is one month of trade figures.


Passage number 12.
MR. TRUMAN. Governor Johnson, I'd note that most of thisdeterioration in the current account in the staff forecast is in thenon-trade current account items.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Truman, providing information about the staff forecast regarding the deterioration in the current account, specifically the non-trade current account items.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 13.
 It is true that there's a slightdeterioration in the trade balance, which is based on one month, butit's essentially flat--MR. CROSS. There's no question that people are talking very,very intently about what these trade figures will be on the 15th ofJuly when they come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. One speaker is stating that the trade balance is essentially flat, while the other speaker is expressing uncertainty and indicating that there is a lot of discussion and speculation surrounding the upcoming trade figures.


Passage number 14.
MR. JOHNSON. I take it we're forecasting a worsening on thecurrent account number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage merely states that Mr. Johnson is forecasting a worsening on the current account number without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
MR. TRUMAN. That's right. But the current account numberfor the second quarter isn't going to appear until September--evenassuming that we are right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is providing factual information and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 16.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but that's not that far away. I'm justsaying that September, assuming we're right, could be the periodyou're talking about, then. Right now there is a good healthy two-wayrisk on the exchange rate, but I'm just saying that there might besome numbers in the future that hinge on that; I don't know. If thisis going to be an uneven path on the way to improvement, maybe themarkets recognize that but maybe they don't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and uncertainty about the future.


Passage number 17.
MR. CROSS. Well, I think they recognize that in volume termsthere has been some improvement. But they also recognize that innominal terms there has been very little improvement, if any. Andthat, of course, is what you have to finance. Sometimes marketparticipants over-interpret these figures and sometimes they respondby kind of knee jerk [reactions]. So, I think if we have bad tradefigures next week--really bad trade figures--that could change thepicture from what it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and observations about trade figures.


Passage number 18.
MR. JOHNSON. We're getting numbers next week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that numbers will be obtained next week.


Passage number 19.
MR. CROSS. On the 15th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple statement.


Passage number 20.
MR. BLACK. What is your guess on what those numbers willlook like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any apparent contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asking for an opinion or prediction.


Passage number 21.
MR. CROSS. The market is expecting [a deficit of] about $14billion, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Cross, is expressing his belief about the market's expectation of a deficit of about $14 billion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
7/7/87MR. TRUMAN. I would say that April was somewhat over-interpreted--that is, as listed in the forecast. That [deficit]number on a balance-of-payments basis was something like [an annualrate of] $140 billion and we have a little over $150 billion for thequarter as a whole. We think that May and June will be not as good asApril, but not dramatically different in terms of the monthly figures.But to the extent that the market has been extrapolating the trend asthe numbers came down in February, March, and April, even a levelingoff [in the trade deficit] might produce some degree ofdisappointment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is suggesting that the market's interpretation of the trade deficit numbers may lead to disappointment if there is only a leveling off of the deficit.


Passage number 23.
MR. KEEHN. Sam, I suppose it's hard to forecast, but on theelement of downside risk, has there been some improvement this timeversus, say, the past several weeks. Is the downside risk about thesame as it has been or has there been some fundamental improvement torelieve that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question about the downside risk and the possibility of improvement in the future.


Passage number 24.
MR. CROSS. I'm not sure I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Cross simply expresses his uncertainty about understanding something.


Passage number 25.
MR. KEEHN. Well, at the last few meetings we have been veryconcerned about the precipitous free fall, if you will, [of thedollar.] There seems to be some improvement in tone, but I thinkyou're questioning that. And I wonder whether the downside risk nowis as great as it has been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Keen expressing concern about the falling value of the dollar and wondering if there is still a significant risk.


Passage number 26.
MR. CROSS. Well, no, in the sense that we are nowcomfortable with pressures not moving one way or the other. At someof these earlier meetings we had been sitting here with very heavydownward pressure facing us and the intensification of that raisedmuch more serious problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Cross states that there is no contention or disagreement in the sense that they are now comfortable with pressures not moving one way or the other. He mentions that earlier meetings had heavy downward pressure, but he does not indicate any disagreement or contention regarding this.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a lot on this in the presentationto be given later, I guess.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions. It simply states that there is more information available in a presentation that will be given later.


Passage number 28.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suggest we defer these generaldiscussions of the balance of payments outlook on the dollar untillater. Are there any more operational comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement here. The statement suggests deferring a discussion and then asks for any additional comments or questions.


Passage number 29.
MS. SEGER. I have one. When you refer to market sentiment,since there are obviously many hundreds or thousands of participantsin the foreign exchange markets on any given day, are you talkingprimarily about traders that are commercial bankers in this country,or commercial bankers from abroad, or corporate treasurers, or centralbankers, or all of the above. I'm just sitting here trying to get aflavor of what are you basing your sentiment comments on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and trying to understand the basis of the sentiment comments.


Passage number 30.
MR. CROSS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific information or statements to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 31.
 You're right that there are probably ten thousandpeople out there in this market and nobody can synthesize the view--MS. SEGER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, there is agreement between the speaker and Ms. Seger. The phrase "You're right" indicates that the speaker agrees with Ms. Seger's statement.


Passage number 32.
MR. CROSS. Except that the market reflects the view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Cross, stating that the market reflects a certain view.


Passage number 33.
MS. SEGER.Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. While we don't have the full context to provide a detailed explanation, the fact that Ms. Seger responds with "Yes" implies that there is some form of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 34.
7/7/87MR. CROSS. We do talk to large numbers of traders all daylong. We talk to central banks all around the world and get theirassessment of what's going on in their markets and we talk tocommercial bankers and others here. And we try to keep up with whatthe economists are saying and absorb these various views to the extentwe can. Now, there are times when a view sort of gets moving and themarkets seem to all act like turkeys and fly in the same direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the process of gathering information from traders, central banks, commercial bankers, and economists to get a comprehensive view of the market. They mention that sometimes a particular view gains momentum and influences market behavior, but this is not presented as a point of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 35.
MS. SEGER. Right. I sensed that last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges and agrees with the previous statement made by someone else.


Passage number 36.
MR. CROSS. So one can profess a market view. But I don'tthink anybody can profess to be very confident at any one moment aboutwhat all these many different players are thinking. But we do thebest we can by talking to many different kinds of operators. We alsotalk to treasurers of corporations about what they're doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that it is difficult to know what all the different players in the market are thinking, but they try their best to gather information by talking to various operators and treasurers of corporations.


Passage number 37.
MS. SEGER. Isn't it true that they are more importantplayers on the scene now than they used to be 5 or 10 years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a neutral statement about the perceived importance of certain players on the scene compared to the past.


Passage number 38.
MR. CROSS. They're certainly more important than they usedto be. The market has gotten a lot bigger and a lot more complex; andit involves a lot larger universe than it did some years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Cross is stating a fact about the market becoming more important, bigger, and more complex over the years. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


Passage number 39.
MR. HELLER. Sam, do you see any changes in the pattern ofthe inflows of foreign capital.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the observation of changes in the pattern of inflows of foreign capital.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 40.
MR. CROSS. We can't really tell very much about it, but whatwe hear is that it's still fragile. Even if one is buying a long-termbond, that's not a long-term investment. There is not a lot ofassurance that these present exchange rates are stable enough for oneto be entering into a lot of long-term investments with assurancesthat there are not going to be further changes. At least that is whata lot of people tell us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker states that there is not a lot of assurance that present exchange rates are stable enough for long-term investments. This suggests disagreement or uncertainty about the stability of the exchange rates.


Passage number 41.
MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or specific text provided.


Passage number 42.
 Well, I meant mainly geographically--theJapanese versus the Europeans who--MR. CROSS. The Japanese, of course, are key because they aresuch big players. In the early part of the year, they had long-termoutflows of $10 billion in January and another $10 billion inFebruary. In March it fell down to about half that and in April itdisappeared entirely. In May it has come back up and the last reportswere that in June it was even bigger than ever--$13 billion. So theamounts seem to have come back up to very substantial levels. But thequestion is how solid that is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides factual information about the financial flows of the Japanese and does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Japanese long-term rates were going upin this period when they resumed their investment in the UnitedStates, presumably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage is providing information about two separate events, the increase in Japanese long-term rates and their investment in the United States. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 44.
MR. CROSS. Right. The Japanese long-term rates have gone upby about 1/2 point during this period and ours have come down some.If you want to look at it in terms of differentials, at the beginningof the year the differential between U.S. and Japanese long-term rateswas about 2-1/4 percentage points. It went up to as high as 6percentage points and now it's down to about 4-1/2 points--maybe alittle below that. So, it's still a lot higher than it was in the7/7/87early part of this year, but it's well down from the peak that itreached in May.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 45.
MR. JOHNSON. As long as there's no major downside exchangerate risk that might be plenty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson is expressing a condition that, if met, would make something sufficient.


Passage number 46.
MR. CROSS. I think the exchange rate is the key part of theequation, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the sentence. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the importance of the exchange rate.


Passage number 47.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:
No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "yes" in this context is simply a response indicating agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 48.
MR. HELLER. And the stock market in Japan, probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions a specific topic (the stock market in Japan) without presenting any argument, disagreement, or conflicting views.


Passage number 49.
MR. CROSS. The stock market in Japan has declined somewhat.It got up as high as about 26,000; it's now about 24,000 or so--downmaybe 10 percent, which is substantial. And the Japanese have beenvery worried about the liquidity in their whole economy, as reflectedboth in the stock market and the real estate market. It is a veryworrisome and dangerous thing. That's one of the reasons why thereare questions about what they should be doing in terms of their ownlonger-term ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents information about the decline of the stock market in Japan and the concerns about liquidity in the economy. There is no evident disagreement or contention.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement provided does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a need for ratifying the transactions.


Passage number 51.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "Move it" does not contain any contentious or disagreeable elements. It is a straightforward directive, without any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 52.
MS. SEGER. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or express disagreement between different individuals or groups. It simply states the name "MS. SEGER" without any additional information or context.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "without objection" suggests that there is no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 54.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context or information about the contents of the Appendix.


Passage number 55.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments. If not, we willratify the transactions; that is all we have to do here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there are any questions or comments. If there are none, they will proceed with ratifying the transactions.


Passage number 56.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 57.
MS. SEGER. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions. It appears to be a statement made by someone named Ms. Seger, but we do not have any surrounding context to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 58.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Why don't youintroduce this report on borrowing just very briefly, Mr. Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" suggests that there is unanimous agreement or approval to move forward with introducing the report.


Passage number 59.
MR. KOHN. Okay, Mr. Chairman. The report was requested inresponse to some questions that arose over the previous intermeetingperiod--and perhaps really since last fall as well--about the kinds offederal funds rates and pressures on reserve positions we were gettingrelative to what the Committee and the Desk had specified. The paperbreaks down the difference between actual federal funds rates andthose that you might have expected to be associated with an intendedlevel of borrowing into two separate kinds of misses. One is the missthat stems from the relationship between actual borrowing and thefunds rate that comes to pass. We found that that was a pretty looserelationship. There was a standard error of about 60 basis points;two-thirds of the time you could expect to be plus or minus 60 basispoints from the mean on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about a report that was requested and the findings of that report.


Passage number 60.
 There's a lot of short-term noise inthat relationship, having to do with the pattern of reserves shifting,unusual borrowing that might occur, the pattern of reserve provision,actual demand--7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that on a weekly-average basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating various factors and asking a question for clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 61.
MR. KOHN. A two-week average. There are also some longer-term shifts in that relationship. One was identified during theperiod of the Continental Illinois crisis, when banks obviously becamemore reluctant to use the discount window because they were concernedabout being seen as borrowing in that period. More recently, asmaller shift occurred last year when banks' desire to borrow alsoseemed to be less than might have been expected based on the long-termaverage.A second source of misses involves a deviation of actualborrowing from the borrowing that was intended, that is, the borrowinglevel that was put in the path. There we can have misses in excessreserves and estimates of excess and required reserves. Once again,the pattern of reserves provision and borrowing in the period can giverise to these sorts of misses. I think an important finding in thepaper is that there tend to be some offsets among the different kindsof errors that can be found in this relationship. So, the loosenessof a piece of the relationship--say, the relationship betweenborrowing and the funds rate spread--viewed by itself does not showthrough to the differences or the looseness between the actual fundsrate and the funds rate that was anticipated by the Desk. There areactions by the Desk in supplying reserves and by the market in keepingthe funds rate at levels that it believes consistent with the Deskprojection that tend to reduce quite substantially the standard errorsassociated with the difference between realized funds rates and fundsrates anticipated by the Desk. In the end, I think the relationshiplooks loose, but not all that loose. The current operatingprocedures, and the Desk and market actions that go with them, doprovide an anchor to the federal funds rate. But there is room formarket forces or for unanticipated misses in reserves to show throughin this relationship. Sometimes that can occur in desired ways: thatis, the market can push us toward higher or lower funds rates inanticipation of something we might end up doing; sometimes it couldmove the other way.With regard to the last intermeeting period, the problem wasprimarily the difference between the actual borrowing that occurredand the borrowing that was in the path. I think there were severalparticular problems that built on themselves in that period. One wasthe problem with the Treasury balance and the tax payments, which bothbuilt up the required reserves much higher than anyone had thought anddrained more actual reserves than anyone had estimated as the Treasurybalance came through. As a result, through almost the entire periodthe Desk found itself fighting reserve shortages, and much largerreserve shortages, than anyone--the Desk, the New York Fed, the Board,or the Treasury--was estimating. So it was constantly behind in thatway. Secondly, of course, there were a lot of market expectations atthat time that we would be firming. And the markets tended to pushthe federal funds rate up in anticipation of some firming of policy,given what was happening to the dollar and inflation. In some sense,I think borrowing rose in response to the market's push of the fundsrate up; there was extra inducement to borrow at the window. So,there were a number of factors that came together in the intermeetingperiod before the May 19th meeting that tended to give much largermisses between actual and intended borrowing than we ever hadexperienced before, except at year-end periods.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is discussing the relationship between borrowing and the federal funds rate, and whether it is loose or not. He believes that the relationship appears loose, but not all that loose, highlighting the potential for market forces or unanticipated misses in reserves to influence the relationship. However, others may disagree with his assessment and argue that the relationship is much looser.


Passage number 62.
7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The phrase "7/7/87 Comments" simply indicates that comments were made on a particular date, but it does not convey any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 63.
MR. JOHNSON. First, I want to say that I found this to be areally outstanding review of the issue and a very good report. Forour own purposes, it might be useful to go through this exercise everyso often to re-address the issue and to feel comfortable with it. Ithink it was very useful. I don't have any major questions; the studypretty much explains a lot. But a couple of things struck me as Iread through this that I wanted to bring up today. One is that Inoticed, at least over the period I looked at, that there appeared tobe an upward bias in actual borrowings relative to predicted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 64.
 Thiswas only over about a 3-1/2 year period, I think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Relative to intended.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact or opinion without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 65.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes--relative to intended. I wonder if youhave a good feel for what might be causing that. I think the Chairmanmentioned yesterday a very plausible explanation for certain periods:obviously, when you get to very low frictional levels of borrowing--when you're targeting something like $300 million or less--the bias isgoing to be on the upside because there's not a lot of downsideopportunity. But there's a positive bias that appears to occur over along period. Chart 2 summarizes the information, and it does tend toshow that when targeted borrowing levels were fairly low, that's whena lot of positive bias occurred. But I wonder if you went back over alonger period if you'd still see that positive bias and if it'srelated also to periods when targeted borrowings were very high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Johnson, discussing the potential causes of a positive bias in certain periods of borrowing.


Passage number 66.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the passage for me to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 67.
 I'm not--MR. JOHNSON. If you look at chart 2 you can see a positivebias there. I just wonder what you sense there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing curiosity about the positive bias shown in chart 2 and seeking the input or opinion of someone else.


Passage number 68.
MR. KOHN. I think a lot of the bias occurs in 1985,abstracting from the most recent period, which is a separate subject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kohn expressing his opinion about bias occurring in 1985.


Passage number 69.
MR. JOHNSON. Right. And borrowings were averaging fairlylow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply indicates that borrowings were averaging fairly low.


Passage number 70.
MR. KOHN. Our findings were that low borrowings versus highborrowings didn't really affect that funds rate relationship verymuch. However, when borrowings are low, there is a tendency to comein a little high because if something unusual occurs--for example, acomputer breakdown where some bank doesn't receive a wire and doesjust a little borrowing, particularly if it happens over a weekend--itcan give a big boost relative to a very low two-week average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their findings about the relationship between low borrowings and the funds rate.


Passage number 71.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree. It just seems to me that thatought to be factored into the expected borrowings to some extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, states that he agrees with the previous statement and offers his own opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 72.
MR. KOHN. We often do that. Peter Sternlight can comment onthis. When we have an unusual amount of borrowings that pushes upborrowing relative to what we expect, we can't take it into accountahead of time because by its very nature we don't anticipate it. ButPeter often takes that into account in his intentions through the restof the period. I think that's one of the offsets that we get thatkeeps the funds rate close to [expectations]. As for the 1985 period,one thing that was going on then was that excess reserves were rising7/7/87through that period more rapidly than we were expecting them to. Wekept writing up the excess reserves numbers incorporated into thepath; but, in some sense, we were lagging a little behind as that washappening. So I think that period has a particular explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and describing the factors that influenced the funds rate in the past.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the question remains--and you maynot know the answer now--but the one period on this chart whenborrowings were fairly high, which was in 1984, that bias didn't seemto exist. Is that typical, in fact, of other periods when the targetwas $900 million, or $1 billion, or $1-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking information or confirmation about a specific period of time.


Passage number 74.
MR. KOHN. I don't know; we can find out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
MR. JOHNSON. It would be interesting to know that. I havetwo other questions. One major issue is this: I realize that there'sa standard error plus or minus--I'm talking about borrowings relativeto the funds rate and the standard error you mentioned of about 60basis points--that creates noise in the system. If so, there's acertain amount of that noise that we have to accept; but that's plusor minus. There's a difference between that and the long-term issueof when we detect some sort of shift. I think the question arisesthere [unintelligible] policy shifts, that we're making a monetarypolicy adjustment whether we are doing anything or not. And thequestion is: If we detect a long-run shift in the borrowing functionshould we try and offset that in some way. Otherwise, we reallyaccept a policy adjustment because nonborrowed reserves are going tobe lower or higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson raises a question about whether a long-term shift in the borrowing function should be offset in some way, while the rest of the passage does not address or respond to this question.


Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you equate policy with interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that if someone equates policy with interest rates.


Passage number 77.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, yes, but nonborrowed reserves would beaffected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no apparent contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker simply acknowledges that nonborrowed reserves would be affected.


Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but as an AI language model, I cannot answer your question without understanding the content of the passage or having more context. Please provide the passage, and I'll be happy to assist you.


Passage number 79.
]MR. JOHNSON. Maybe borrowings wouldn't, but the nonborrowedpath would be affected to some extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement expressing a possibility or speculation rather than a conflicting opinion.


Passage number 80.
 So I don't know--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This question arose in the summer of '84,for instance. We got a much higher funds rate at a given level ofborrowings than we had anticipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and expressing uncertainty about the situation.


Passage number 81.
MR. JOHNSON. My question is: What do we do about it when wedecide that there has been a long-run shift in the function or whenthere's a consensus that that has developed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question about the action to be taken when there is agreement or consensus on a long-run shift in function.


Passage number 82.
 I guess it's justsomething that ought to be brought before the FOMC, to acknowledgethere's a shift and then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests discussing a shift before the FOMC.


Passage number 83.
 It sure is [unintelligible] when it hasalready been that for a while, that's--MR. JOHNSON. Sure it has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is agreeing with the previous statement.


Passage number 84.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Sternlight, therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 85.
 It seems to me that it is the nature of theBluebook discussion to bring that kind of shift to the Committee'sattention in a normal way before it's in the--7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To some degree this question arises atevery meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that a certain question arises at every meeting.


Passage number 86.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "MR. JOHNSON" does not provide any information or indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 87.
 Sometimes, though, we don't have enoughinformation to decide whether it's just noise or real--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's usually the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement in the passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that sometimes there is not enough information to determine if something is noise or real, and it adds that this is usually the case.


Passage number 88.
MR. JOHNSON. That's usually the case, yes. The lastquestion that I had was about seasonal borrowing. It seems to me thatthere's always been a bit of a question about whether seasonalborrowing should be included and, if so, to what extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's observation and question about seasonal borrowing.


Passage number 89.
MR. KOHN. Our findings are that seasonal borrowing isinterest sensitive--sensitive to the spread. It's not quite asinterest sensitive as adjustment borrowing but, as I think is pointedout in the footnote here, when we fit the whole equation--totalseasonal and adjustment borrowing--on the spread, we cannot find aseasonal influence that is separate from the influence of the spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents the findings of the research without any conflicting perspectives or contradictory statements.


Passage number 90.
So, from that kind of finding, it would appear that including or notincluding seasonal borrowing wouldn't significantly affect--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say. There's no seasonal inseasonal borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement discussing the potential impact of including or not including seasonal borrowing.


Passage number 91.
MR. KOHN. Well, there is a seasonal in seasonal borrowing,but it's not large enough to come through in the overall--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about seasonal borrowing without any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
 When welook at seasonal borrowing by itself we find a significant seasonal;but when we lump it in with adjustment borrowing that seasonal getsswamped by all the other--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But isn't that because we're aiming at atotal borrowing figure including the seasonal. Otherwise, we offsetthe seasonal in the seasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is pointing out that when seasonal borrowing is considered alone, it is significant. However, the other person argues that the reason it seems less significant is that they are aiming for a total borrowing figure that includes the seasonal borrowing. This suggests a difference in perspective and disagreement about how to analyze or present the data.


Passage number 93.
MR. LINDSEY. Well, it's looking at borrowings as they relateto the spreads. So, what we're looking for is the seasonal in thatrelationship, not just in the quantity per se. As Don said, in thatrelationship for the total adjustment plus seasonal borrowing we'renot able to pick up statistically significant seasonal effects, thoughthey do appear in a seasonal borrowing relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 94.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say your relationship between theborrowing total and the funds rate doesn't change seasonally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is stating a relationship between the borrowing total and the funds rate, without indicating any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 95.
MR. LINDSEY. In a systematic way, that's what we find.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lindsey is stating a statement or observation without any opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even though the seasonal total itself isseasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is stating a fact that the seasonal total exists.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
MR. KOHN. Yes. In effect, we're saying that the seasonalinfluence isn't strong enough to push the whole thing around. TheDesk actually has a different view of that. Frequently, they see ahigher seasonal [influence].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "The Desk actually has a different view of that" indicates that there is a differing opinion or perspective being presented.


Passage number 98.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. JOHNSON" seems to be a simple identification or introduction of Mr. Johnson, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 99.
 But you're saying whether we include it or not,it's not really an important--7/7/87MR. KOHN. Clearly, it works in the direction that in thesummer--the seasonal peak is usually in July and August--we would haveless adjustment borrowing and potentially a slightly lower federalfunds rate than we would in the middle of the winter for a given levelof borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating a fact and discussing the potential impact of including or not including certain factors.


Passage number 100.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forget: How much does the seasonalborrowing swing in a normal year. Is that [unintelligible] orsomething.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  While there is some confusion or uncertainty about the specific information being asked, there is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
MR. KOHN. Yes, close to it. It would have a trough of $100million and a peak of $300 million, and in a tight year such as 1984,maybe $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the peak of the budget would be $300 million, but then suggests that in a tight year like 1984, it could potentially be as high as $400 million. This discrepancy in numbers indicates that there is some level of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 102.
MR. JOHNSON. So you don't think that taking it out wouldhave any effect on the standard error.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is asking for the other person's opinion or belief on a topic.


Passage number 103.
MR. KOHN. I guess, consistent with the findings, it wouldn'treduce it very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn is simply expressing his agreement with the findings.


Passage number 104.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage only provides information about Mr. Johnson, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
 But I think we did say--MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 106.
 But the problem is--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But if we got to a lower level ofborrowings that would probably aggravate the problem you were justtalking about before. In other words, there would be less cushion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a potential problem or consequence that could arise from reaching a lower level of borrowings. They are not contradicting or arguing against any previous statement or point.


Passage number 107.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 108.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the overall mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention or imply any disagreement or contention about the overall mechanism.


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply a title or designation for a person, and it does not suggest any conflicting perspectives or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 110.
 I certainly don't think it makes muchdifference if the level of borrowings is $1 billion or something, butmaybe if it is so low--MR. ANGELL. The problem is that if you take seasonalborrowing out, it is no longer under control the same way that openmarket operations are. You have to ask yourself: Are seasonalborrowings more like adjustment borrowings or more like open marketsupply credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their belief that the level of borrowings does not make much difference, while Mr. Angell disagrees and argues that seasonal borrowings are not under control in the same way as open market operations.


Passage number 111.
 And I think it's--MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or arguments. It appears to be a neutral statement without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 112.
 Well, that's what I was--MR. ANGELL. The answer, it would seem to me, is that it'smore like adjustment borrowing than it is like open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by an opinion, but there is no disagreement presented.


Passage number 113.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To an extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "to an extent" suggests that there may be some level of contention or disagreement present in the passage, but without any additional context, it cannot be definitively determined.


Passage number 114.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, maybe we should apply some adjustmentfactor to it to deal with just the seasonal element. I don't know ifthat's possible; but if it is possible, we might be able to correctthe seasonal borrowing for seasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an idea or possibility without contradicting or opposing anyone else's statement.


Passage number 115.
MR. ANGELL. In other words, you'd like to have the seasonalborrowing have a seasonal influence; thereby, if we had a $500 millionseasonal target, then it might be adjusted seasonally to be $540million or $470 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 116.
-10-7/7/87MR. JOHNSON. Something like that. I don't know if it'sdoable; I'm just saying it's worth thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing an idea and suggesting that it is worth considering without opposing or contradicting any previous statements.


Passage number 117.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only states "MR. ANGELL" without providing any additional information or context. Without any further details or statements, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 118.
 That would tend to give you--MR. HELLER. Otherwise, you are always counter steering withyour adjustment borrowing and that's the variable that gets squeezed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing an explanation of a concept without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 119.
MR. JOHNSON. It's worth thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply encourages the reader to consider a certain idea without expressing any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 120.
MR. KOHN. Okay. One option would be to include the seasonalin with the extended credit. We could treat it as an exogenous factoraffecting "nonborrowed" reserves. That would be just targeting onadjustment credit. Our feeling is that the seasonal is sufficientlyresponsive to interest rates and, as I think you or the Chairman said,that its behavior is somewhere in between adjustment and extendedcredit, and we've included it with the adjustment credit. I think itdoes respond to interest rate spreads; it's not truly seasonal, that'sfor sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a proposed option and their reasoning behind it.


Passage number 121.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple acknowledgment or confirmation.


Passage number 122.
MR. ANGELL. I think it would be better to leave it in andput a seasonal factor on it than it would be to take it out and treatit like extended credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is offering their opinion on a particular course of action, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented or any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 123.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Governor Angell put his finger on it insaying that you need to ask if it is more like the adjustment creditor more like something that we want to compensate for totally, likethe extended credit. I think it has some elements of both, andprobably is closer to the adjustment credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply presents different perspectives on the topic without arguing or contradicting each other.


Passage number 124.
MR. JOHNSON. I'm just saying that you might want to leave itin, but still make some adjustments to that number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage suggests that there is a suggestion being offered, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, possibly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is possibly contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the use of the word "possibly," which suggests that Mr. Sternlight is uncertain or open to the existence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 126.
MR. HELLER. The question is whether you have enoughconfidence in your seasonal factors to do it with any degree ofprecision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about confidence in seasonal factors.


Passage number 127.
 If you don't, then you're better off--MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I don't want to send us off on somefrivolous exercise; I'm just saying it might be worth thinking aboutif there's a way that you feel comfortable dealing with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that it might be worth considering a certain approach, but does not oppose any previous statement or viewpoint.


Passage number 128.
MR. KOHN. Why don't we look a little more closely at therelationship with and without the seasonal and see whether we can comeup with a plan if, after looking at that relationship, it looks likeit's worth doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 129.
MR. HELLER. Is that seasonal borrowing also concentrated incertain institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question being asked and seeking clarification.


Passage number 130.
MR. KOHN. Well, it's in smaller institutions by policy--Regulation A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kohn simply states that Regulation A is implemented in smaller institutions as a policy.


Passage number 131.
 It's primarily in agricultural banks, but it's also inareas that have tourism and in some other areas subject to seasonal---11-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you do any study as to how sensitive,let's say, the federal funds rate is--that is, what kind ofrelationship you get with net borrowed reserves or free reservesinstead of borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It is discussing the presence of certain factors (agricultural banks, tourism, seasonal areas) without presenting any conflicting views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
MR. KOHN. Yes, we did free reserves, net borrowed reserves,and it did not improve the relationship; in fact, it was worse inrecent years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The statement "it did not improve the relationship; in fact, it was worse in recent years" suggests that there is a difference in opinion about the effectiveness of the mentioned strategies.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 133.
 In the LRR period it was about the same; but in the CRRperiod the excess reserves have fluctuated and we've made moreadjustments, so the free reserves--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess if you're going to follow thisgeneral approach, it's better to target borrowings than free reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The mention of "if you're going to follow this general approach" suggests that there are different approaches or opinions on whether to target borrowings or free reserves.


Passage number 134.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 135.
 We do make adjustments in the excess reserveallowance as those demands change, over time; and that would beincorporated into a strict reserves--MS. SEGER. What do the relationships look like if you don'twash out the variations within a maintenance period. It seems to methat by averaging that you would knock off quite a bit of thevariation before you do your statistical study.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that not washing out the variations within a maintenance period would have an impact on the relationships being studied. This implies a disagreement or questioning of the methods being used.


Passage number 136.
MR. LINDSEY. Yes, that's right. The daily variation wouldbe much larger than what we've shown here. We have looked at this inthe past, and we've found that on settlement day over the last fewyears we have gotten more variation than we did previous to theintroduction of CRR in 1984. On the other hand, the quarter-ends(except for the year-ends) seem to be somewhat muted by the two-weekperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing past findings and observations about daily and quarterly variations. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 137.
MR. PARRY. Don, your work indicates that the relationshipbetween the spread and borrowing is linear. Is it more reasonable tothink of that as a nonlinear relationship, since banks have a tendencyto become more reluctant to borrow as that spread widens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry suggests that it is more reasonable to think of the relationship between the spread and borrowing as nonlinear, while the other person (Don) believes it is linear.


Passage number 138.
MR. LINDSEY. In some earlier work that we did here, inconnection with the evaluation of the new operating procedures in1980, Peter Tinsley and his colleagues did estimate a borrowingfunction that, instead of being linear as we've drawn it, showed thatas borrowings got to higher and higher levels the associated increasein the funds rate tended to rise faster.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a finding from previous work by Peter Tinsley and his colleagues.


Passage number 139.
MR. PARRY. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Mr. Parry. Right." without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 140.
MR. LINDSEY. On the other hand, there has been somesentiment among commenters on this memorandum, that perhaps in some ofthe more recent data the relationship bends the other way since, afterall, as borrowings increase more and more, each $100 million involvesa smaller percentage change. So, confronted with two alternativessuggesting the opposite, we took a hard look at these data and justfit a straight line through them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that there has been some sentiment among commenters about a possible alternative perspective. However, the passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. Instead, the speaker mentions that they analyzed the data and fit a straight line.


Passage number 141.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 142.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I react to this along the followinglines. The whole thing, as a matter of perspective, represents aseries of technical relationships that are the first step in a long,7/7/87long, linkage between what we do and prices and all the things wereally care about. Looked at in that light, I walk away somewhatamazed that it works as well as it does. Indeed, when you look at thenet deviations as summarized either on chart 2 or chart 5, I'm hardpressed to conclude that any of them is likely to have any net effecton real economic variables or prices or anything else. Indeed, thedeviations are in that sense, I think, astonishingly small. So, it'sreassuring to me in that sense. But what is a little troubling aboutit to me is that it comes pretty darn close to saying that, despiteall our protestations to the contrary, we're really operating on thefederal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is expressing their reaction to a situation and discussing their observations and thoughts about it.


Passage number 143.
MR. PARRY. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply mentions Mr. Parry.


Passage number 144.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I find that troubling because we'vebeen down that path before; and to the extent we seduce ourselves backinto that I think it could come back to haunt us in the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It expresses a personal concern and cautionary statement, but does not mention conflicting opinions or perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I didn't read this carefully, but Icame out with the opposite conclusion: that the relationship is soloose that we're not doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of the word "opposite" suggests that the author has a different interpretation or conclusion than someone else, indicating a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 146.
MR. JOHNSON. I guess the point is that even if we are, westill think of the funds rate as a check against the borrowings. Iknow that from sitting in on the [daily] call. Many times the fundsrate is used as a check to gauge whether the reserve estimates arecorrect. If the funds rate starts to move off from where we wouldhave expected, given the reserve estimates, we seem to second guessour Treasury balance numbers and our excess reserve numbers andnaturally assume that our reserve estimates are off because the fundsrate is strange. Therefore, the Desk tends to do more or less in theopen market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 147.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's one thing. In that case, thefunds rate is being used appropriately, in my judgment, as aninformation variable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's judgment on the appropriate use of the funds rate as an information variable.


Passage number 148.
MR. JOHNSON. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement by Mr. Johnson without any other conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 149.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's telling you something. Indeed,some of those deviations--which, again, I regard as small in netterms--ultimately reflect a willingness to let the federal funds rateat times tell us something. But that's a little different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is expressing the author's view that deviations in the federal funds rate, although small, sometimes provide valuable information.


Passage number 150.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree. And that's a short-term viewversus a longer-term policy issue. But I'm just saying that even ifwe were trying to target the funds rate, the question still remains:Are we targeting the funds rate to affect the aggregates or reservesor are we just trying to stabilize the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an agreement between Mr. Johnson and an acknowledgment of a question that remains.


Passage number 151.
 In other words, wecould target the funds rate at various levels over short periods thatwould affect the aggregates, and I think that's basically what we'redoing, as one means of sort of trying to--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's always what I thought we weredoing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 152.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any opposing viewpoints or disagreement between different individuals.


Passage number 153.
-13-7/7/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But when I got through reading thisI got a little nervous on the other side of the ledger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a feeling of nervousness after reading something.


Passage number 154.
MR. JOHNSON. If you let the funds rate drift off somewhere,over the long run it's eventually going to affect the aggregates. Soyou can't really look at one without the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that the funds rate and the aggregates are interconnected and cannot be considered separately. It does not imply any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 155.
MR. BLACK. The most important argument for using theborrowed reserve target is that it gives us a certain amount ofpolitical insulation so that we can let the federal funds rate movemore than we otherwise would be able to do. That to me is theimportant decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply presents an argument for using the borrowed reserve target without any opposing viewpoints or alternative arguments being presented.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are all kinds of interestingquestions and implications toward operating techniques which I willdeclare after this discussion will not be acted on at this particularmeeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have further questions and implications to consider, but they acknowledge that they will not address them in this specific meeting.


Passage number 157.
MR. JOHNSON. I think you're right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson agrees with the speaker.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume that the operating techniqueswill remain the same, for this meeting anyway. Let's turn to theeconomic situation. I gaze down at the other end of the table andnote that we have a few other changes. You are aware that Mr.Kichline will leave us in a couple of weeks. He has been at that endof the table during my whole Chairmanship; I don't know how I'm goingto get along without him but I see some able-bodied, capable peopledown there to lead me through this meeting anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges changes and expresses uncertainty about how they will manage, but there is no conflict or disagreement present.


Passage number 159.
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As usual, we'vedistributed to you a set of charts; they are entitled "StaffPresentation". [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply thanking the chairman and informing them that they have distributed a set of charts.


Passage number 160.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it was a comprehensive presentation,very complete in all senses. It can now be attacked. Are there anyattackers. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the presentation could be criticized or opposed by others.


Passage number 161.
MR. PARRY. I have two questions. With regard to theinflation assumptions for 1988 and what might be the interest rateimplications: We have a forecast of inflation that is really not verymuch different from what you have for 1988. But to achieve that, tokeep a lid on inflation, we had to generate some slack in the economyand that was done by having short-term rates--in this case thecommercial paper rate--rise a little more than 200 basis points to 9percent. In your principal assumptions you referred to an appreciablerise in interest rates over the projection period. I wonder if youcould be more specific. What is the extent of that increase in ratesand where would you have the commercial paper rate at the end of 1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification and specific details.


Passage number 162.
MR. PRELL. We've made assumptions about both short- andlong-term interest rates. As I indicated, we see Treasury bond ratesmoving back above the 9 percent level that we saw just recently. Onthe short end we are looking at federal funds trading above 8 percentby some time in 1988. That would be a shade less of an increase thanyou're talking about but in the same general ballpark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different assumptions about short- and long-term interest rates, with Mr. Prell suggesting a slightly lower increase than what the other person is talking about. However, there is no argument or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 163.
MR. PARRY. I see. The second question is [about inflation.]Your forecast for 1988 has a slight upward trend in the last three-14-7/7/87quarters in the fixed-weight deflator. And, if I remember correctly,you have import prices rising about 10 percent, the dollar decliningless than 10 percent, and little slack in the economy given that theunemployment rate remains relatively constant around 6.3 percent. Ifyou were to continue your projection beyond 1988, it sounds to me asthough your forecast implies that inflation rates continue to move upin 1989. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the forecast mentioned.


Passage number 164.
MR. PRELL. I think the answer is that much would depend onsuch things as what happens to the dollar in the latter part of thecurrent projection period and into 1989. Another uncertainty is, ofcourse, what the implication of any unemployment rate level might befor inflationary pressures. But our forecast certainly hints ofongoing pressure on compensation coming from the price increases thatwe have forecast and the risk that if the dollar continued to declinesubstantially into 1989 there would probably be some furtheracceleration in general inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting potential uncertainties and factors that could influence the forecast.


Passage number 165.
MR. PARRY. But even a decline in the dollar through 1988would probably have some inflationary impact in 1989.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a prediction about the potential inflationary impact if the dollar were to decline in 1988.


Passage number 166.
MR. PRELL. That's why I mentioned it for the latter part of1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no obvious contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply mentions something and explains the reason for bringing it up.


Passage number 167.
MR. PARRY. Yes. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Parry is simply expressing his gratitude.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage is incomplete, as it only contains the name "Mr. Boehne." Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 169.
MR. BOEHNE. Ted, I wonder if you could comment on how yousee the business outlook for some of our major trading partners,Germany, Japan, England, etc..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a straightforward request for the speaker's opinion on the business outlook for major trading partners. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 170.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think the answer to your question is notterribly robust. As that chart that I referred to shows, for thosecountries the growth is in the 2 percent range, on average. Growth indomestic demand is somewhat faster. The current situation presents asomewhat mixed picture. Germany, after a very weak first quarter,which was partly a seasonal weakness that is not seasonally adjusted[in the statistics], seems to have moved quite rapidly in the firstcouple of months of the second quarter, according to the availabledata. Unfortunately, Germany has shown more strength in theirexternal accounts than one might want to see from our perspective.Japan, on the other hand, had a better first quarter and things seemto have become a little soggier in the second quarter. However, theyhave put in place the fiscal package that was announced just after thelast FOMC meeting, and that was somewhat more than we had expected.That has led us to boost our forecast of growth in Japan for this yearand next year. So, we have real growth in the 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percentrange in that country and in the 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent range inGermany. The somewhat prolonged slowdown in growth in Germany doesseem to be having some effects on the rest of western Europe. I thinkthe projection for France also has been marked down in recent months.The only country in western Europe that seems to be doing quite wellis the United Kingdom. It all depends on how you read these things,but that in part seems to reflect a boost from the depreciation of thepound last year and the somewhat easier fiscal policy--they wouldn'tdescribe it that way--that they seem to have gone into this year. Wedo see some drop-off in growth in 1988, in part reflecting the fact7/7/87that the economy has recovered this year. And as far as Canada isconcerned, we see things largely dependent on [unintelligible]; so youfind growth in the 2 percent area next year. On balance, it's notmuch of a favorable picture and [there's] not much scope orwillingness to foster very much [further growth]. We have built intothe forecast some further downward adjustment in the interest rates inthese countries, though I would say it's quite modest, presumablytriggered by a discount [rate cut] or [unintelligible] some exchangemarket pressures to bring that about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker presents a mixed picture of the economic growth in various countries and expresses concern about the lack of favorable conditions and limited scope for further growth. There seems to be a disagreement between the speaker's view and a more positive view that may exist.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
 Aside from the Japanese fiscalpackage, which we assume will pass before the [unintelligible] go intoeffect, and the German tax cut that comes in the first quarter of nextyear, we really have no other major policy that--MR. BOEHNE. Have you given any thought to what theimplications of the outlook in the United States plus the outlook thatyou just gave for Europe and Japan might have on the less developedcountries and their external accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions the Japanese fiscal package and the German tax cut as major policies, but Mr. Boehne questions if there has been any consideration given to the implications of the outlook in the United States, Europe, and Japan on the less developed countries. This suggests disagreement or potential contention regarding the focus and effectiveness of major policies in addressing global economic concerns.


Passage number 172.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, and that has deteriorated noticeably butnot in demand for right now. Since April, for example, we have [beenprojecting] a deterioration in the current account next year ofroughly $4 billion for the [unintelligible] of the developingcountries. That reflects the influence of somewhat weaker growth inthe industrial world and somewhat higher interest rates and slightlybetter commodity prices, on average, at least relative to early Aprilwhere the [unintelligible] occur. But that effect has been negative--much of it coming from interest rate assumptions. Now, that's notenough to upset the apple cart, but it could rebalance the apples inthe cart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 173.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage itself does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 175.
MR. FORRESTAL. What surprised me about this forecast wasyour projection of real consumption, consumer spending. It's really aquite low level in 1988. It seems to me that on the one hand, you'reprojecting increased industrial production, which I would have thoughtwould have increased disposable income, and yet you're not showing anyincrease in the saving rate. I would have thought that you would havea higher level of consumer expenditures. What am I missing in thatequation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Forrestal is simply expressing his surprise and seeking clarification about the projections presented to him.


Passage number 176.
MR. PRELL. Well, we have some modest growth in manufacturingemployment going with the stronger industrial production but thosegains are not large by any means. We see overall employment growthslowing from the pace of the last couple of years. Layered on top ofwhat would be moderate growth in nominal personal income would be moresizable consumer price increases--not more sizable than we've seen inthe first half of this year but more sizable by far than we had overthe past year or two. And thus, that's eroding real income, laborincome, by a substantial amount. So, as I pointed out, we have gainsin income and expenditures of a similar magnitude. This is very lowgrowth in consumption expenditures, particularly in a nonrecessionperiod. But consumption expenditures have been very high relative toeconomic activity. And consumer durables have been growing verystrongly. There's probably much less pent-up demand for consumerdurables than there has been. We think the financial situation on the-16-7/7/87whole is one in which we probably will not see the kind ofaggressiveness of spending relative to income that we've seen over thepast few years. So, that is the story behind our admittedly very weakprojection of consumption expenditures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing the current economic situation and making projections for future consumption expenditures, but there is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a very optimistic projection from onepoint of view. That has to happen to release the resources for theimprovement in the external account and produce some savings; itdoesn't produce very much. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing an optimistic projection and acknowledging the limited impact it has in terms of producing savings. The mention of Mr. Stern does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 178.
MR. STERN. If the dollar were to level off relative toforeign currencies about where it is now, what do you think that woulddo to our real trade position over this forecast period and to theaggregate forecast that you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for an opinion or prediction about the potential effect of the dollar's stability on trade position and overall forecast.


Passage number 179.
MR. TRUMAN. It depends a bit on what else goes along withthat, in particular whether the dollar leveling off and presumably alittle less inflationary pressure would lead to the same kind ofinterest rate projection or trend or a somewhat easier one. But, anobviously easier one needs to result in more gain on income. In termsof where you would be in the fourth quarter of next year, it wouldmean roughly between $20 and $30 billion, depending on whichassumption you make on the real net export side. And it would bemaybe between $5 and $10 billion on the current account side by theend of the projection period to keep GNP unchanged. In the worstcase, using the higher number in terms of losses, if you keep GNPunchanged and you get the $10 billion and $30 billion (nominal andreal)--if you essentially let the tighter policy show through--giventhe passage of the exchange rate pressures, you would lose a halfpercentage point or so on the level of GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of possibilities and projections regarding the impact of certain economic factors on GNP.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 180.
 You'll get $5 to $10billion off--MR. STERN. I guess what bothers me about this forecast isthat you have the dollar going down somewhat further and interestrates higher than they were the last time we met, and you have takensomething off real growth. The directions are all right but it seemsto me that the adjustment is kind of small. If things work out thatway, I would think we would be looking at slower growth than you havehere and something that would be approaching a stagflationenvironment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the forecast, stating that they believe the adjustment is too small and that the actual outcome could result in slower growth and a stagflation environment.


Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "Ms. Seger" without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 182.
MS. SEGER. I have one question for Ted Truman and one forMike Prell. For Ted: How is the rundown you gave of the growthforecast for these various major economies consistent with ourexpectation of a substantial pickup in exports. I keep thinking ourexports have to go someplace and England isn't going to buy them all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Seger is simply asking a question and expressing her thoughts about the potential destinations for exports.


Passage number 183.
MR. TRUMAN. First, I think the answer to that question, andthen you can ask Mike of course, is that domestic demand in thesecountries is growing faster--by 1/2 percentage point or more--thanproduction in these countries. And it is the difference betweendomestic demand and production that is absorbing the net imports. Itis generated not so much by relative income effects because of growthbut price effects. To put it more clearly, it's the other side of thegap we had in the early 1980s between domestic demand and production,against a background in which domestic demand will be growing more-17-7/7/87slowly. There is less help from income effects; [we're] relying to aconsiderable extent on the price effects that produce increases inexports. And as I noted, one particular problem in that area has todo with the role of protectionism, in a generalized sense, inweakening the link between relevant price changes and foreignexchange. Of course, part of the protectionism thrust comes from a"soggy" or not terribly dynamic world economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is providing an explanation of the relationship between domestic demand, production, and net imports, as well as discussing the role of protectionism in weakening this relationship.


Passage number 184.
MS. SEGER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage. Please provide the passage you are referring to.


Passage number 185.
 Well, do you think that there is enough zip orthat it's not so soggy that it will sabotage our interests--MR. TRUMAN. First of all, the growth we are anticipatingover this forecast period is not much different than we've had overthe past four quarters, and we have only a slightly faster pace forgrowth of non-agricultural exports, as we are all aware. So we're notrelying a lot on that further pickup in the rate of increase of ournon-agricultural exports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It presents factual information about anticipated growth and the reliance on non-agricultural exports.


Passage number 186.
MS. SEGER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 187.
 But we were badgering Germany and Japan, Ithought, to stimulate their economies so that there would be--MR. TRUMAN. I believe that we're better off, in some sense,than if they had chosen for their own reasons not to accelerate thetax cut in Germany and not to adopt the fiscal stimulus in the case ofJapan. But that's not enough to boost the overall level of productionin those countries; in fact, as I've commented, looking out into 1988we now see domestic demand slowing a bit further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that Germany and Japan are being pressured to stimulate their economies, while President Truman believes that it is not enough to boost overall production in those countries. This difference in opinion indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 188.
MS. SEGER. Okay, but it still makes me nervous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger expresses her nervousness, but there is no evidence of disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 189.
MR. TRUMAN. I share your nervousness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to be in agreement about feeling nervous.


Passage number 190.
MS. SEGER. For Mike: In reading the Greenbook and othermaterials that were distributed prior to the meeting, there's sort ofan underlying tone of an economy that's about to go into orbit. It'snot stated that way, and maybe I just read it wrong, but the forecastsuggests that private demand suddenly is going to explode and thatthere's going to be this inflationary surge. I went through all theindividual numbers and thought it through in my own mind, looking atthe different sectors and so forth, and I must say that I can't findone that is about to go off in a bit of robustness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply sharing their personal interpretation of the materials and expressing their own thoughts on the forecasts.


Passage number 191.
MR. PRELL. Governor Seger, if that was the impression weleft, that was not our intention. As I've noted, we have in fact verymodest growth of domestic spending in the forecast period. We thinkthings may pick up a bit in the near term on the consumer side, butonly because there are some autos that have to be cleared away beforetoo long--before we get well into the '88 model year. I suppose therecent indicators on business fixed investment have been a bitcheerier and, indeed, if one wanted to be optimistic one could seesome upside potential there relative to our forecast. Certainly, ourforecast is considerably weaker than any of the major surveys--Commerce, McGraw-Hill, and Merrill-Lynch--would suggest for theremainder of the year. If one became particularly bullish on thebasis of recent stories about the computer industry maybe we could beon the brink of another resurgence of high-tech spending. Butbasically, our thrust is not toward a boldness in the economy such asyou've referred to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and acknowledging alternative viewpoints, but there is no clear disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 192.
-18-7/7/87MR. PARRY. What deflator does the Commerce Department use ontheir surveys. Don't they use last year's price experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for information about the deflator used by the Commerce Department in their surveys.


Passage number 193.
MR. PRELL. Well, I was thinking of the nominal [GNP], butyes, the Commerce Department takes the experience over the most recentfour quarters and applies that as the deflator for the currentcalendar year's spending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the perspective of Mr. Prell and his thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 194.
 That gives us--MR. PARRY. So they're probably overstating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an observation or opinion by saying "they're probably overstating."


Passage number 195.
MR. PRELL. We're expecting a fairly low inflation in fixedinvestment prices this year. In fact, that computer factor that Imentioned for the second quarter would put equipment price inflationat essentially zero in that period. So it may be that they're notthat far off; but looking at nominal spending, the trajectory impliedto get their annual total is far steeper than we have in the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply pointing out that the trajectory implied by the nominal spending of others is steeper than what they have forecasted.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 196.
MR. PARRY. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker, Mr. Parry, responds with "Yes," indicating that he disagrees or holds a contrasting view compared to the previous statement or question.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage only mentions "Mr. Keehn," without providing any further details or context that would suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 198.
MR. KEEHN. I also have a question about the consumptionexpenditures, which I think look on the low side, particularly for1988. Cross-referencing a bit between [components of] the Greenbookforecast, specifically for autos, Mike, you are forecasting anincrease in auto sales next year yet durable expenditures seem awfullysoft. Maybe I missed it but what is your number for autos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a question about a specific number for autos.


Passage number 199.
MR. PRELL. Total auto sales next year are a shade over10-1/2 million units. We have about 10.3 million units for thecurrent year. The difference there is something of an artifact of thebulge that we had in the latter half of 1986 which borrowed some from1987. Looking at it in terms of the year from the fourth quarter wehave 10.7 million units in both years; auto sales provide essentiallyno contribution to growth for the period from the fourth quarter of1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988. I would note that cars are notthe only element of motor vehicle purchases by households at thistime. The sales of vans and trucks and light trucks are reallyrunning quite strong and may persist; that's not something that shouldbe ignored. There's little more I can add to what I said earlierabout our consumption forecast. It's not inconceivable that consumerswill not get over their increased bent for spending and that they willcontinue to spend. The short-run income developments, transitory forMay, [could lead consumers to be] very optimistic about the future andpush consumer spending up further. But we think that's not as likelyas what we have forecast; we feel that the strength we've seen hasbeen, in part, a reflection of those currents of trade movements oravailability of imported [goods] at attractive prices and that hasinfluenced a shift in the direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of statements and observations about auto sales and consumer spending without any conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 200.
MR. KEEHN. If you have a level of doubt about any part ofthe forecast is this one area where your doubt level is a littlehigher than in others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is doubt but does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 201.
MR. PRELL. Oh, I don't know. I'm always very doubtful aboutthe part that Ted is most [unintelligible]. But consumer spending isa very big sector, so a small error in one's thinking about it couldhave a big effect on overall GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's personal doubt about a specific topic, but there is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 202.
7/7/87MR. KEEHN. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude, indicating a positive and agreeable tone.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an answer without the passage you are referring to. Please provide the passage for further assistance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
MR. MORRIS. The number that I find rather depressing, and Iwant to make sure I understand it, is your projection that the Federaldeficit next year is going to be about the same as in fiscal 1987.After $25 billion of deficit reducing actions and after what I recallwas a fairly sizable increase in the Social Security surplus--which Iassume is in these numbers--we still end up with no change in theFederal deficit. And on top of that you're projecting a wiping out ofthe state and local government surplus, a low consumer saving rate,and some decline in the inflow of foreign capital associated with thereduction of our current account deficit. To me, all of this adds upto the possibility that we will see much higher interest rates, as aconsequence of all of these forces, than you have been suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, finds the projection of the Federal deficit to be depressing and questions why it is projected to be the same as in fiscal 1987 despite deficit-reducing actions and an increase in the Social Security surplus. He also suggests that these factors could lead to higher interest rates than what has been suggested.


Passage number 205.
Now, perhaps you didn't want to scare us but--MR. PRELL. There is a complex of things involved here.Clearly, our overall nominal GNP growth is not very rapid relative tothe kind of money that we have built into this forecast. It doesn'timply a large amount of interest rate pressure, certainly not morethan we have built in. On the outlook for the Federal budget, thesituation does look less favorable to us now than it did previously.In part, that's a result of our ongoing attempts to interpret theeffects of tax reform; the pattern of movement from year-to-yeardoesn't look as favorable at this point as it did before. And, ofcourse, with the kind of nominal income growth we have, we're notgenerating a tremendous growth of Federal revenues. Our Federalspending projection is not terribly robust but when we put all thesethings together, we come out with 1988 much closer--in fact almostidentical--to what we have for 1987 now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It consists of a speaker providing an analysis and interpretation of economic data and expressing their opinion on the outlook for the Federal budget. There is no indication of a conflicting view or argument within the passage.


Passage number 206.
MR. MORRIS. I suppose what could really cause us troublewould be if the improvement in our trade picture should lead to alarger increase in business investment expenditures than we'reprojecting here. That would put an awful lot of strain on the capitalmarkets with the government deficit not declining.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating a concern about the potential strain on capital markets if the increase in business investment exceeds projections. He is not arguing or disagreeing with any other person or viewpoint in the passage.


Passage number 207.
MR. PRELL. Yes, I think that's a possibility. We have builtinto our thinking some stimulus to investment coming from thisimprovement in manufacturing, and that's associated with the tradeimprovement. As we said, we think equipment spending will be fairlystrong and we may see some increase in industrial construction, too,as time passes. I should note that one other factor that has changedin our thinking from earlier in the year with respect to the 1988fiscal year budget is the higher level of interest rates that we haveseen come about. We have that extended a bit into the fiscal 1988period, so that is adding to the deficit. But in a sense that's sortof an artifact; many people would want to look at the so-calledprimary deficit without interest to get a better guide as to what theunderlying movement is. But it's adding something significant tothese numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different factors that have influenced their thinking and the potential impact on the deficit.


Passage number 208.
MR. MORRIS. The increase in the Social Security surplus isnot a very big factor for 1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Morris about the increase in the Social Security surplus being not a very big factor for 1988 is presented as a straightforward observation.


Passage number 209.
 Maybe I was--7/7/87MR. PRELL. Well, I must confess: I don't think we havespecific numbers on the surplus. It's clear that the trend over thenext decade or more is going to be in that direction; and for the 21stcentury I assume it's moving in that direction. It would be helped bythe increase in Federal taxes that will occur the first of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their assumption and opinion about the trend of the surplus and how it would be helped by an increase in Federal taxes.


Passage number 210.
MR. MORRIS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only provides a person's identification ("Mr. Melzer") without presenting any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 212.
MR. MELZER. Mike, I wanted to pursue your assumptions withrespect to money growth and your statement earlier. You have veryslow rates of growth of M2 and M3 over the projection period. As youmentioned before, I guess that's associated in part with risinginterest rates and increasing velocity. First of all, what's impliedfor M1 growth if you looked at that. And secondly, apparently you'recomfortable that the liquidity that's being provided, if you will, issufficient to sustain the type of expansion you're projecting. But Iwondered what that implied overall in terms of velocity behavior.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions and statements seeking clarification and information.


Passage number 213.
MR. PRELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 214.
 We think there's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I could say something, but I thinkwe'll get into this later in some more sophistication presumably thanMr. Prell has indicated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage suggests that there might be disagreement or a difference of opinion in relation to the topic being discussed, as the person is hesitant to speak and mentions the possibility of discussing it later in more depth.


Passage number 215.
MR. PRELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 216.
 Don Kohn has an exhibit that he'll be giving forthese--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presume that Mr. Kohn's presentation isgoing to revolve around those issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their assumption about the content of Mr. Kohn's presentation.


Passage number 217.
MR. MELZER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a response from Mr. Melzer, without any conflicting viewpoints or diverging opinions.


Passage number 218.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 219.
MR. JOHNSON. Ted, you said something about oil prices. Ithought you said something about rising oil demand so that we havepotential upside risk on the price level. But we have a verydepressed level of world demand it seems; I'm wondering where the risein oil demand would come from out of this whole picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is seeking clarification and asking for more information about the potential rise in oil demand.


Passage number 220.
MR. TRUMAN. All I was trying to suggest was that that's areason why we don't have prices going up. There was some furthersecular decline in U.S. production and the leveling off of some of theproduction in other non-OPEC sources of supply like the North Seas.But there was at the same time [unintelligible] on the production sideof the equation ex OPEC. And given some growth in GNP and productionaround the world--it's not bulging but it adds to demand, with theelasticity of something between 3/4 and 1 percent. So the question iswhether that differential is going to be absorbed by the substantialexcess capacity in OPEC, in particular in the Middle East, abstractingfrom military installations [unintelligible]. If it's going to beabsorbed by Saudi Arabia increasing its revenues by increasingproduction--which it clearly has the scope to do if it wants to--thatis one scenario. What happens to [unintelligible] in that way tostabilize prices and to not cause the kind of run-up in prices thatwould bring a presumption of exploration around the world in non-OPEC-21-7/7/87sources of supply. That is another scenario--a small gradual increaseof 1 million barrels a day roughly in the demand for OPEC oil, whichcould easily be accommodated by OPEC itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much is U.S. production down in thepast year or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply poses a question and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 222.
MR. TRUMAN. So far it's down something like 600,000 barrelsa day. The numbers are not great on this. And we have another coupleof hundred built into the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and acknowledges uncertainty or lack of precise numbers.


Passage number 223.
MR. JOHNSON. I also have are a comment on the interest ratepicture and a word in terms of the deficit. It's true that by yourprojection the deficit is not improving in '88 over '87, but you haveabout $300 or $400 billion more nominal GNP. I think the deficit-to-GNP ratio declines by about .3 or .4. So you have a slackening ofpressure there even with a constant number. In addition to that,you're estimating the same degree of capital flows. If I rememberright, there is not a dramatic change in capital flows from abroad.So, under your forecast there is going to be a still significantamount of foreign capital inflow [in relation] to the decliningdeficit-to-GNP ratio. On the state and local front, Frank, your stateand local numbers don't count the pension surpluses, which are verylarge. So, I don't see in this scenario big interest rate pressurescoming from the government side. Now, if those capital inflows werereally changing sharply you'd have a different picture. But that'snot the forecast. And the deficit declines as a percent of GNP. So,there seems to be an improvement on that side rather than a change inthe other direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is discussing and analyzing different aspects of the interest rate and deficit picture, providing additional information and perspectives without contradicting or disagreeing with the speaker.


Passage number 224.
MR. PRELL. But if you look at the numbers on a quarterlybasis you would see, for example, that our NIA deficit is moderatingover the forecast period to the end of 1988. We have about $158billion in the fourth quarter of 1988; and we have a projection of$187 billion for the current quarter. So there is a perceptibledownward movement. You are quite right about the surplus of thesocial insurance funds in the state and local sector which is runningabout $60 billion and edging up in our forecast. That sector as awhole, at least as measured in the national income accounts, is movingin the direction of additional net saving to offset some of theFederal deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents numerical data and explains the trends within those numbers.


Passage number 225.
MR. MORRIS. But you do have an absolute decline in theforeign capital inflows in 1988, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is asking for confirmation of a fact, specifically whether there was a decline in foreign capital inflows in 1988.


Passage number 226.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, of about $20 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 227.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need more context or the specific passage you are referring to in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 228.
 Not only as a percent of GNP but in absoluteterms so that--MR. JOHNSON. Yes. It's not dramatic but it's there. Itdoesn't change at all in 1987 I don't think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It is just a response stating that there is a change, but not a significant one.


Passage number 229.
 There is something inthere--MR. MORRIS. No, I'm talking about 1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It seems like one person is stating that there is something "in there" and another person, Mr. Morris, responds by saying they are talking about 1988. However, this exchange does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 230.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Based on the given information, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "yes" does not provide enough context to make a judgment.


Passage number 231.
-22-7/7/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What happens, Mike, to the netdomestic savings gap in 1988. In other words, what happens to thefinancing requirements of the government plus the private sectorrelative to net domestic savings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply asks a question about the changes in the net domestic savings gap in 1988.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 232.
MR. PRELL. I have to do the arithmetic to get to the net.Looking at the government sectors combined, as a percent of GNP wehave a 3.3 percent deficit last year moving down to 2.6 percent thisyear and then to 2.3 percent next year. So there's a significantmovement this year and then some modest further movement next yearwhile net foreign investment declines by 0.7 percent over that period.That is almost, I'll say, 3/4 of the movement in the governmentsector. In gross terms private saving is about unchanged for 1987 and1988 in our forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "In gross terms private saving is about unchanged for 1987 and 1988 in our forecast" indicates a disagreement with the previous statement about a significant movement in the government sector. The passage suggests that while there may be changes in the government sector, private savings remain relatively stable.


Passage number 233.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As a percent of GNP or in absoluteterms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating two different ways to measure something (as a percent of GNP or in absolute terms), without implying any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 234.
MR. PRELL. As a percent of GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of fact.


Passage number 235.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So the net is slightly worse off in1988 than in 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states that the net is slightly worse off in 1988 than in 1987. There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement as it is simply presenting a comparison between the two years.


Passage number 236.
MR. PRELL. Net, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or confirmation that the term "net" is correct.


Passage number 237.
MR. TRUMAN. One of the problems is that these statements arein nominal terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Truman about a problem without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 238.
 If you look at the real terms you get a somewhatdifferent picture because the real adjustment on the external sideis--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is providing an alternative perspective or additional information, but there is no direct contention or disagreement.


Passage number 239.
 But for financing purposes thereal--MR. TRUMAN. Right, but the resource allocation implicationsof the reallocation exercise are more difficult, in some sense, on thefinancial side. They do get more reshuffling [unintelligible] side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement made by Mr. Truman and adds that the resource allocation implications are more difficult on the financial side. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is asking if anyone else has a question, which does not indicate any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 241.
MR. MELZER. I just want to ask: I assume the way you'vestated interest rates as an assumption means they are more or less anendogenous variable here. Where would this come apart had you notprojected the kind of increase in rates that you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification and understanding.


Passage number 242.
MR. PRELL. Well, I think we would have tendencies towardgreater inflation and a weaker dollar. And the kind of accelerationwe would see in the inflation rate next year would be a significantchange from what we had. I think you would notice it; that up-tiltwould be considerably greater. These are matters of degree. Wehaven't changed our interest rate forecast from last time to thistime. The change is not drastic, really, by comparison to what wewere looking at earlier in the year [but] we have a substantiallygreater increase in rates than we anticipated at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Prell about his thoughts on inflation and the dollar, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 243.
MS. SEGER. Could you just run the numbers by us instead ofjust saying appreciable. I don't know what that means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks for clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 244.
-23-7/7/87MR. PRELL. Yes. Maybe you were out of the room when I gavethe numbers earlier. We have federal funds, for example, rising above8 percent by some time in the latter part of 1988. We have long-termTreasury bonds moving noticeably above 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating various numbers and projections without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 245.
MS. SEGER. How about home mortgages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 246.
MR. PRELL. We have them moving back to the highs--maybetoward the 11 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints. It simply states that "we have them moving back to the highs" and suggests that the movement may be toward the 11 percent area.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the given passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 248.
MR. GUFFEY. Just to follow up on Tom Melzer's question: Ifyou look at the quarterly pattern of prices measured by the CPI, theimplicit deflator, or otherwise, you really end up 1988 at about thesame level as the second quarter of 1987. But I think you may havejust answered my question when you said to Tom that the rise ininterest rates is what pulls that to about that level. Is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is simply seeking clarification on the relationship between prices and interest rates.


Passage number 249.
MR. PRELL. Well, it's clearly an ingredient in the dampingof GNP growth in our forecast. The fiscal side is one factor; but thefinancial environment we think will tend to damp domestic demand, andoverall pressures on the labor markets will not increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states their opinion about the fiscal side and financial environment without any opposing views being presented.


Passage number 250.
 And so--MR. GUFFEY. Given the capacity utilization you're projectingof roughly 80-81 percent and the unemployment rate of about 6-1/2percent, it could turn out not to show through in prices if indeed thedollar does not fall. We may not need the various interest rates thatyou have built into the projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement discussing a hypothetical scenario based on different factors and their potential impact on prices.


Passage number 251.
MR. PRELL. I can't quarrel with that. I would justreiterate my statement that there has to be a considerable uncertaintyassigned to one's reading of the implications of a given level of theunemployment rate. We think it has gotten in the territory where itwill [unintelligible]. There are areas of greater tightness; innondurable manufacturing, for example, there are industries right nowthat have very high levels of capacity utilization and price pressuresare evident there. But there's clearly a significant range ofuncertainty around it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any particularquestions that are contrary on this presentation. If not, I would askyou to present your alternative scenarios, if any, that you think areimportant. I don't want to interpret the group as all being in fullagreement with the staff. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking if anyone has questions that are contrary to the presentation, and they also express a desire for alternative scenarios to be presented. This suggests that there may be different perspectives or disagreements within the group.


Passage number 253.
MR. PARRY. Our forecast really is in agreement with thebroad outlines of the Greenbook forecast. We're expecting growth ofjust under 3 percent this year and a slowdown next year, althoughperhaps more of a slowdown than is included in the Greenbook. Thisgreater weakness that we have is in spite of a little faster growth ofconsumption. It's a result of a smaller improvement in net exportsthan is in the Greenbook forecast and a somewhat weaker housingsector. Our inflation forecast for this year and next, as measured bythe fixed-weight deflator is 4-1/2 percent for this year and 4 percentfor next year. And higher import prices are certainly a significantcontributor to these inflation rates. But I just want to repeat thatthe only way we were able to keep inflation to these levels was to-24-7/7/87produce slack in the economy by means of a fairly substantial increasein short-term interest rates on the order of 200 basis points. Andfrankly, I'd be very interested in what types of trade-offs othermembers of the Committee ran into as they addressed this issue of therelationship between their forecast of inflation and its implicationsfor interest rates in 1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Parry is simply presenting his own forecast and acknowledging potential differences with the Greenbook forecast.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think Governor Heller will tell us theanswer to that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that Governor Heller will provide the answer to a specific question.


Passage number 255.
MR. HELLER. I'm not sure. You asked where we were woulddiffer with the forecast; let me focus on that. I think the Federalgovernment deficit number of $168 billion is probably on thepessimistic side. I would expect that the tax reform which has takenplace, and which is clearly difficult to model as far as econometricmodels are concerned, would result in a considerable broadening of thetax base and, therefore, that the tax revenues would be running higherthan the projections indicate. That would be the one factor that Iwould argue would relieve some of the pressure in the financialmarkets and thus would yield lower interest rates in an overalleconomic environment where there is relatively slow consumptiongrowth--with which I agree--and a lot of underutilized capacity and,therefore, lower investment. But the commodity markets still havequite a bit of excess capacity, on a global basis at least. I thinkthat is the framework in which we could see interest rates stayingroughly where they are, or maybe even drifting lower, and not havingthat inflation rate surge that would accompany the projections thatthe staff has here. Overall, as far as the level of economic activityis concerned, I'm roughly in agreement with the Greenbook. But as faras the financial implications are concerned, I'm not as pessimistic;and therefore, unless we do something to drive interest rates up, Ithink we can see probably the same level that prevails now, if notlower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide an answer without the passage. Could you please provide the full passage?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 257.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, our forecast for thisyear is basically in agreement with the Greenbook but we departsomewhat [for 1988] on both the real growth and the inflation side.We think that real GNP is going to be more in the neighborhood of 2.8percent, which is the number we used in our wire to the Board's staff.That's basically because of our belief that personal consumption isgoing to be stronger than the Greenbook indicates. We also think theinvestment forecast for 1988 is a little on the sluggish side in theBoard staff's forecast; we think it's going to be a little better thanthat. Also, we don't see quite the improvement in the trade situationthat the Greenbook implies and that translates into our forecast forinflation which we have rising somewhat faster than the Greenbook. Infact, we put the GNP deflator at 4.3 percent, which is about a halfpoint higher than the staff expectations. Unlike Governor Heller, ifI understood him correctly, I think the Federal budget deficitprojection is a little on the optimistic side; I think it's perhapsgoing to be higher than the $167 billion that the staff isforecasting. And that might give a little stimulus to the economy aswell. The one place where I think we are in agreement, if Iunderstood the staff forecast correctly, is that we're likely to getwage pressures toward the end of this year and out into 1988 simplybecause we're operating probably at our potential in the economy at-25-7/7/87the moment. And if the inflation number that I have is right, thatwill in turn put some pressures on the wage front.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker disagrees with the Greenbook's forecast on several issues, including real GNP growth, investment forecast, trade situation, and inflation. The speaker also disagrees with Governor Heller's projection of the Federal budget deficit.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only introduces Mr. Corrigan without any further context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The New York Bank's ResearchDepartment forecast has basically the same bottom line as the Boardstaff's forecast but there are a couple of very important differencesin the assumptions. In the forecast of the New York ResearchDepartment--I distinguish that from my own forecast, because sometimesthey're not the same--they basically have no further change in theexchange rate over the forecast period from about the levels of thepast month or so. Vis-a-vis the Board staff's forecast that reallyconstitutes a very large difference because it reflects not just the 9or 10 percent [decline that is forecast] for next year but also whathappens over the balance of this year. So, the net difference is morelike 13 or 14 percent from where we are right now. Now, because wedon't have that further decline in the dollar we get some spuriousfeedbacks from that. For example, in nominal terms, our currentaccount number for next year is actually better than the staff'snumber even though in real terms the opposite might be the case; it'shard to tell there precisely. But by not getting that further 13 or14 percent of J-curve effects we actually end up with the spuriousresult, at least in the near term, of a better current accountsituation in 1988.The other thing that is true by assumption is that while wehave some build up in interest rates I don't think it is quite assharp, by implication, as maybe what you're talking about, Mike. Butwe get a different mix: we pick up a little more in terms of domesticspending and a little less perhaps in real terms on the net exportside. It washes out in terms of GNP to about the same although, as Isaid, the current account--which for financial purposes is important--is actually better in 1988. The other thing that is troublesome isthat, notwithstanding the fact that we have by assumption no change inthe dollar, our price numbers are higher, if anything, than the staffnumbers--not by a whole heck of a lot, but they are higher. Indeed,it seems to me that when you look at all the price forecasts that arearound, certainly the overwhelming consensus of the forecasts, thoughnot all of them, is for a situation for 1988 in which the deflatoreither bumps or passes through 4 percent and the consumer price indexeither bumps or passes through 5 percent. And in some cases theconsumer price index gets up into the 5-1/2 percent range. Withoutbeing too precise, I am just thinking of those thresholds of 4 percentand 5 percent. I'm hard pressed at this point to see what, short of arecession or some major slowdown in economic growth, will prevent thatfrom happening. In other words, given labor market conditions, importprices, and all the rest, that kind of result seems to me to be almostbaked in already. To the extent that developments either in oilprices or other things work the wrong way, so much the worse. So, Ifind it troubling that--and I'm referring to my personal forecast onthis--I end up with such a price outlook, again just focusing on those4 and 5 percent thresholds, despite a different assumption about thedollar exchange rate. When looked at it in terms of a growth patternof say, 2-3/4 percent, just to pick a number out of the air, that'stelling us that we're at the point where we've got to pay for some ofour past sins. If we have faster growth we're going to have moreinflation and we're going to have less external adjustment. And when-26-7/7/87I look at that growth pattern for next year of, say, 2-3/4 percent, Ithink it's about the best we can possibly hope for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is highlighting the differences between the New York Bank's Research Department forecast and their own forecast, particularly in regards to the exchange rate and price outlook. The speaker finds it troubling that their own forecast predicts higher prices despite a different assumption about the exchange rate. This suggests a difference in opinion or disagreement about the potential impact of the exchange rate on prices.


Passage number 260.
MR. PARRY. What kind of interest rate increase do you havein that forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward question asking about the specific details of the interest rate increase forecast.


Passage number 261.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's really quite modest, Bob. Idon't have the numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion that something is modest, but they do not provide any evidence or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 262.
MR. PARRY. Modest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The word "modest" is a statement or description, rather than a point of contention.


Passage number 263.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. That's partly because byassumption the exchange rate is unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the exchange rate is assumed to be unchanged.


Passage number 264.
MR. PARRY. But the higher inflationary rate doesn't feedthrough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage doesn't present any statements or arguments that could generate contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the higher inflationary rate not feeding through.


Passage number 265.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is kind of a mechanicalexercise; not in any material way, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply describes a task as a mechanical exercise without any conflict or contradiction.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage as the passage is not provided. Please provide the passage you are referring to.


Passage number 267.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes. My comments can be brief, Mr. Chairman,primarily because for all practical purposes we're right where thestaff forecast is--for 1988 at least. We're slightly less optimisticfor the remainder of this year; rather than the 3 percent, we seesomething more like 2-1/2 percent. We question whether there's quitethat much strength there. We do see a little price pressure for nextyear--not anything particularly great, but slightly higher prices. Onbalance, we pretty much agree with the staff forecast that was justgiven.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, states that he agrees with the staff forecast and only offers a slight adjustment to the growth rate for the current year and mentions a little price pressure for the next year. Overall, he is in alignment with the staff forecast.


Passage number 268.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only mentions Mr. Melzer, without providing any additional information or opinions that could potentially lead to disagreement or contention.


Passage number 269.
MR. MELZER. I want to pick up on Bob Parry's theme, using amoney-driven model and extending the debate about what money isgrowing at right now. Just extending the present growth rate--whichfor this purpose we assumed to be 8 to 10 percent in M1--into 1988produced what I would consider unsatisfactory results, with thedeflator getting up to 5-1/2 percent by the fourth quarter of 1988.So, in coming up with our projections, we assumed a further degree ofrestraint in 1988 vis-a-vis 1987, which I guess, Bob, would reallytranslate into another way of looking at your interest rateassumption. The net result was that, basically, in 1987 we tend to beat the high end of the [Committee member's ranges] with a 7-1/4percent nominal growth rate--3 percent real and 4-1/4 percentdeflator. But then in 1988 we're more in the median area with 7percent nominal, 2-1/2 percent real and 4-1/2 percent on the deflator.But we found, really, the same thing using another type of model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only mentions Mr. Keehn without providing any statements or situations where disagreement or contention may arise.


Passage number 271.
MR. KEEHN. Our outlook is quite similar to the forecast thatBob Forrestal gave just a moment ago; namely, we're really very muchin sync with the staff with regard to 1987 but our 1988 number is 3percent. The difference, as I alluded to earlier, is in theconsumption area; in each of the three categories of consumption wehave a higher level of growth than the staff has in its forecast. The-27-7/7/87services number seems awfully low, certainly by comparative standardswith what we've had over the last few years. And we really wonder ifthat's realistic. So that's an area of difference. Our inflationnumbers are somewhat higher but not much higher than the staffforecast, based principally on the export or the trade side. We feelthat higher import prices are going to work their way through to agreater extent than in the forecast that the staff gave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Keen is simply stating their organization's outlook and offering a comparison to the staff's forecast. They express higher levels of growth in consumption and slightly higher inflation numbers, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 272.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as there is no specific statement or claim made. The passage only mentions "Mr. Stern," which does not provide any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 273.
MR. STERN. As far as the real economy and real growth areconcerned, my own view is very similar to the Greenbook numbers; Ithink that may be the most likely outlook. But as I suggestedearlier, if I were to use something like Mike's interest rateassumptions, I think I would get something that would be considerablyweaker. Indeed, some of our more formal models suggested that thatwould be the case as well. On the other side of the coin, and reallysort of putting the dilemma before us, I think the staff hasappropriately raised concerns about the price outlook and inflationarypressures as the months and quarters pass here. Again, our moreformal models suggested that, if anything, those pressures must cometo fruition more quickly and somewhat more severely than the Greenbookforecast and my own judgmental view of how things are likely tounfold. So, I think we are facing some unpleasant choices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different viewpoints and considerations when it comes to the real economy, interest rates, and inflationary pressures.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else feel compelled to saysomething. If not--you feel compelled to say something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone else feels the same urge to speak up, and if no one does, they express a suggestion that the person who feels compelled should say something.


Passage number 275.
MR. ANGELL. No, I don't feel compelled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell simply states that he does not feel compelled, without any opposing or conflicting viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 277.
 I don't want to--MR. ANGELL. No, I thought you were stopping the process.Right now I understand you want to eat lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. In the passage, one person initially expresses their unwillingness to do something, and the other person clarifies their understanding of the situation.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'd rather eat lunch with everybodyhaving talked on this subject before lunch so we don't return to itafter lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. It is a personal preference expressed by the speaker, indicating that they would prefer to have a discussion on the subject before lunch, to avoid revisiting it after lunch.


Passage number 279.
MR. JOHNSON. Issue complete.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a name and a statement, providing no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 280.
MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that there's more assuredness, asI read it, in the 1988 numbers than I quite feel. I'm somewhat moreoptimistic in regard to the rate of wage pattern change than the staffforecast. But I hasten to add that I believe that if you wait untilyou do get the wage inflation change that accompanies the staffforecast then it's too late not to have a price impact from that. SoI have a very strong resistance to creating an environment in whichthose wage patterns might develop as the staff and some of the rest ofyou seem to be indicating. It seems to me, if you look at the wagepatterns over the entire decade of the 1980s, that you do see a ratherslow, gradual, moderation of wage patterns. And when you look at thekinds of interest rates and unemployment rates that have existed, itseems to me that it takes more of a movement of the actualunemployment rate compared to the assumed natural rate to jar wagepatterns out of the existing mold. So I would expect there to besomewhat more delay; consequently, it seems to me that there is somewindow of opportunity to bring price pressures more in line before a-28-7/7/87wage adjustment takes place. But I am grateful to the staff forcontinuing to indicate to me the danger of this because I don't wantit to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Angell disagrees with the staff forecast and argues that wage pattern change is not as assured as they suggest. He believes that there is an opportunity to bring price pressures in line before a wage adjustment takes place.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 282.
MR. JOHNSON. I don't have too much to add. The numbers Ihad in mind for 1987 and 1988, at least in terms of real and nominalGNP, and maybe even the deflator, probably are a little moreoptimistic. Overall, the [Greenbook] GNP and deflator numbers arevery close to what I had in mind. Like Governor Heller, I had aslightly different view of the financial implications of that. Butthere are so many "ifs" I really don't know the answer at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker mentions having a slightly different view than Governor Heller on the financial implications, indicating disagreement or contention.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had a much lower deflator number fornext year if this report is correct. In fact, you have the lowest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement presents an objective observation or fact without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 284.
MR. JOHNSON. Deflator number. I had 2.7 or 2.8 percent,something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about having a deflator number of 2.7 or 2.8 percent.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 286.
6 percent it says here, but--MR. JOHNSON. Okay. Well, maybe it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without any additional information or context that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 288.
 And you're way down at the bottom on therate--MR. JOHNSON. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 289.
 Maybe I was thinking more on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Along with Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 290.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes. Well, what does the staff have for thedeflator.MESSRS. TRUMAN AND PRELL. 3-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. It simply presents information without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. The speakers are in agreement about the reported deflator rate of 3-3/4 percent.


Passage number 291.
MR. JOHNSON. 3-3/4 percent. I guess it is different. Butthe main issue is that there are so many "ifs" I don't know where tostart. One story that's being told here that I think would alleviatesome of the financial implications is that we're shifting resourcesinto an area where there's a lot slack in the economy. The wholetrade area that we have growing here is one that has a large degree ofslack. We are shifting from a service base into trade-sensitivemanufacturing areas where capacity utilization rates are extremelylow. I agree that there are some sectors that are doing quite well,like paper or others like that. But basically, we're shiftingresources out of the service area toward the trade-sensitive areas;and productivity has been high in those areas. Employment growth hasbeen very small, and whether employment demands will pick up in thearea, I don't know. But, given the utilization rates and theproductivity rates consistent with those sectors, there's a goodchance that they won't increase labor demand dramatically and thatoutput will be satisfied otherwise. If that's the case, we're [not]going to be seeing the kind of wage pressures that one might expectand we may not see a big reduction in the unemployment rate associatedwith the output growth that we're forecasting. So, that's sort of myexpectation; the direction things are shifting would tend to indicate-29-7/7/87that the kind of pressures we might expect would not be as great.That's just a notion; I don't really know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and uncertainties about the situation, but there is no evidence of disagreement with anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know; I would like to believethat. And if you look at just goods versus services it sounds right.But if you look at goods, I wonder whether that is a likely result.It cannot be resolved today, but if you look at it industry byindustry where is the trade improvement likely to take place. Wouldyou, in fact, find substantial amounts of slack. In some cases yesand in some cases no, I suspect. But where does the balance lie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author starts by expressing uncertainty and a desire to believe in a certain idea, but then raises doubt by questioning the likelihood of that idea. The author acknowledges that the issue cannot be resolved currently and speculates that there may be differing outcomes in different industries. Therefore, there is a contention between the initial belief and the subsequent doubts and uncertainties expressed.


Passage number 293.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only contains the name "Mr. Johnson" and no other context or statements.


Passage number 294.
 Well, I think just as--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not going to tell me right away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses an opinion but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 295.
MR. JOHNSON. I don't know the answer. But if you justaccept the principle--which I think we've all accepted up to thispoint--that the trade-sensitive sectors have been severely damaged bythe changes in the trade imbalances, it seems to me that you have toaccept that there's slack there in reversing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson is stating his opinion and suggesting that if the principle is accepted, then it follows that there is slack in reversing the trade imbalances.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, there is in some industries; paper,for instance, is a leading example. In lumber I don't know--maybethere is and maybe there isn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely acknowledging their lack of knowledge or uncertainty about whether there is contention or disagreement in the lumber industry.


Passage number 297.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, maybe it's not true that trade has beendamaged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement as it simply presents a statement from Mr. Johnson without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been damaged because someindustries have contracted; and in some cases where it has beendamaged it isn't going to recover. The recovery is going to be indifferent industries than where some of the damage took place, Ithink.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply stating that certain industries have suffered damage and may not fully recover, but the recovery is expected to occur in different industries. The phrase "I think" does not indicate a contradiction or argument; it is likely an expression of the author's opinion or speculation.


Passage number 299.
 But if we compromise--MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence states that if a compromise is reached, indicating a willingness to find a middle ground or resolution.


Passage number 300.
 Yes, but capital goods, autos, that whole area--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, look at it. How much capacity haveyou got on autos. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply reflecting on the current situation and expressing uncertainty about the capacity of autos without arguing or conflicting with anyone.


Passage number 301.
MR. ANGELL. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 302.
MR. JOHNSON. I'm just saying the total rate is around 79percent and that's very low. It seems to me that's got to be weightedtoward the trade-sensitive sectors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and sharing their opinion.


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would like to see an analysis afterlunch. Does anybody else have anything to say before lunch. If not,we'll go to lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they would like to see an analysis after lunch and then asks if anyone else has anything to say before they go to lunch.


Passage number 304.
[Lunch recess]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 305.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a technical question: In 1987 whatgrowth would be needed in M2 to hit the bottom of the current rangefor the year. Arithmetically, what does it take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply asking for a technical question regarding the growth needed in M2 to hit the bottom of the current range for the year. There is no conflicting information or opposing viewpoints present.


Passage number 306.
MR. KOHN. About 7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a percentage without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 307.
-30-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From June to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a date range and does not contain any information that suggests disagreement or contention.


Passage number 308.
MR. KOHN. Yes. It would be about 6-1/2 percent on a QII-to-QIV basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement of a percentage.


Passage number 309.
 But given where we are in terms--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7-1/2 percent brings it into a[unintelligible] 5-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a numerical value without any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 310.
MR. KOHN. That will bring it to 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement arises from the use of the word "That," as it suggests a previous point or idea that is not explicitly mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 311.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states a percentage.


Passage number 312.
 Not just for December--MR. KOHN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One historic question is bound to arise.What is the record in changing these targets at midyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that a historic question is likely to come up regarding the record of changing targets at midyear. It is not expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 314.
MR. KOHN. We have never changed an M2 or M3 target atmidyear; we have changed M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have changed M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that a change has been made to M1 without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 316.
MR. KOHN. We have rebased it, we have widened the range, andwe have abandoned the range. We have done all sorts of things. Wehave never changed the M2 and M3 targets at midyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that different actions have been taken regarding the M2 and M3 targets, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Stated another way, we've changed thetarget that was the most operative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 318.
MR. JOHNSON. One down, two to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the progress of a task.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we concentrate mostly on 1987now. Somebody commenting on 1987 might want to say something about1988 but primarily concentrate on 1987 where the choices are morelimited. We are running within the debt range, so I presume thatnobody is going to want to change the debt target. There's some biasagainst changing these things. Does anybody want to raise a bigquestion about M3. I just want to see if I can narrow this[discussion] at all. Now we might want to say something or leave openthe issue of our willingness to fall short or overshoot, or where we'dlike to be in the range, or whatever. But so far as any formal changein the ranges, we are talking about M2. Who would like to saysomething. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of suggestions and questions for discussion purposes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in reading this discussion of thealternatives in the Bluebook, I was struck by the difference betweenthe way some of us used to view these ranges several years ago and theway in which we are approaching them now, which seems to me to be verydifferent. In the past, some of us thought of these aggregates asintermediate targets and we selected ranges that we felt would beconsistent with progress against inflation in the context ofreasonable economic growth. And, of course, one of the advantages ofthis fairly direct relationship was that we made an announcement onthe ranges and it was reasonably clear as a signal to both the publicand Congress of what our intentions were. This present approach is, Ithink, very different from that. What we are doing now, as I thinkthe Bluebook makes very clear, is projecting a broad path of interestrates that we think will be consistent with a desirable economic-31-7/7/87outcome and then we project the ranges for the aggregates that wethink will be consistent with that interest rate path. Now, I realizethat the increased sensitivity of the aggregates to interest ratesmakes this a logical move but I worry that this approach, if we followit too slavishly, is going to lead us to deemphasize the aggregates tosuch a point that these ranges will cease to be reasonable signals tothe market as any kind of confirmation of our longer-term objectives.Thus, I would have some reservations about reducing this 1987 rangefor M2 even though I recognize that a good case can be made for doingthat on the basis of the prospective behavior of interest rates overthe next 18 months or so. I think some professionals in the marketwould clearly understand what we are trying to do; but I think therewould be a lot of other people who would not understand it. Theywould likely interpret it as a considerable move toward ease in theshort run, which seems to me to be pretty unwise, given theuncertainties regarding the overall economy and inflation. So I thinka better approach would be to leave that range unchanged and stateexplicitly that there is a possibility that it may be appropriate tocome in under the range if the recent trends in velocity continue.If you want me to go on to 1988 I would say that I would takealternative II, which would reduce all the ranges. If we do that,though, I think we ought to have a sentence, which I would be glad tosuggest if anybody has any sympathy with this, to explain therationale behind why we are reducing these ranges--that the furtherreductions are going to be required over time if we are going toextend the recent progress we have made against inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention regarding the approach to setting ranges for aggregates. Mr. Black expresses concern about the current approach and suggests a different approach. He also suggests leaving the 1987 range unchanged and states his reservations about reducing it too much.


Passage number 321.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can get back to M2 in 1988 in time.Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a factual statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 322.
MR. PARRY. Well, I will confine my remarks to 1987 and M2.I think that there is a compelling reason to reduce that range.Projections that I have seen, including the Board staff's, wouldindicate that the growth is going to be about 4-1/2 to 5 percent. Ifindeed that is what the growth is likely to be, why don't we changethe range. And 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent makes a lot of sense to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Parry is expressing his personal opinion and suggestion to change the range based on the projections he has seen. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because there is no information or statement provided about Mr. Forrestal that would indicate any conflicting opinions or opposing perspectives.


Passage number 324.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we ought to staywith the historical precedent that we have established and not move M2at midyear. First of all, I am not really concerned very much aboutthe shortfall in M2 that we have had. The indicators suggest that theexpansion is not really in any kind of jeopardy and our discussionthis morning, I think, confirms that. Also, it seems to me that tochange the range now would suggest a degree of precision that I don'tthink we really have. So I would not be in favor tinkering with M2 atthis point. I would rather explain it; and I think it can beexplained in terms of a period of slower growth after a period of morerapid growth. And perhaps even more importantly, it could also besaid that the growth was too rapid in the past. So again, I wouldleave M2 exactly where it is for 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their viewpoint and preference to keep M2 at its current level for the year 1987. There is no conflict or opposition mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 325.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 326.
MR. ANGELL. I would favor leaving the target for 1987 theway it is. It seems to me that it's better to perceive the targets as7/7/87being what you are trying for and subsequently, if reasons cause youto miss, to miss. I would rather explain the miss than have newtargets. Having a new target almost gives you the notion that it ismore important. And if you choose that new target of 4-1/2 to 7-1/2percent, it is entirely possible that conditions would be such that7-1/2 percent would be too fast a growth path. So I think it would beconfusing, non-helpful, and unnecessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is expressing his opinion and providing reasons to support his stance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You confused me a bit. Let me ask you aquestion. I don't remember your exact words, but [the thrust wasthat] they are real targets and we don't change them but explain if weare going to miss them. Are you really going to try to make it [intothe range] by not changing them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the other person's intention to reach the targets without making any changes.


Passage number 328.
MR. ANGELL. No, I would not at this point, unlessdevelopments in the economy gave us a clearer signal than we now have.I would not try for the 7-1/2 percent [second-half] growth path itwould take to get there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion on the growth path of the economy.


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not try for the 7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 330.
MR. ANGELL. I would not try.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: to fix a broken car engine without any knowledge or experience.


Passage number 331.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't really consider it a target inthat sense. I am just trying to clarify your view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 332.
MR. ANGELL. I would consider it the best target we knew howto come up with in February of 1987. To try to adjust the target[unintelligible] the targets in my view. It was the best indicationat that time of what we should have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion that the target they chose in February 1987 was the best they could come up with at that time.


Passage number 333.
 And I think we've learned withM1 that there are conditions under which one better not try to alter--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are not arguing to make 5-1/2 percenta minimum at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement about learning something from a certain experience and suggests caution in another situation.


Passage number 334.
MR. ANGELL. That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell simply affirms the correctness of a statement or statement made by someone else.


Passage number 335.
MR. PARRY. Do you think that is the best target today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question asking for the speaker's opinion on a topic.


Passage number 336.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I would prefer that we would havesomething in our language. As you may remember, in March we chose thewords 6 percent or less [for the March through June period]. We canhave a short-run range as an appropriate signal in the market thatdoes not necessarily have to move growth back within the long-runtarget range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is expressing his preference for having a specific term in their language to signal appropriate market conditions.


Passage number 337.
MR. PARRY. But if you thought that the best target was 5-1/2to 8-1/2 percent before, and now six months later you think that it issomething lower--which I think most people do even though they saydon't change the target--why wouldn't you want to communicate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning why someone wouldn't want to communicate a change in the target.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The whole issue is--and Mr. Kohn, this isa question that you can answer--have we ever before said explicitlythat we have this target but we expect to come in below it or aboveit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "but we expect to come in below it or above it" suggests a contention or disagreement about whether the target will be achieved within the expected range.


Passage number 339.
MR. PRELL. We did in the early 1980s, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a belief about something that happened in the early 1980s.


Passage number 340.
 We wereunder the M1 range, and probably ended up---33-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have often said the low end or the highend, or whatever. I am asking have we ever said we expect to end upabove or below the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking a question about whether the speaker has ever mentioned their expectation of ending up above or below the range.


Passage number 341.
MR. KOHN. That, specifically, I don't know. However, M1last year is an exception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn simply states that he does not know about a specific topic and offers an exception to a previous statement.


Passage number 342.
MR. JOHNSON. Let me ask: One would have to look back at theFebruary record, but I thought we had qualified our target by sayingit was interest sensitive; we said something about the fact that ifcertain conditions developed, we might expect a more appropriate rangeto be--. Maybe I am wrong about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is questioning his own understanding and acknowledging the possibility that he may be mistaken.


Passage number 343.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We simply said it was interest sensitive.I don't remember the exact words, but we said something aboutparticularly at the beginning of this year, which I just have norecollection of. It bears upon this question of whether we would morereadily or not change the target. I ought to know; I don't recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their lack of recall or memory about a particular event or conversation.


Passage number 344.
MR. ANGELL. Finally, I would say if we choose to change thetarget, why 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent. It would seem to me at this pointthat that might be a higher path than we would want to use. I am notpositive but perhaps a 3-1/2 percent growth path in M2 should betolerated under certain conditions. So, I don't want to change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their opinion about the target growth path for M2 and suggesting an alternative option.


Passage number 345.
If we changed it now to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent then I would feelmore--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then you would feel more compelled to tryto meet the 4-1/2 which you may not want to meet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is discussing a hypothetical situation where changing a certain percentage may lead to a change in motivation or willingness to meet that percentage.


Passage number 346.
MR. ANGELL. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That is right" is a confirmation or agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 347.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I am looking back over the M2 and M3targets, relative to where we were in June when we considered them.There is only one other year in which we were substantially away. Inother cases we've been less than a point or so away and very wellcould have said something, as Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating facts about M2 and M3 targets without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 348.
 Prell indicated, around--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have often said we expected it to behigher or lower within the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Prell, is simply acknowledging that they have previously expressed their expectation for something to be higher or lower within a target. There is no indication of contradiction or argument in their statement.


Passage number 349.
 But I don't recall offhand oursaying, though we might have--MR. BOEHNE. I think we have at times used the word "near"--indicating that we expected to be near the upper end or near thebottom end, with "near" meaning we could be a little out of the rangeor a little within.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is an agreement between the speakers. They both acknowledge that the word "near" has been used, but cannot recall if the specific statement in question was made.


Passage number 350.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else wants to talk about thesubstance. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it consists of incomplete sentences and does not provide enough context to make a judgment.


Passage number 351.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would opt to retain the rangesfor 1987. In listening to Don Kohn, and if I read the Bluebookcorrectly, the reason that we would be at or below the range is theanticipation that interest rates will rise. If interest rates remainat current levels or somewhat lower, then I believe the projection isthat we would come within the ranges established in February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, does not express disagreement or contention in this passage. He is simply stating his opinion and providing an explanation for why he believes the projections will come within the established ranges.


Passage number 352.
 Idon't---34-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It seems to be a nonsensical statement or a typing error.


Passage number 353.
MR. KOHN. I think we would just about make it. It makesabout a 2 percentage point difference in our second-half growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a personal opinion without any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 354.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With the current levels of interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage is simply stating a fact about the current levels of interest rates and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 355.
MR. KOHN. At the current levels of interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any specific contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the current levels of interest rates.


Passage number 356.
 It wouldbe a close call but, at least if we believe the differences in themodels, the interest elasticity in the models say it will be--MR. PARRY. You say it will be at 5-1/2 percent or close to5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about the interest elasticity in different models and suggests that it will be close to 5-1/2 percent.


Passage number 357.
MR. KOHN. Just around 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 358.
MR. GUFFEY. My point is that if we change the ranges now tolower them, it does imply that we believe interest rates will riseover the next six months. I am not prepared to make that kind ofassumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, is sharing his own perspective and stating that he is not ready to make a certain assumption.


Passage number 359.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This is not a complete or coherent passage, as it only includes the phrase "Mr. Boykin." Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 360.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would not change the ranges hereat midyear; most of the reasons have been given. One other thing doesoccur to me: it seems that if we did, say, want to go to alternativeII, it would limit us somewhat as to what we were going to do for1988. If we do the midyear correction, the change would imply someprecision; I would rather wait and make that judgment. In the finalanalysis, looking out to 1988 and given my view of the economy for thesecond half of this year, I would not want to do anything that wouldgive a signal that would imply possibly higher interest rates. So Iwould leave it alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boykin expresses his opinion and explains his reasoning, but there is no conflict with any other individual or viewpoint.


Passage number 361.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the provided passage only contains the name "Mr. Boehne," it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The passage does not provide any context or information that would indicate an argument or disagreement.


Passage number 362.
MR. BOEHNE. I would leave it alone. I don't think it's abig issue. Frankly, I am pretty close and could go either way.Whether we lower it or keep it the same, I doubt very much that it isgoing to have much impact on our policy decisions, because I suspectthat our policy is going to be much more dependent upon foreignexchange markets and the domestic economy and considerations like thatrather than the range. I would keep it the same and just indicatethat it will be near the bottom and be a little vague as to whether itcould go outside the range or stay in by a margin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne states his opinion that he would leave the range alone and mentions that he could go either way, indicating that he is not strongly opposed to making a change. However, he also expresses doubt that the range will have much impact on policy decisions, suggesting that it is not a significant issue.


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Stern or any topic that could be a source of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 364.
MR. STERN. I have a mild preference for just leaving it atthe 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range. At this point I am not troubled bythe shortfall. The only other thought I would add is that if, as atechnical matter, we are troubled by the prospective slowing, we mightsimply broaden the range to something like 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent onthe grounds that that is all we are doing, broadening it. It reallyhas no other significance. It would raise the probability that M2will come out within it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker only expresses a mild preference for a specific range and suggests broadening it as a technical matter. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 365.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage itself. Please provide the specific passage you are referring to.


Passage number 366.
-35-7/7/87MR. JOHNSON. I don't think I would change the range either.I would leave it, mainly because I think it does imply some interestrate forecast. If interest rates stay where they are then this targetis probably appropriate. And not knowing exactly what the course [ofinterest rates] is going to be at this point--that is more of a seriesof short-term policy decisions--I don't see any point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing his opinion and explaining his reasoning, but there is no disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Mr. Melzer without providing any information or context for disagreement.


Passage number 368.
MR. MELZER. I would leave it the same as well. I agree withEd Boehne, [unintelligible] I don't think it is a particularly goodintermediate policy guide. We know it is not how we are going to runpolicy. And looking at it on a long-term basis, it looks to me likevelocity growth has been essentially zero over a long period of time.That would be consistent with our GNP forecast for the year; it wouldfall right about in the middle of a 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range. Andfinally, I think this signal effect point that Roger Guffey and ManleyJohnson raised is also an important one. I don't think that this isnecessarily a time when we want to send a signal that we're somehowtightening up policy further. The recent actions have gained a lot ofcredibility in terms of the willingness of this group to respond topressures. Those pressures don't seem to be on the table right now,so why send that signal and potentially destabilize things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Melzer, agrees with Ed Boehne and expresses his agreement with keeping the policy the same. He also agrees with the idea that velocity growth has been essentially zero and that it aligns with their GNP forecast for the year. He further agrees with the point raised by Roger Guffey and Manley Johnson about not sending a signal of tightening policy further at this time. Overall, Mr. Melzer's statements indicate a consensus and agreement with the current policy and decisions.


Passage number 369.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply mentions Governor Heller without providing any further information or context to indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 370.
MR. HELLER. For once, I agree with everything that has beensaid so far, more or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the speaker, Mr. Heller, agrees with everything that has been said so far.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 372.
MR. MORRIS. I don't think this is a world-shaking issue, butI have a slight preference for a change to a lower range. We have anumber of times gone before the [Congressional] Committee when we havebeen in a little embarrassing position of having the targets,particularly M1, running over the top. It seems to me we might pickup a couple of minor credibility points by revising the M2 guidelinesdown. I don't see any harm that could come from it. So I say, whynot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris expresses his personal preference for a change to a lower range but acknowledges that it is not a significant issue. He suggests revising the M2 guidelines down and sees no harm in doing so.


Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 374.
MR. KEEHN. Well, for all the reasons stated, I am in favorof maintaining the current range. The only thing I might say that isslightly different is that I think there is a message effect in allthis. I think the economic results have been and look to be prettygood. A change in the range might imply some kind of policy changeand I don't favor that. On top of it all, it is an awkward time to beconsidering change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The speaker explicitly states that they are in favor of maintaining the current range, and their only concern is the potential implication of a policy change. There is no mention of disagreement or contention with anyone else's opinions or ideas.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 376.
MS. SEGER. I'll be brief. I favor maintaining the ranges ofalternative I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I'll be brief" suggests that the speaker has a differing opinion or perspective on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 378.
-36-7/7/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd keep the range, too. What Iwould be prepared to say is that, in a context in which velocity wascontinuing to [rise], I would be willing to tolerate a shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with keeping the range and tolerating a shortfall in a specific context.


Passage number 379.
MR. HENDRICKS. I would leave it the same for all the reasonsthat have been stated and perhaps one that has not quite been stated.And that is that [given the precedent] of not doing it at midyear inthe past, as I understand it, I think we might confuse the marketunduly and unnecessarily and perhaps send mixed signals that could becounterproductive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and providing reasons to support it.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure I understand the signalargument. I think it depends on what we say, not whether we change.If we said nothing and didn't change the target the presumption in themarket would have to be that we were going to ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty and sharing their perspective on the signal argument. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 381.
MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that seeing the same targetwould leave the understanding that at the current level of interestrates we would get back to the target by the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is expressing his own opinion or observation about the target being reached by the end of the year.


Passage number 382.
MR. KOHN. There are some odds on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there are odds on a certain topic without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 383.
MR. JOHNSON. That's the best guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion or suggestion without any conflicting viewpoints or objections mentioned.


Passage number 384.
MR. KOHN. Less than a 100 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the percentage of something is less than 100 percent.


Passage number 385.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but that is your best guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 386.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. His best guess is that it's going to be insome range of outcome that is barely at the bottom of the target andthat to be safe we would reduce the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their best guess and suggesting a cautious approach by reducing the target. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 387.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, it all depends. If the implication isthat we are just reducing the target to respond to interest ratelevels in the past, that is one explanation. If that is theexplanation then I feel less uncomfortable about it. But anotherplausible explanation is that you expect interest rates to rise in thefuture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 388.
 It would depend on which one of those we would use--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to decide what to say. I wouldnot say we are reducing the range because we expect interest rates togo up. That would not be suitable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing their intention to decide what to say, and stating that they would not suggest reducing the range because they expect interest rates to go up.


Passage number 389.
 In fact--MR. JOHNSON. We expect an increase in velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER," which does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 391.
 Over the year as a whole, given what hashappened, given where we are, and so forth--MR. JOHNSON. I think some people would read through that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents someone's opinion or perspective on a given situation.


Passage number 392.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we return to this issue ofwhat we say. Let's look at the next issue, with a bigger range [ofoptions] being displayed before us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting going back to a previous issue and then moving on to the next issue with more options to consider.


Passage number 393.
MR. JOHNSON. For 1988 I'd select alternative II. I think itis important to continue to give the signal that we are adjusting theranges to move toward price stability and I think that all of those-37-7/7/87ranges are appropriate for what we expect for nominal GNP next yearwith some continued resistance against inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 394.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You would be explicit. You are sayingalternative II is lower than--. No, we haven't set any tentativerange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that no tentative range has been set for alternative II.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 395.
MR. JOHNSON. The only thing I would say is that I mightfavor just a 5 to 8 percent range on M2 instead of a full one pointreduction to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent. I might be a little morecomfortable with 5 to 8 percent rather than 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: Mr. Johnson expresses a differing opinion or preference regarding the range for M2, suggesting a narrower range of 5 to 8 percent instead of the proposed reduction to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent. This indicates disagreement or contention within the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 396.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 5 to 8 percent is alternative II,isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

The statement "5 to 8 percent is alternative II" is met with disagreement in the form of a question "isn't it". This suggests that the speaker is unsure or questioning the accuracy of the claim.


Passage number 397.
MR. ANGELL. No, alternative II is 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is simply stating a range of percentages.


Passage number 398.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 399.
MR. FORRESTAL. That's exactly where I would come out, Mr.Chairman. I think it is very important that we send a message to thepublic that we are still committed to the fight against inflation. Wehave had that inflation this year and I think the markets need to knowthat we are not going to validate that. But having said that, I wouldbe a little reluctant to send too strong a signal--which alternativeII implies to me--that we would foresee a need to tightenaggressively. I think the middle ground of reducing it about one halfpercentage point, which is typical of what we have done in otheryears, would be appropriate. So, I would like to go with 5 to 8percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Forrestal agrees with the idea of sending a message to the public that they are committed to the fight against inflation. He also suggests reducing it about one half percentage point, which is in line with what has been done in other years.


Passage number 400.
MR. KEEHN. Could I ask: What is our record of reducing theranges over the last few years. Have we tended to move about 1/2point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Keen is simply asking for information about the organization's track record in reducing ranges over the past few years.


Passage number 401.
MR. KOHN. Yes. The Committee has reduced them nearly everyyear, and more often than not by a half point. In 1984, M1 and M2ranges were reduced by one full percentage point, but usually it hasbeen one half point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the Committee has reduced M1 and M2 ranges nearly every year, often by a half point, with a single instance of a one full percentage point reduction in 1984.


Passage number 402.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 403.
MR. BOEHNE. I like alternative II as it stands. It is truethat for most recent years we have reduced it by a half point. But Ithink this time we have a good technical reason for going to a fullpoint reduction and I would take advantage of it because some years wemay not be able to reduce it at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne expresses his preference for "alternative II" and explains that he believes there is a good technical reason for a full point reduction. He also mentions that there may be some years in the future where they may not be able to reduce it at all. Overall, his statements indicate that he is in agreement with the idea of a full point reduction in this particular instance.


Passage number 404.
MR. ANGELL. I'd vote with Governor Johnson and PresidentForrestal for the 5 to 8 percent because it does send a signal. Andit does give us a chance in January or February, when we reconsiderthis, to come back to the lower number. I would be very happy ifconditions were such next winter that we would want to go ahead andtake the range down another half point. But I would hate to take itdown a full point now and have to bring it back a half point nextwinter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and preference regarding the percentage range.


Passage number 405.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 406.
-38-7/7/87MR. BOYKIN. Alternative II is where I would be. I have apreference for going down the half point, although I am not totallyhung up on it. I could go with a point, but my preference would bethe half point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their preference for "Alternative II" and their slight preference for a half-point decrease rather than a full point decrease.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 408.
MR. PARRY. I would favor alternative II as it is, mainlybecause the kind of growth rates of the aggregates that we see fornext year are consistent with that. As a matter of fact, if one wereto look at the projections more precisely, growth of M2 is at thatlower end of 4-1/2 percent and one could even argue for a slowergrowth. I don't know, but perhaps the projections of those who aresupporting 5 to 8 percent do have 6-1/2 percent growth of M2 in theirforecasts. I just find that difficult to see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Parry is expressing his personal preference for "alternative II" and discussing different growth rates without arguing or disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 409.
MR. JOHNSON. It all depends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a standalone statement without any contrasting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 410.
 If you have stable interestrates next year, you've got--MR. PARRY. But if you have stable interest rates whatinflation rates do you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the potential relationship between stable interest rates and inflation rates.


Passage number 411.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about something.


Passage number 412.
MR. PARRY. That's sort of the critical question though,isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's sort of the critical question though, isn't it?" implies that the speaker is seeking clarification or agreement on a particular point, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 413.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, no. I think the point, once again, isthat we can't control precisely the mix of nominal GNP. You have tohave some idea of what kind of nominal it would allow for and hopethat most of that growth shows up in real. Most of the determinationof the mix is structural.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Johnson explaining his perspective on controlling the mix of nominal GNP.


Passage number 414.
MR. PARRY. I think that interest rates have an effect on thereal side as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion that interest rates have an effect on the real side, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 415.
MR. JOHNSON. Good. That's it, stable interest rates; itdepends on what you say about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is simply agreeing with the statement that stable interest rates depend on what someone says about it.


Passage number 416.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On our staff forecast, from February youwould end up with alternative III if you take [unintelligible] ascertain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about a staff forecast without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 417.
MR. KOHN. If you were to center on the staff's best guess,alternative III would be more like it. Our estimates are similar toPresident Parry's estimates. We have essentially the same underlyingeconomic forces at work: a lower dollar, a little more inflation, anda little higher interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the estimates of MR. KOHN and President Parry are similar and that they agree on the underlying economic forces at work.


Passage number 418.
MR. PARRY. What concerns me is that if one goes to thesehigher rates, one is implicitly saying "I am comfortable with thepotential for higher rates of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, is expressing his concerns about the potential impact of higher rates on inflation. There is no indication of any opposing views or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 419.
"MR. JOHNSON. No, that's not true. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "No, that's not true" indicates disagreement or contradiction to a previous statement.


Passage number 420.
MR. PARRY. Show me the analytic work that leads you to adifferent direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry is simply asking for the analytic work that supports a different direction, indicating a request for further evidence or information.


Passage number 421.
-39-7/7/87MR. JOHNSON. It depends on your interest rate scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It simply states that the outcome depends on the interest rate scenario.


Passage number 422.
MR. PARRY. But that is not independent of what happens toinflation. For example, work that the Board staff has done and workthat we have done would suggest that if you don't get those kinds ofincreases in interest rates, it has an impact on inflation. Wouldyour work show that. What if M2 rose 6-1/2 percent or to the midpointof the 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range. What would happen to inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Parry is asking a question about the impact of certain scenarios on inflation.


Passage number 423.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Kohn without discussing any particular topic or presenting any conflicting ideas. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 424.
 I think you essentially asked Mike that questionbefore about--MR. JOHNSON. There are too many unknowns in this equation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing their opinion about the situation and stating that there are too many unknown factors. There is no mention of any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 425.
MR. PARRY. If there are too many unknowns, what do you do.How do you proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for advice or guidance on how to proceed in a situation with many unknowns.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 426.
MR. JOHNSON. You've got to make some assumptions. We aremaking different assumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that Mr. Johnson and the speaker have different assumptions, indicating a disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 427.
MR. HELLER. A lot depends on what happens to your Federalgovernment deficit, and obviously, the difference between what thestaff has said and what other people say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that a lot depends on what happens to the Federal government deficit and highlights the difference between what the staff has said and what other people say. However, there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 428.
MR. PARRY. I think it is dangerous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "I think it is dangerous" expresses an opinion but does not indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 429.
MR. ANGELL. Bob, you see, I just want to leave room forselecting the range next January. I don't want to do it now. Why notmake the gesture that we have always made, which is a half percentagain. And then we have room to go further in January. The lastthing I want to do is to go [down] too far and then end up having toback up. I might be ready to take the 4 to 7 percent, closer toalternative III, next January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 430.
MR. JOHNSON. If interest rates rise as in the staffprojection in the end, in January we'll build that into our M2forecast for 1988. I don't think there is any doubt. We are notsaying that we wouldn't support the interest rate rise; it is just amatter of opinion about how the scenario is going to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is stating his opinion about how a potential interest rate rise may affect their M2 forecast for 1988. He clarifies that they are not opposed to supporting the interest rate rise, but rather discussing different possible outcomes.


Passage number 431.
MR. ANGELL. I don't want to build in a possibility of aneasing signal that is inappropriate because we got the number too lownow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is expressing his concern about setting a number too low, which could lead to an inappropriate signal.


Passage number 432.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the specific passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 433.
MR. KEEHN. I'd also favor alternative II. I don't feelstrongly between 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent and 5 to 8 percent but I wouldhave a slight bias for the 5 to 8 percent. In July, February alwaysseems like a long time away. But this year it seems like aparticularly long time away. I would be very tentative in thelanguage for the reasons that Governor Angell has pointed out. Iwould prefer to go to the 5 to 8 percent now, and if there is room togo to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent when we get to February, I think thatwould be the appropriate direction, as opposed to the alternativedirection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Keehn expresses a slight preference for the 5 to 8 percent alternative but also acknowledges that going to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent in February could be another appropriate direction.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the information provided ("Mr. Stern").


Passage number 435.
-40-7/7/87MR. STERN. I, too, would favor alternative II with themodification of 5 to 8 percent on M2. It seems to me that, in termsof the signal effect and working toward progress on price stability,at least at this point in time, alternative II would demonstrate thatconcern. The uncertainties in the outlook remain sufficiently largethat I would be a little reluctant to want to overdo it at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for alternative II with a modification, but they acknowledge the uncertainties in the outlook and the need to be cautious.


Passage number 436.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Hendricks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 437.
MR. HENDRICKS. Our projections follow very closely those ofthe Greenbook and as we try to lay that against our forecast, we comeup with the suggestion that interest rates can't stay where they are.And the alternative that best seems to fit our projection is reallyalternative III. So we would suggest that we make that move, whetherwe stick with it exactly the way it is put here, 7-1/2 percent orsomething in between there. Alternative II would be all right withus. But alternative III is the one that we would favor over the othertwo alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement and preference for alternative III, while also mentioning that alternative II would be acceptable to them.


Passage number 438.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage simply mentions the name "Governor Seger" without providing any context or information to indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 439.
MS. SEGER. Well, just to take advantage of the full range ofalternatives, I will vote for alternative I, primarily because thestaff's beautiful forecast failed to convince me that the economy isas strong as we would like to see it and as they suggested it is. Iam also less confident about the outlook for the economy. I wouldlike, of course, to see the strong trade turnaround, and I hope ittakes place; but I am not really convinced that it will to the extentthat they are assuming. So I would prefer to go with 5-1/2 to 8-1/2percent again, with the understanding that we have another crack atthis early next year. If I am wrong and the economy is roaring along,then certainly it can be adjusted and I don't think anything will havebeen lost. We'll have plenty of time to send signals to the markets,in my judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger does not agree with the staff's forecast and is less confident about the outlook for the economy. She expresses her preference for a different range of alternatives and suggests that if she is wrong, adjustments can be made.


Passage number 440.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 441.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My preference is alternative II asis. But if there was something of a consensus to go 5 to 8 percent onM2, then I would make a formal suggestion that we make the ranges forboth M2 and M3 4 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the author's preference (alternative II) and proposing a potential alternative option based on a consensus (5 to 8 percent on M2). The author then suggests making the ranges for both M2 and M3 4 to 8 percent. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 442.
MR. ANGELL. Make it 4 to 8 percent, Jerry, did you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is simply asking Jerry to confirm and clarify the percentage.


Passage number 443.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My preference is alternative II asis. What I said is, if there was a consensus to make the M2 range 5to 8 percent, I would then suggest that we make both M2 and M3 4 to 8percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for alternative II and suggesting a range for the M2 and M3 percentages. They are not presenting any opposing viewpoints or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 444.
MR. MELZER. Don, what would you say is the trend velocity inM2 right now. I threw out zero before as the trend velocity growth.Is that fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks for Don's opinion and clarifies their previous statement.


Passage number 445.
MR. KOHN. I think that is as close as we can estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply expresses their opinion and does not mention any opposing views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 446.
MR. MELZER. One of the things that concerns me a little isthat we get down to ranges that embrace trend velocity growth andfactor in what we expect in nominal GNP and the ranges roughly bracket-41-7/7/87that. If we start to take into account short-term velocity behaviorto drop the ranges down even further, that's almost building in thefact that at some point down the road we are going to have to jackthem back up and move them around. Maybe this is a historicalquestion in terms of what the tradition is. But I would tend to viewthese, particularly for M2 and M3, as much longer-term. I would becomfortable, therefore, embracing a trend velocity concept togetherwith a nominal GNP forecast; and that would lead me roughly to the 5to 8 percent range for M2, which is what I would favor. I think thereis a danger if we get these ranges down so far that, first of all, weare almost making it necessary to project interest rates to set thetargets because of the sensitivity of velocity to interest rates.Also, later we might get into the situation Wayne described where justbecause we change our outlook and interest rate forecast, we'rejacking them up and sending a false signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Melzer, expresses concern about reducing the ranges too much and suggests that the ranges should be based on longer-term trends and nominal GNP forecasts. He argues that setting the ranges too low may require projecting interest rates to meet the targets and could result in false signals. This contradicts the idea of reducing the ranges further based on short-term velocity behavior.


Passage number 447.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kelley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it only mentions the name "Mr. Kelley."


Passage number 448.
MR. KELLEY. I would just like to go on record as saying thatI prefer alternative II with the 5 to 8 percent range on M2 forbasically many of the reasons that I've heard already expressed here;no others occur to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for alternative II and stating that they agree with the reasons already expressed by others.


Passage number 449.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 450.
MR. HELLER. I would be hard pressed between alternatives Iand II, but with the 5 to 8 percent modification I would go foralternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and indicating a preference for alternative II with a slight modification.


Passage number 451.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anyone we haven't heard fromhere. Mr. Morris, then Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is anyone else who hasn't spoken yet, mentioning two specific individuals.


Passage number 452.
MR. MORRIS. I would go for alternative II as written, Mr.Chairman. I don't have the concern that Tom Melzer expressed that weare going to lock ourselves into a range for M2 that is going to betoo low. I can't foresee in the years ahead when we would wantnominal GNP growing faster than 7-1/2 percent. So that doesn'ttrouble me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris states his agreement with alternative II and explains that he does not share Tom Melzer's concern. He then expresses his own perspective on nominal GNP growth, indicating that he does not see a need for it to exceed 7-1/2 percent.


Passage number 453.
MR. GUFFEY. I would opt for alternative II with the 5 to 8percent, simply because I've been persuaded to keep a little of thepowder dry. If indeed in February alternative II of 4-1/2 to 7-1/2percent looks appropriate, we would have an opportunity to adjust itat that time. I wouldn't use up all my ammunition in midyear when itdoesn't mean a whole lot for the next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is expressing his opinion and explaining his reasoning for choosing alternative II with the 5 to 8 percent interest rate. There is no opposing viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 454.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 455.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I indicated earlier at the time Iwas talking about 1987 that I would be in favor of alternative II. Istill feel that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Black, continues to hold the same opinion as mentioned earlier.


Passage number 456.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is one peculiarity about ending upwith 5 to 8 percent [for 1988] if we say we are sticking with thispresent [1987] target which we expect, with a high degree ofprobability, to come in below. Are we saying we expect 1988 to behigher than 1987. What is the implication of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply questioning whether the expectation for 1988 is higher than 1987. It is asking for clarification or explanation regarding the implications of that expectation.


Passage number 457.
-42-7/7/87MR. HELLER. We have had that situation many times before inreverse--where we have overshot and then we still adopted a lowergrowth range and there wasn't necessarily any change in policy impliedby that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement that describes a previous situation where a lower growth range was adopted without any change in policy implied. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 458.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm going to make a little case. Ithink these are too high. What do we want to do. We have an outlookhere which is always uncertain in real terms. It is quitesatisfactory; it's about the best you could hope for if you believethe staff analysis of a slow growth domestically and a pickupexternally. Nobody has discussed the point that Mr. Prell madeinitially that we had quite slow--people like to call it sluggish--growth and a decline of one half percentage point or more in theunemployment rate in the past year. I am not sure we could standvigorous growth and a decline of 2 percentage points in theunemployment rate in the next year. I don't know how you resolve thatlittle dilemma.It seems to me that it is perfectly evident that the forecastthe staff has for prices--though I am not sure that it is right--leaves us in a totally unsatisfactory position a year from now, withthe inevitability of a sizable recession if we are going to have anychance of restoring price stability. Once that gets built into thewage outlook, it is just a question of when; it is going to be messy.I am not sure that is the outlook. I find it a little difficult tothink that the prices are going to be that high with the wages at themoment being as good as they are. But certainly, the recent evidenceis not very good in terms of what is happening in prices despite theperformance on wages. I would agree with what you said, Mike, thatonce it has broken the wages, you're dead. And a lot of hard workwill come unwound. What can we do about it. We only have one tool.For one thing, I would play for stability of the dollar, unlike thestaff forecast. And I would not take a further aggravation on theinflation rate or risk there and hope that a further decline in thedollar is not needed to produce the uncertain trade effect. I wouldcertainly work on the budget deficit. There's not much we can doabout it, but at least we get some protection on the growth ofdomestic consumption as well as on the financial side and interestrates. I worry about minimum wages and all that stuff. Now, when itcomes to monetary policy, I would be cautious. I think it would be abig mistake not to be cautious. We have talked about a half percenthere; it's imagery, but that is where I would come out. I think it isvery hard to present a suitably cautious outlook without changing therange this year. I suppose we can decide that we will probably comein low and we are willing to. But we are going to have a higher ratenext year that encompasses a more or less satisfactory nominal GNPgrowth but assumes a totally unsatisfactory price level. That is myspeech for the afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the staff's forecast for prices and expresses concern about the potential for a recession if price stability is not restored. The speaker also disagrees with the staff's forecast for the stability of the dollar and suggests playing for stability instead.


Passage number 459.
MR. ANGELL. If you took one of these--the 1987 or 1988ranges--and you changed one, which one would you prefer to have lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 460.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For 1987 it is so much a matter of the waywe present it; I think it makes very little difference. If we say weare not in the practice of changing the range--which isn't quite truewhen we are looking at M1--and we are going to keep the range but wereally expect to come in low, Mr. Proxmire will say: "Why the heckdidn't you change the range." If I were testifying, I would be hard7/7/87pressed to answer that question. I would mumble that the Committeedidn't want to but nonetheless we think it is going to come in low andeventually we would go on to the next question. I can survive that.I think the way we're sending the message is more in the 1988 rangesthan [unintelligible], providing that we say we are willing to come inlow in 1987. If we are not going to come in low in 1987 then we areactually saying--these are going to get quite exaggerated--come hellor high water, we are going to get it up in the second half of theyear with the implication that that takes a more aggressive easingstance for which we're going to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement. It is discussing different strategies for presenting and communicating a message.


Passage number 461.
MR. ANGELL. But let's suppose there is one chance in fivethat the economy in the third quarter and the fourth quarter will belower than our estimate. Now, I don't think that's what is going tohappen. But I don't feel certain enough that I am willing to make abig stand over a 1988 target range at this point, have the economycome in weak, and then have to reverse. That is, with 6-1/2 percentnominal, one can have very modest inflation--less than 4 percent;that's very plausible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a lack of certainty and a cautious approach to making predictions about the economy.


Passage number 462.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Barely less than 4 percent. In GNP, Imake an assumption, and maybe its wrong, that you cannot have theeconomy grow 3 percent from here on out through the next 18 months,just based upon recent experience. The unemployment rate is going tobe 4-1/2 to 5 percent, which I think is going [down] too fast on theunemployment rate in terms of the future stability of the economy.Therefore, if it can't be 3 percent real and it is 6-1/2 percentnominal, we are going to see 3-1/2 percent on the GNP deflator and4-1/2 percent on the consumer price index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is making an assumption about the future growth of the economy and expressing concern about the unemployment rate and stability of the economy.


Passage number 463.
MR. JOHNSON. Once again, it depends upon your view of howthis whole scenario develops. If the growth is in the trade sensitiveareas where there has been a lot of slack and the employment gains arenot expected to be strong, then there might not be a reduction in theunemployment range consistent with 2-1/2 to 3 percent growth [in realGNP]. I think that is a perfectly plausible scenario. To remaincompetitive you want to maintain those productivity gains.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is discussion about different views and scenarios, there is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 464.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I grant you that; I hope that is whathappens. We can get reasonable growth consistent with sufficientlyless inflation than is in this forecast. If we can't we're introuble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and hope for a desired outcome while acknowledging the possibility of potential trouble if their desired outcome is not achieved.


Passage number 465.
MR. ANGELL. Paul, I very strongly share your view on what,in my view, is the most important issue and that is whether or not weare ready to have the dollar sustained.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Both parties seem to be expressing agreement on the importance of a certain issue.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's one of the issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is an issue or problem without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 467.
MR. ANGELL. Because it seems to me that we will quite likelyhave another period in which the testing of that will occur. But Iwould prefer not to have to test the dollar declining in an economythat is particularly weak. It seems to me that if we have an economythat is particularly weak and then we have a declining dollar, that isindeed the worst of all worlds. And so, I feel strongly andsympathize with you in regards to the dollar. But I want to be readywith ammunition to do the job when that needs to be done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement and sympathy with the person they are talking to.


Passage number 468.
 I am notsure whether this is that significant an issue---44-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the next few months, I don't thinkthis is an issue at all. That we will get to in a minute.SPEAKER(.). Mr. Chairman, one of the reasons I suggestedalternative I was that I thought it would be easier for you to explainto the public. You are saying to me that for 1987 alternative II, inyour judgment, would be much easier to explain, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty and seeking clarification, but there is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 469.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is incidental. It is easierto explain at first blush, but we can do either one for 1987. I thinkif we've got a real [unintelligible] what we say for 1987. It's onething to say we are staying with the range, but we are perfectlyprepared to come in below it if that is the way things work out. Orwe say we are sticking to the range and mean it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options for explaining something and states that they are prepared for either option.


Passage number 470.
MR. BLACK. If we don't go with alternative II, I think weneed to go with alternative III for 1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 471.
MR. ANGELL. I don't want us to lower the ranges for thisyear and then say we mean it. Because then we get into a situationthat requires another move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 472.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying lower the range for thisyear. Or do you mean lower the range now for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or confirmation about the intended meaning of lowering the range.


Passage number 473.
MR. ANGELL. No, I said this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is simply stating that he said something during the current year.


Passage number 474.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the arithmetic is. I amnot arguing about it. I don't much care whether it is lowered thisyear; it's a little awkward to explain. If we didn't lower it thisyear, from now to the end of the year at what rate of speed would M2have to grow to exceed the 7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 475.
MR. KOHN. To exceed 7-1/2 percent would probably take 11-1/2percent. It takes 7-1/2 percent [from now until year end] to get5-1/2 percent. I assume it would take about 11-1/2 percent to get7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making assumptions and stating a possible scenario based on those assumptions. There is no contradicting statement or opposing viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 476.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 11-1/2. I don't think it will exceed theupper end of the range, whatever we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states their opinion about the outcome without mentioning any opposing views or disagreement.


Passage number 477.
MR. ANGELL. Of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 478.
MR. HELLER. There is really no expectation that we shouldchange the range. The world isn't waiting for us to make a decisionon changing or not changing. We have never changed an M2 or an M3target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, is stating that there is no expectation or urgency to change the range and that they have never changed a specific target in the past.


Passage number 479.
 So, if we let the target--MR. MORRIS. Yes, but we have never had an M2 or M3 targetcome in this much below, or even above, the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 480.
MR. PARRY. One thing I don't understand is what you thinkthe interpretation of not changing it would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification on a certain subject, but there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 481.
 Wouldn't not changingit indicate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Most people said don't change this year;that is what everybody [who has a vote] said. Now, what I don't-45-7/7/87know--we have to return to what we mean by that. What do we want theexplanation to be. We are not changing it this year. We think it isinappropriate to change in the middle of the year unless there is avery strong reason. But, given what has happened in the first half ofthe year, we anticipate that it is quite likely that we could come inbelow the bottom of the range. I think that is what I heard mostpeople say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating different perspectives and opinions on whether or not to change something this year.


Passage number 482.
MR. KEEHN. There is a high level of uncertainty. Ourresults so far have been quite different than one might expect; thatlevel of uncertainty continues and that's how the rest of the yearmight play out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a high level of uncertainty in the results so far and that the rest of the year may continue to be uncertain.


Passage number 483.
MR. ANGELL. I would say that the price level pressuresbecame such that it was appropriate for us to undertake policies thatresulted in coming in under the range because of our high priority onprice level stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their viewpoint on price level stability and their belief that it was necessary to undertake certain policies.


Passage number 484.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you put it that way, the nextquestion would be: What is that level of prices that gives you that.I would be a little more vague.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they would be more vague in their answer.


Passage number 485.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I suggest "be prepared to tolerate."I think that is a little different from saying we expect. We would beprepared to tolerate it coming in somewhat below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply differentiating between being prepared to tolerate something and expecting something. They are explaining that they are willing to tolerate something coming in below a certain standard.


Passage number 486.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage to analyze, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage, and I will be happy to assist you.


Passage number 487.
]VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context or information. The given passage only provides the title or position of Vice Chairman Corrigan, and does not provide any specific statements or actions that would indicate a contention or disagreement.


Passage number 488.
 I would start with velocity: Ifvelocity of M2 continues to [rise], as in the first half of the year--MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that what you want to say is:given our modest tightening actions to deal with the inflationarypressures that have built up, interest rates have strengthened some;that has put some upward pressure on M2 velocity and M2 has weakenedsomewhat relative to the targets. Assuming no further changes, Idon't know what you say about future policy, but [unintelligible] it'sstill plausible. I would want to say it is still plausible that wewill reach the current target. It is doable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation that aims to clarify and discuss the topic of velocity and M2.


Passage number 489.
MR. ANGELL. "Tolerate" is a good word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell simply states that "tolerate" is a good word.


Passage number 490.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "Tolerate" leaves you open to hitthe target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is discussing the potential risks or vulnerabilities associated with having a tolerant mindset.


Passage number 491.
MR. BLACK. I am not sure that the best choice for 1987 isn'tin part determined by what we do in the short run, because if we arenot going to send a signal of any action there, then it makes it alittle easier to explain no change for 1987. If we decide to takesome action, I think it becomes a little more difficult to maintainthe status quo for 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 492.
MR. ANGELL. It just seems to me that commodity prices andthe dollar this year might once again be a problem. And in thatcircumstance, that 3 percent might be a better growth path for M2 thanany number that we are willing to put out there. I would prefer tosend a signal that we have decided to come down in a systematicmanner--we want to come down a half a point per year. I would fit-46-7/7/87that in with what Tom Melzer had to say: that that is gradualismregarding the long run. In the short run, the short-run variations invelocity may cause us to tolerate growth occasionally below the ratesin the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is expressing his personal opinion and preference for a specific growth path for M2. He is not arguing against or challenging any other viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 493.
MR. HELLER. Lowering the targets this year, I think, wouldbe interpreted as a signal that we want to be tighter than we werebefore. And with the dollar rising at the present time, I see verylittle reason to tighten right now. Why do it at the presentjuncture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 
Mr. Heller argues against lowering the targets, stating that it would be interpreted as a signal to be tighter. He also argues against tightening, as he sees very little reason to do so at the present time.


Passage number 494.
MR. PARRY. By lowering it you wouldn't be tightening. Whywould you be tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The given conversation seems to be a straightforward question and answer. Mr. Parry is simply seeking clarification about why something would be tightened if it were lowered.


Passage number 495.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are we talking about--1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a question and does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 496.
MR. HELLER. 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states the name and year of Mr. Heller.


Passage number 497.
MR. PARRY. Why would you be tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes a question and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 498.
MR. HELLER. Because now you are saying that I am going tochange my ranges; I am going to be tighter than I intended to bebefore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, is expressing a personal decision to change his planned ranges to be tighter than originally intended.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 499.
MR. PARRY. You mean you would adopt a different borrowingstarget as a result of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, is questioning the idea of adopting a different borrowing target based on certain circumstances or factors.


Passage number 500.
MR. FORRESTAL. It would signal that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, is discussing a signal that would indicate something, but there is no argument or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 501.
MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the passage itself. Please provide the actual passage in order to provide an accurate answer.


Passage number 502.
 If we suddenly announced lower targets--MR. KELLEY. Which we have no history of doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentions the possibility of announcing lower targets, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 503.
MR. HELLER. Which we have never done before, right. Then wesuddenly give a signal that we want to be tighter than we were before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about a previous action that has not been done before.


Passage number 504.
MR. KELLEY. It would seem to me that if we do announce areduction to 4-1/2 percent, that would be immediately perceived asbeing the target that we are after.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker is stating their own opinion or observation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 505.
MR. ANGELL. We found with M1, with the interest ratesensitivity of its velocity, that under non-normal conditions we werenot able to forecast what its target path would be and we had to endup abandoning it. It seems to me that we don't want to forceourselves into this preciseness for M2 that might later cause us tosay: Well, we just can't hit it at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is expressing concern about the preciseness of forecasting the target path of M2 and the potential consequences of being unable to meet that target.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 506.
MR. BLACK. I am repeating myself, but I really do think thiswould come to a head if we would address the short-run target. Ithink it makes the long-run a bit easier because we either send asignal or we don't and that strengthens or weakens the case for themost favored alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion by stating that addressing the short-run target would have an impact on the long-run and either strengthen or weaken the case. This suggests that there may be differing opinions or disagreement within the group or conversation.


Passage number 507.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we need to reopen [unintelligible]1987. I need to reopen what we say about it. There was aconsiderable feeling ranging from extremely mild to strong that weshouldn't change the 1987 range. That leaves open what we say aboutit. Have people who didn't want to change it before changed their-47-7/7/87mind or do I assume that we are going to keep the same 1987 range.I'm leaving open for right now what we are going to say about it.SEVERAL. Keep the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their own thoughts and uncertainty about whether to reopen a certain topic and what should be said about it.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't hear anybody recanting. Now whatare we going to say about it. We are not going to say at the oneextreme that we are really going to make it period. Nobody is sayingthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that nobody is recanting and discusses what is not going to be said.


Passage number 509.
MR. GUFFEY. Do we have to say anything at all about the nextsix months and the fact that we are coming in at or near the bottom oreven maybe below the bottom. I don't think the market perceives thatwe are going to take any action at this table to try to come withinthe M2 range within the next six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, is posing a question and expressing his opinion that the market does not perceive any action being taken to come within the M2 range in the next six months.


Passage number 510.
MR. JOHNSON. I think that we can make that clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing his belief that they can make something clear, indicating agreement or consensus.


Passage number 511.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've got to say something there.It will be rather obvious if we say nothing and we are at whateverlevel we're at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and stating the need to say something in a certain situation.


Passage number 512.
MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that we can say, assuming nochange in current policy, that it is plausible that we could stillcome within the M2 target. That is what the staff says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their interpretation of the information provided by the staff.


Passage number 513.
MR. BOEHNE. Why not say that some of the same velocityproblems that have affected M1 in recent years have spilled over to M2and that the level of uncertainty is such that we can't be all thatprecise and would tolerate being near the bottom of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a possible explanation for the spillover of velocity problems from M1 to M2 and the uncertainty surrounding it.


Passage number 514.
MR. JOHNSON. Okay, tolerate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The word "tolerate" suggests an agreeable response.


Passage number 515.
MR. PARRY. Could I ask a question. Don, what was theforecast of M2 in February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 516.
MR. KOHN. About 7 percent, near the midpoint of the range,assuming no change in interest rates from the levels that prevailed atthat time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact or assumption about a percentage without any contrasting viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 517.
MS. SEGER. It was 7 percent for the year. Is that what yousaid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation or clarification from someone named Ms. Seger about the specific percentage mentioned.


Passage number 518.
MR. KOHN. Yes. Assuming no changes in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of assumption with no conflicting views.


Passage number 519.
MR. MORRIS. The big capital gains tax payments--was that afactor in the slow growth of M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply asking a question about the potential impact of capital gains tax payments on the slow growth of M2 and M3.


Passage number 520.
MR. KOHN. If it was, I think it was very, very small. Itwould have had to have been a factor boosting the fourth quarterlevel. That is, people realized the capital gains; they put it in thefourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possible scenario where people realized capital gains during the fourth quarter.


Passage number 521.
 By the time you get to June--MR. BOEHNE. We were high last year; we are low this year.We have to have a lot of tolerance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the financial situation, mentioning that they were high last year and low this year, and emphasizing the need for tolerance.


Passage number 522.
MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me thatexplaining this is an opportunity for us to say something about the7/7/87recent actions that we took in order to provide for more price levelstability. The dollar was under pressure and that resulted in marketforces taking interest rates higher than they otherwise would havebeen. And that increased the probability that we might undershoot thelower boundary somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and explaining a situation.


Passage number 523.
MR. JOHNSON. What did we say at mid-term 1981 on M1. Wewere below targets then and we didn't hit the range by the end of theyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact and there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 524.
MR. KOHN. The Committee indicated its expectation thatgrowth in M1, adjusted for shifts in NOW accounts, over the year as awhole would be near the lower end of its annual range. Both of thebroader aggregates on the other hand--and this was the instance whenM3 was above the range--had been running at the top or somewhat abovethe upper ends of the ranges. Given their behavior the Committee saidtheir growth might be toward the upper part of their ranges for theyear as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or contention. The Committee's expectation for M1 growth is different from their expectation for the broader aggregates. M1 is expected to be near the lower end of its range, while the broader aggregates are expected to be towards the upper end of their ranges.


Passage number 525.
MR. JOHNSON. At least M3 is in the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about M3 being in the range of something without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 526.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We had shift-adjusted M1; that wasthe NOW account year with all the controversy. The measured M1 wasactually below the range, but the measure we were using adjusted forNOW accounts and was within the range as I recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about a particular measure, M1, and its adjustment for NOW accounts.


Passage number 527.
MR. JOHNSON. We could use similar language. Is that why wedidn't change the range on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or question without any conflict or argument.


Passage number 528.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What language did you use. I am not quiteclear on what language we are supposed to use at this point. Are wesupposed to say passively that we "may be near" or "tolerate". And ifwe say tolerate, under what conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification on the language to be used. They are not disagreeing with anyone or presenting conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 529.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, what's wrong with linking itto velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a question, expressing curiosity about the potential issues with linking something to velocity.


Passage number 530.
MR. BOEHNE. We're in a situation in which velocity continuesto be high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 531.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The velocity figure that we don't knowuntil the quarter is over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states a fact about a specific figure that is not known until the quarter is over.


Passage number 532.
MR. BLACK. I think this is a dispute about how we explainsomething that we almost all agree on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply stating his belief that there is a dispute or disagreement about how something is explained, even though most people agree on the matter.


Passage number 533.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not even sure it is a dispute. Ihaven't got it clear in my mind as to what should be said at thispoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing uncertainty and a lack of clarity.


Passage number 534.
MR. ANGELL. That is what I was seeking: the way we canexplain it the best.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is seeking an explanation and looking for the best way to explain it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 535.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am going to ask the staff. Do they knowwhat to say at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is potential for contention or disagreement in the passage.

The phrase "I am going to ask the staff" suggests that there may be differing opinions or perspectives among the staff members. Depending on the context, the staff members may have different knowledge or ideas about what to say at this point. Therefore, there is a possibility for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 536.
MR. PRELL. We are going to try to reflect the discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their intention to reflect the discussion.


Passage number 537.
-49-7/7/87MR. BLACK. They would eliminate the System.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple observer on the topic of eliminating the System.


Passage number 538.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could say: "The Committee expectsthat M2 will come in at or slightly below the bottom of the range.However, if velocity were to continue to [rise], the Committee alsorecognizes that it might tolerate somewhat slower growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement presents a conditional scenario, acknowledging the possibility of a different outcome based on a specific condition ("if velocity were to continue to rise"). However, there is no indication of conflicting opinions or conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 539.
"MR. MORRIS. [Unintelligible] I think there is some languageon page 16 of the Bluebook that says "The depressing influence of theprevious increase in market rates should begin to wear off reasonablypromptly since offering rates on many components of M2 seem already tohave adjusted to the current structure of market rates." Theimpression is it's a temporary phenomenon or at least is thought tobe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Morris about a particular language in the Bluebook and his interpretation of it. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 540.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't believe this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their personal disbelief without providing any specific arguments or counterarguments.


Passage number 541.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Previously someone said that it is prettyclear, or we expected to come in around, about, below or whatever. Ifthat is what you want to say, that is fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the previous statement or expectation is acceptable if that is what the listener wants to convey.


Passage number 542.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 543.
 Yes, that's what I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Put in some other qualifying words aboutwhat is happening in the real world. I just want to be sure that iswhat you want to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and confirmation to ensure they understand the intended message correctly.


Passage number 544.
MR. ANGELL. That's not too bad. It doesn't make themonetarists angry. It doesn't make anybody angry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the mentioned statement does not provoke anger from monetarists or anyone else.


Passage number 545.
MR. JOHNSON. I think that is fine. We just need theexplanation for why it dipped below, which is what happened in thepast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson is expressing his agreement with a previous statement and requesting further explanation.


Passage number 546.
MR. ANGELL. I don't know. I would rather have a wordslightly less emphatic than "substantially"; I'd rather leave"substantially" out. Is that page 16.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Angell is expressing a personal preference for using a slightly less emphatic word than "substantially" and suggesting leaving it out altogether. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 547.
MR. STERN. Why not be prepared to tolerate M2 growth at ornear, or whatever, the bottom of the range, depending on some of thethings we usually use--like performance of the dollar, the inflationoutlook, the real economy. It seems to me that that's really where weare. Assuming those variables more or less behave themselves, we justare not going to get all that worked up about M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely suggesting a possible strategy to tolerate M2 growth at the bottom of the range based on certain variables.


Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you're really saying is--I just wantto get this right--if it is going to come in around 5-1/2 percent,that means above or below 5-1/2 percent depending upon all these otherthings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be a statement seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 549.
MR. JOHNSON. Say "at or near the bottom of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is simply stating a fact or instruction without any opposition or argument.


Passage number 550.
"MR. ANGELL. "Around" is a good word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement by Mr. Angell about the word "around."


Passage number 551.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Tentatively I think we[unintelligible]. Where are we now on the big issue of next year. Wehave lots of people who want 5 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3. Wehave some who want 6 to 9 percent. Are there any different thoughts-50-7/7/87on these ranges. Anybody on one side or the other who wants to changetheir minds. Mine is closed. Does anybody like Mr. Corrigan's 4 to 8percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different ranges for the interest rates and asking if anyone has any different thoughts or wants to change their minds.


Passage number 552.
MR. KELLEY. I thought Jerry's suggestion of 4 to 8 percentwas an interesting alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement shows that MR. KELLEY finds Jerry's suggestion interesting, indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 553.
MR. STERN. One virtue of that is it does reflect a somewhatgreater level of uncertainty, which I think is probably appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea that a greater level of uncertainty is appropriate.


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody like this 4 to 8 percent.SPEAKER(.). I think it is pretty good. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 555.
MR. KEEHN. Unless broadening the range to 4 percentagepoints has some meaning that would make it difficult, I think it is agood suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Keehn, expresses agreement with a suggestion, indicating that he believes it is a good idea.


Passage number 556.
MR. ANGELL. I would prefer 4 to 8 percent over 4-1/2 to7-1/2 percent. It seems to me it gives you more flexibility which[unintelligible]. And then if we wanted to become more precise inJanuary, as long as we didn't change the top of it, and I don't thinkwe will--that is, we may want to increase that bottom range some--Idon't think it would be that damaging.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, expresses a preference for a specific range (4 to 8 percent) over another range (4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent). He also suggests the possibility of adjusting the bottom range in the future but does not expect any significant negative impact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 557.
MR. HELLER. I think the 4 to 8 percent is really going toofar. First of all, it's a very, very broad range. Because then we[unintelligible] just fuzzy things over. We are not giving a realmessage there. Talking about the bottom end of the range, I disagreewith the implications of the 4 percent growth for M2, certainly fornext year. Actually, if we use the 4 percent growth as a matter ofpolicy and get an unintended velocity change, where would we be. Ifwe have anywhere near the inflation that is projected, we'd haveeither zero or 0.5 percent growth. That is all that's left for thereal economy. So 4 percent growth, I think, would be too tight; 5percent leaves some room to grow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, disagrees with the implications of the 4 percent growth for M2 and argues that it would be too tight. He suggests that a 5 percent growth would provide more room for growth.


Passage number 558.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 559.
 But we might have a condition next year, likethis year, in which we might need fuller--MR. JOHNSON. You would have to have 2-1/2 percent velocitygrowth in M2, which would be the implication of rising interest rates.That's what you would have to have to get the kind of splits you'retalking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and discussing a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 560.
MR. HELLER. Yes; that's really speculative. You're lookingat the M2 velocity as it is projected on those handouts. It is almosthorizontal--just a tiny bit higher for M3, a tiny fall for [M2]. Ihave never seen anybody who can project velocity with any great degreeof confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. Mr. Heller is expressing his skepticism about the accuracy and reliability of projecting velocity, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented or any argument taking place.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 561.
MR. PARRY. I would like to ask a question about thisuncertainty issue and the 4 percentage point band. Are we suggestingthat there is a greater uncertainty because the analysis that has beenpresented by staff and others suggests there is greater uncertainty.Or are we just trying to widen the band because there is a greaterdifference of opinion and we can't fit people within a 3 percentagepoint range. I think there is a big difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention regarding the reason for widening the band from 3 percentage points to 4 percentage points. Mr. Parry is questioning whether the band is being widened because the analysis suggests greater uncertainty or because there is a greater difference of opinion. He believes that there is a significant difference between these two reasons.


Passage number 562.
-51-7/7/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In making the suggestion earlier, Iwas thinking of the analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the author's previous suggestion and their thought process behind it.


Passage number 563.
MR. PARRY. Nothing has been said about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry simply states that nothing has been said about a certain topic.


Passage number 564.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, if I take the arguments thatMr. Kohn and his colleagues are making about the interest elasticityof M2 seriously--and I am not sure that I do--but if I did, and if Ihad an economic outlook that very much parallels Mr. Prell's economicoutlook, it is not at all difficult for me to envision circumstancesin 1988 in which M2 could be growing at quite a low rate and I wouldbe very happy. The real economy could be doing just what they aretalking about--growing at 2-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is considering hypothetical scenarios and discussing their potential implications.


Passage number 565.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage given, "MR. JOHNSON," does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It is merely a mention of someone's name.


Passage number 566.
 Once again, to do that you have--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Now, I don't think that that is thelikely outcome; but certainly it is quite plausible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a thought and acknowledging that there is a possibility, but not providing any argument or conflicting views.


Passage number 567.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Much lower [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The phrase "[unintelligible]" indicates that the specific content of the passage is unclear or missing.


Passage number 568.
MR. HELLER. We can ask ourselves whether 5 percent or 4percent is more appropriate in conjunction with the economic outlookthat we have presented. And push it to a [unintelligible]. You arereally talking about an outlier of an outlier there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller is simply asking a question and discussing different percentages without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 569.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think so, Bob. Again, Ithink part of the question to consider is how you judge the outlook inthe first place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their own opinion and adding that part of the question to consider is how one judges the outlook in the first place.


Passage number 570.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Next year, you're projecting what for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply mentions the need for projecting something for M2 next year, without any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements.


Passage number 571.
MR. KOHN. Around 5 percent or maybe a little under that--4-1/2 to 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 572.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether I can get a[consensus for] 4 to 8 percent. Let's just have a show of hands ofpeople who like this idea of 4 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply an inquiry or suggestion regarding the feasibility of achieving a certain percentage.


Passage number 573.
MR. ANGELL. Let's ask the question to you. How do you feelabout it. Do you feel that 4 to 8 percent helps you much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks for the listener's opinion about whether a certain percentage helps them much.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 574.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a relatively small problem. Why isthe range so large. I am not so sure about velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage because the first sentence suggests that the problem is small, while the second sentence questions why the range is large. Additionally, the last sentence expresses doubt about velocity.


Passage number 575.
MR. STERN. That seems to me to be one of the things we havebeen confronting for the last several years now. It doesn't seem tome that that would be difficult to explain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their perspective and stating that it doesn't seem difficult to explain.


Passage number 576.
MR. JOHNSON. The only thing I can think of is that SenatorProxmire might react to that [by saying]: Well you never reallywidened the range on M2 and M3 before; it was just M1. Now you arefocusing on M2 and you are broadening the range on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is speculating on what Senator Proxmire might say, but there is no actual disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 577.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Historically, the range has been 2 to2-1/2 points; we got that up to 3 points. It's a little embarrassing;if you believe in these targets, it is a pretty wide range. I am not-52-7/7/87sure it is wider than, in fact, the outlook has suggested it shouldbe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the range and expressing their own uncertainty about whether it is wider than what was suggested by the outlook.


Passage number 578.
MR. STERN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Mr. Stern without providing any further context or information.


Passage number 579.
 It is probably not as wide as the analyticshere--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a decline in velocity last year ofwhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any specific contentions or disagreements. It simply states a fact about the analytics and the decline in velocity without providing any contrasting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 580.
MR. KOHN. It's about 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show contention or disagreement. It is simply a factual statement about something being around 4 percent.


Passage number 581.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is because the passage only states a numerical value without providing any context or information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 582.
MR. JOHNSON. If I were a Senator sitting on the BankingCommittee, it would look to me like a gradual undermining of theHumphrey-Hawkins Act.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical scenario where the speaker, Mr. Johnson, expresses his perspective on the potential undermining of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act.


Passage number 583.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Senator Proxmire would take that view. Idon't think the rest care.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that Senator Proxmire holds a specific view, but states that they believe the rest of the individuals mentioned do not care about the issue.


Passage number 584.
MR. ANGELL. No, I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with the statement.


Passage number 585.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say we are making it 4 to 8percent now, in July, but the Committee intends to try to narrow therange next February. That is what we could say to respond to hisquestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the current situation and the future intentions of the committee in a straightforward manner.


Passage number 586.
MR. ANGELL. Or we could say 5 to 8 percent and the Committeeis going to look at it again in February in terms of possibly loweringit again. We want to send signals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the committee is considering lowering the percentage again.


Passage number 587.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have three choices: 4 to 8percent is being proposed, if that appeals to anybody or most of you;we have alternative II as written, which has gotten quite a few votes;and we have alternative II as modified to 5 to 8 for both M2 and M3.Then there are further subdivisions. We could adopt that last one andsay we were going to look at it hard with the thought or reducing it,or that we would have some inclination to look at that possibilitynext February, to take Mr. Angell's variant of that. Let me just testthe three pure ones and forget about defining the third. How manyprefer 4 to 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states different choices and options without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 588.
MR. BLACK. Which ones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a question asked by Mr. Black.


Passage number 589.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many members. We haven't got a hugefollowing for 4 to 8 percent: five. Alternative II as written.Alternative II with the 5 to 8 percent. Well, that seems to be wherethe Committee is; so let's assume that's where we are for the moment.Let us turn to the short-term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just discussing the number of members and considering different alternatives.


Passage number 590.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, do you want to consider thedirective language that would go with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 591.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's return to that after we consider allthe rest. I hear that you got all this new [unintelligible]. For theshort run, the critical variable will be [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting to discuss a specific topic after considering everything else and acknowledges that they have heard about something new. They also mention that the critical variable for the short run is unclear. However, there is no conflicting or contradictory information in the passage.


Passage number 592.
-53-7/7/87MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I think that we ought to stayexactly where we are. We have two-way risk again in the foreignexchange market; we have a diminution in inflationary expectations;and the real economy is going along reasonably well. And I think weought to just take things as they are and not rock the boat. I wouldbe speaking of borrowing at $500 million and language saying that weseek to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 593.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can I carry you one step further: is [yourpreference] symmetrical on the language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage does not contain any statements or arguments that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question and seeks further clarification.


Passage number 594.
MR. BOEHNE. Symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements or arguments that indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 595.
MR. BLACK. With "woulds" or "mights".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of "woulds" or "mights" suggests that Mr. Black is speculating or uncertain about something, indicating a potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 596.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 597.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm precisely with Mr. Boehne: "B"and symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is in agreement with Mr. Boehne.


Passage number 598.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot attend the meeting tomorrow due to a scheduling conflict.


Passage number 599.
MR. BOYKIN. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin's agreement indicates that he is in agreement with something previously mentioned or discussed.


Passage number 600.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 601.
MR. JOHNSON. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 602.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It simply states a name without providing any information or context.


Passage number 603.
MR. KEEHN. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker explicitly states that they agree, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 604.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Kelley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 605.
MR. KELLEY. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kelley, explicitly states that he agrees with something.


Passage number 606.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is very subtle analysis in terms ofyour--contrarySPEAKER(.). You've got them all worn out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It simply describes a subtle analysis and suggests that something has exhausted the subjects being analyzed.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Angell without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 608.
MR. ANGELL. I agree. I don't know what to fight about now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker explicitly states that they agree and do not know what to fight about, indicating there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 609.
MR. MELZER. I'll agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Melzer, agrees with something that was not explicitly mentioned in the provided excerpt.


Passage number 610.
MR. PARRY. So will I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement of agreement.


Passage number 611.
MR. FORRESTAL. I will not break the pattern; I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Forrestal agrees with the pattern and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 612.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does anybody want to express aview.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage implies that there may be differing views or opinions among the individuals present but does not explicitly state whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 613.
MS. SEGER. Can we have a different tilt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a different perspective or opinion is being presented, indicated by the use of "Can we" implying a desire for change or deviation from the current situation.


Passage number 614.
-54-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us resolve the language. Where isthis language. Do you give any alternative here in the directiveparagraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for clarification and alternative options in regards to resolving a language issue.


Passage number 615.
MR. KOHN. No.SPEAKER(.). That's good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers seem to agree that the situation is good.


Passage number 616.
MR. KOHN. Not for the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that "Not for the short run" which suggests that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 617.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're going to say "seeks tomaintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions." Canwe make it symmetric. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint would orsomewhat lesser reserve restraint would..." Do you want it in thatorder or reverse order.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a discussion about wording and order of statements, not a debate or disagreement about ideas or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 618.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, reverse it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 619.
MR. ANGELL. Let's not reverse it. I don't want to send anyother subtle signals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell simply expresses his preference not to send any subtle signals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 620.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does the sentence otherwise look allright--to people who want it symmetrical anyway. I suppose we simplyput in these numbers; we have faith in the staff. Are we[unintelligible] now. What they say is 5 and 7-1/2--we sometimes tryto avoid using those fractions. If you believe the staff we've got touse different numbers this time; I don't know whether to believe them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and skepticism about whether to trust the staff's recommendation to use different numbers. This is shown in phrases such as "we sometimes try to avoid using those fractions" and "I don't know whether to believe them."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 621.
MR. KOHN. Sorry. You can say 5 to 7; that would encompassboth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not clearly state whether the speaker can say 5 to 7 or not, causing a potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 622.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we ever used a fraction here before.I guess we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 623.
MR. BERNARD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as the statement "Mr. Bernard" is simply a response or acknowledgment.


Passage number 624.
MR. KOHN. I guess so, but not recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply states that there has not been disagreement or contention recently.


Passage number 625.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given statement "VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN." This is a neutral statement that does not indicate any conflicting positions or opinions.


Passage number 626.
 7-1/2 is a nice fraction, though;it's not like--MR. BLACK. That really [balances] off very nicely between 5and 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that 7-1/2 is a nice fraction and provides additional context by saying it balances off nicely between 5 and 10.


Passage number 627.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall we say 5 and 7-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking if "5 and 7-1/2" is an appropriate answer.


Passage number 628.
MR. ANGELL. That seems to me to be somewhat expansive butthat's--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is expressing his personal opinion that the statement being referred to is somewhat expansive.


Passage number 629.
 I can imagine circumstances in which 5 to 7-1/2 might be--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a personal opinion or speculation and does not involve any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 630.
 Well, this is a resource--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This follows a very low [growth] period,let me say. That's not very expansive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 631.
MR. JOHNSON. That's what's inconsistent with alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that something is inconsistent with alternative II.


Passage number 632.
-55-7/7/87MR. HELLER. I know--which is [unintelligible] the bottom ofthe range, again. Otherwise, you have a hard time explaining why wewould be able to achieve the lower end of the target cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 633.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 5 percent on M2 isn't going to be inthe lower end of the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is stating a fact without any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 634.
MR. HELLER. No, you need 7-1/2 percent arithmetically inorder to be able to reach it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 635.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7-1/2 percent for 6 months. If it grew 5percent for the next 3 months, what would you need for the final 3months--11 percent or something--to reach the bottom end of thetarget.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or confusion about what interest rate would be needed for the final 3 months to reach the bottom end of the target, as indicated by the statement "or something." This implies that there is uncertainty or disagreement about the exact interest rate required.


Passage number 636.
MR. KOHN. Yes. Presumably, it would be 10 percent, withouttaking account of the compounding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply states a presumption without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 637.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it would be 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a fact or opinion without any contradictory or conflicting information.


Passage number 638.
MR. KOHN. Yes, but without knowing the compounding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that more information is needed to make a complete assessment.


Passage number 639.
 The 5percent gets you to 4-1/2 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if the 7-1/2 percent is rightforgetting about the compounding, which is limited, it is going to be10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 640.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's 7-1/2; that's what it says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson simply states a fact by stating what it says, without any indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 641.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or content provided.


Passage number 642.
 Q4 to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, but I think with the 7-1/2 percent forM2 that we get [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions a percentage, but without further context or information, it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 643.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It only mentions Mr. Johnson without any additional context.


Passage number 644.
MR. KOHN. 5 percent gets you to 4-1/2 percent in September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about percentages.


Passage number 645.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be a little more than 10 percentbecause that's a quarterly figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply providing an explanation or justification for why the figure is a little more than 10 percent.


Passage number 646.
MR. KOHN. It might be less given the higher base. We'll betaking it from September, which is a higher base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about a higher base and the timeframe it will be taken from.


Passage number 647.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to find out it's going to beeven 12 percent that this implies for the last quarter; I'm not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions uncertainty about the percentage for the last quarter.


Passage number 648.
MR. KOHN. It's a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. The statement "It's a lot" is a simple remark and does not imply disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 649.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And for growth in M1, that's a vagueenough statement. Are we going to leave that the way it is. "Growthin M1, while picking up from recent levels" or something--. Do wewant to put something like that in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not explicitly express any disagreement or contention. It is discussing a potential change in wording and asking for input or suggestions.


Passage number 650.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. JOHNSON." This is simply a title or a reference to someone named "Mr. Johnson."


Passage number 651.
 Still running--MR. KOHN. March to June was 4 percent; and 4 percent isabout what we're projecting for June to September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a projected percentage for a specific time period.


Passage number 652.
-56-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. March to June was low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "March to June was low" is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 653.
MR. KOHN. It certainly picked up from May in June but notfrom March to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the increase in activity from May to June compared to March to June.


Passage number 654.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it makes muchdifference. If we want to be reassuring to some of our monetarists,then we could say "growth in M1, while picking up from recent levels"--which would be May and June. And that was negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion and providing a possible alternative phrase without contradicting or disputing any previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 655.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of "Yes" by Mr. Angell indicates that he disagrees or has a different opinion. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 656.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information or context for there to be contention or disagreement.


Passage number 657.
 "M1 is expected to remain well below its[pace]"--MR. JOHNSON. "Of 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a statement made by Mr. Johnson regarding an expectation for M1 to remain below its pace in 1986. There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 658.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Growth during 1986," I think. Do youwant to put that phrase in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 659.
MR. ANGELL. That's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "That's fine," indicating agreement or approval.


Passage number 660.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The word "pace" is kind of a funny wordwhen I see it, but I know what it means. It was 6 percent last time;I guess we'll leave it then and use growth rate. We continue on with4 to 8 percent. Does anybody have any further comments. That'sstating it symmetrically with no change, the numbers or the projection[provided by the staff], and "while picking up from recent levels"inserted. Does anybody have any questions about that. Then we'll beturning to the other operational paragraphs. We'll go back to page20. What's the difference between these variants. All right. Youhave nice language for us here; I might have read that before.Variant II just has the reduction in the range. Do people like Mr.Kohn's language. It's going to save us some trouble.SPEAKER(.). Yes.SPEAKER(.). Yes. It seems pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists primarily of statements, questions, and observations without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 661.
MR. BOEHNE. Good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement as it only consists of a greeting and a polite response.


Passage number 662.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Where are you reading from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks where the reader is reading from without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 663.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The top of page 21.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 664.
MR. FORRESTAL. Do we just want to say "the lower ends of therange" or do we want to indicate that growth might be somewhat below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention regarding whether to only mention "the lower ends of the range" or also consider the possibility of growth being somewhat below that range. The use of the phrase "or do we want to indicate" implies different opinions or perspectives on how to present the information.


Passage number 665.
MR. BOEHNE. It sounds like "around".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that the speaker perceives a word as sounding like "around."


Passage number 666.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "around the lower end of the range"I guess means that it could be below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely expressing their interpretation or understanding of the phrase "around the lower end of the range."


Passage number 667.
MR. FORRESTAL. Does it mean that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a dialogue with no clear indication of contention or disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 668.
MR. KOHN. Yes."Around" means both sides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that "around" means both sides, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 669.
-57-MR. MORRIS(.). Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states "Sure" in response to an unknown statement or question, indicating agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 670.
7/7/87MR. BLACK. Trust him, Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states "Trust him, Bob," suggesting that there is a level of faith or reliance in someone named Bob.


Passage number 671.
 That's Boston--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to say aggregates or growth inM2--pin it down to one that's around the lower end of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering a suggestion or preference for a specific measurement when discussing Boston's M2 growth.


Passage number 672.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only consists of the name "Mr. Johnson," and there is no indication of any content or information that could suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 673.
 They're both going to be "around"--MR. FORRESTAL. Being around [unintelligible], which takescare of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that both individuals will be "around" without any opposing opinions or conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 674.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They "will be in the lower halves of theirranges, particularly M2" or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The sentence simply states that the subject will be in the lower halves of their ranges, specifically mentioning M2.


Passage number 675.
MR. JOHNSON. That's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, expresses that something is fine, indicating agreement or approval.


Passage number 676.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I kind of like it the way it is.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their personal opinion that they like the current situation.


Passage number 677.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. When it comes in, if one falls out[of the range] we did exactly what we said we were going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions or statements.


Passage number 678.
MR. HELLER. Yes. Right; one may be above and one below it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that there can be two positions in relation to a specific point.


Passage number 679.
MR. ANGELL. How about that [wording within the] brackets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 680.
MR. HELLER. That's right; put it in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller is simply affirming or agreeing with a statement or action.


Passage number 681.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "That's all right." This statement implies acceptance or agreement, without any hint of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 682.
MR. ANGELL. I'd rather put a period after "appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "put a period after" suggests that there is disagreement or differing opinions on what should come after the word "appropriate".


Passage number 683.
"MR. JOHNSON. The rest of that explanation sounds all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson acknowledges that the rest of the explanation sounds all right, implying agreement.


Passage number 684.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think whether or not you put a periodafter "appropriate" the explanation you'd have to go on isincorporated in the bottom line of what's there.SPEAKER(.). Yes, I'd leave it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with leaving a period after "appropriate" and providing an explanation for why they think so.


Passage number 685.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that satisfactory.SPEAKER(.) Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees that the situation is satisfactory.


Passage number 686.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, where are we. On page 22. Is this abit of boiler plate at this point. Have we said this before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply questioning their current location in a book and wondering if the information mentioned before is being repeated.


Passage number 687.
MR. KOHN. Well, we condensed what's in the directive rightnow. This is adapted from what the Committee put in at the lastmeeting and at the February meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they condensed the information from the directive based on what was discussed in previous meetings.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 688.
MR. JOHNSON. What do you say to monetarists who have focusedon M1A and tried to take out the highly sensitive interest componentand still find a similar pattern--maybe even a more pronouncedpattern--in M1 growth. I think you can still use the interestsensitivity argument, but it seems to me that it may come up in thehearing; there may be some focus on M1A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is suggesting that monetarists who focus on M1A and try to remove the interest component still find a similar or possibly even a more pronounced pattern of growth in M1. However, he acknowledges that the interest sensitivity argument may be brought up in the hearing, indicating potential disagreement or differing perspectives among participants.


Passage number 689.
 Do you say take out theinterest earning accounts and you've still got a pattern like---58-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the question is likely to come upregardless, since the issue has been raised. We should have had alittle discussion of what's the matter with M1A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is discussing a pattern and potential question, suggesting that a discussion should have happened. However, it does not involve conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 690.
MR. KOHN. I tried to include something in my presentationabout velocity; that's why I had the velocity chart in there. Ourview is that, while less is wrong with M1A than is wrong with M1, it'sstill not that good an aggregate. It's still interest sensitive; muchof the trend in its velocity that's extended beyond the trend in M1velocity is a combination of offsetting propitious events, includingderegulation and interest rate declines. And in fact, its velocitytrend did break in early '85. So, I think it's useful as a monitorand probably more useful than M1; but all our work suggests it'sprobably not as useful as M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that M1A is not a good aggregate and is still interest sensitive, while also mentioning that their work suggests it is probably not as useful as M2. This indicates a contention or disagreement about the usefulness and accuracy of M1A as an economic indicator.


Passage number 691.
MR. JOHNSON. Would you concentrate even further oncompensating balances of corporations and their growing proportion ofdemand deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply asks for further concentration on compensating balances of corporations and their proportion of demand deposits.


Passage number 692.
MR. KOHN. In my view, that's actually what's making thisaggregate increasingly interest sensitive over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker's statement is presented as their personal view or opinion, without any conflicting ideas or arguments being presented.


Passage number 693.
MR. JOHNSON. I think it might be useful to say that becausethat would really take a lot of the wind out of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is suggesting an idea that he believes would be helpful or beneficial.


Passage number 694.
MR. PRELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 695.
 We had really good evidence, hard evidence, onthe proportion and lots of input on the growth of bits and pieces of--MR. JOHNSON. Well, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the evidence and input they have received.


Passage number 696.
MR. KOHN. Except that households are a much smallerproportion than they used to be and businesses obviously are a higherproportion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the proportion of households and businesses, without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 697.
MR. BLACK. We took a look at that Treasury study andconcluded the same thing that the staff did: that M2 is a littlebetter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is expressing agreement with the Treasury study and the staff's conclusion.


Passage number 698.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without more context.


Passage number 699.
 I completely buy the staff study and--MR. BLACK. That's where we came out, quite independently ofwhat they had done, much to my disappointment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the staff study and expresses their disappointment that their own conclusion aligns with it.


Passage number 700.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not crazy about this sentence thatfinishes with lower growth in M1; it says "the Committee anticipates".Shouldn't we say that "In the light of what happened last year theCommittee welcomes substantially slower growth of M1 this year thanlast year".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their preference or opinion about the sentence, suggesting an alternative wording without disagreeing with the information provided.


Passage number 701.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 702.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In the context of continuing economicexpansion given the intensification of price pressures,"--maybe justleave that there. All this wording about "associated with substantialdownward movement of the dollar...and the abatement of the weakness inM1 velocity" is saying the same thing as the first part of thesentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The second part of the sentence is simply rephrasing and elaborating on the ideas presented in the first part of the sentence.


Passage number 703.
-59-7/7/87MR. ANGELL. So you want to take the whole sentence out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply indicates that someone wants to remove a whole sentence.


Passage number 704.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, just the second half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the second half of the passage, there is no contention or disagreement evident.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 705.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the second half of that: "TheCommittee welcomes substantially slower growth of M1 in 1987 than in1986 in the context of continuing economic expansion andintensification of price pressures." I'm not quite crazy about that"intensification.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the phrase "I'm not quite crazy about that" indicates disagreement or a negative opinion towards the statement about the intensification of price pressures.


Passage number 706.
" I don't like to admit that the intensification-MR. ANGELL. I don't either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both individuals express agreement by saying "I don't either."


Passage number 707.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information about potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 708.
 Say "the continuing economic expansion anda greater tendency for prices"--MR. MELZER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a statement of fact or observation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 709.
 "Some evidence of greater prices"--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Some evidence of greater inflationarypressures." How about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage.
The phrase "Some evidence of greater prices" suggests that there is only partial or limited evidence supporting the idea of higher prices. On the other hand, the phrase "Some evidence of greater inflationary pressures" implies that there is some evidence indicating an increase in overall inflationary pressures. These statements present conflicting views regarding the extent and nature of the evidence provided.


Passage number 710.
MR. ANGELL. That's better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is "better" without indicating any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 711.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or information about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 712.
 Say greater--MR. ANGELL. Or inflationary expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement showing a progression or an alternative suggestion.


Passage number 713.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes. The only thing I can think of is that themonetarists would say that there's a lag and that to look atcontemporaneous inflation and to adjust monetary policy is chasing thetail.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is simply stating a possible perspective or counterargument that monetarists might have. There is no indication of a disagreement or argument between Mr. Johnson and anyone else.


Passage number 714.
MR. MORRIS. Milton Freidman predicted an explosion ofinflation in 1984.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Milton Friedman made a prediction about inflation in 1984.


Passage number 715.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a vague sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 716.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Mr. Johnson without providing any information or context about him.


Passage number 717.
 Oh, I realize that, but I'm just saying that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 718.
 All this says is that substantially slowergrowth of M1 in 1987 than in 1986 with a [unintelligible] that oughtto be--MR. JOHNSON. That's fine with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the statement.


Passage number 719.
MR. MELZER. It seems to me the last sentence could be endedafter "prevailing".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage alone does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 720.
MR. KOHN. Well, that's taken from before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Kohn without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 721.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any preferences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear statement or argument given in the passage. It simply states "Any preferences," which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 722.
 I'm--MR. HELLER. Are we really planning to do that still. We'rein the second half of the year. Are we really going to starttargeting Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the plans and expressing doubt about whether they will actually be carried out.


Passage number 723.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is this exactly what we said earlier inthe year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply referencing something that had been previously said earlier in the year.


Passage number 724.
-60-7/7/87MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The provided text does not contain any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement. It appears to be a date followed by a name or signature.


Passage number 725.
 This last sentence is exactly, which is--MR. HELLER. We may as well drop the whole sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests that the whole sentence should be dropped, indicating a desire for it to be removed but not expressing disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 726.
MR. ANGELL. No, but--. Well, I think we might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell interrupts with "No, but--", but there is no argument or conflicting views presented.


Passage number 727.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we should.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 728.
MR. ANGELL. I think there might be some circumstance inwhich we would want to bring it back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion by using the phrase "I think," and there is no indication of any opposing viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 729.
MR. STERN. I think Tom Melzer's suggestion is probably agood one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement and support for Tom Melzer's suggestion.


Passage number 730.
 I don't know why we would be particularly--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we actually should do is this. I'llmake a more accurate sentence: "The Committee in reaching operationaldecisions over the balance of the year will take account of growth inM1, and at some point in time, in the light of circumstances thenprevailing if the Committee...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is not disagreeing or arguing with any other point of view or making conflicting statements. They are simply clarifying or making a more accurate sentence.


Passage number 731.
"--MR. ANGELL. That's better, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that something has improved.


Passage number 732.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Committee in reaching operationaldecisions over the balance of the year will take account of growth inM1 in the light of circumstances then prevailing," [unintelligible]and all that business. The issue is if it's too low, we'll be alittle easier than we otherwise would be. Now we get to 1988. Wehave 5 to 8 percent as the Bluebook number for M2 and M3, right.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 733.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" and does not provide any context or information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 734.
 Leave this sentence about M1 just in--MR. ANGELL. Apparently, we could put M1 back in tentatively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage as the speaker suggests putting M1 back in tentatively, implying a potential disagreement or discussion surrounding the decision.


Passage number 735.
MS. SEGER. I'm not sure it would fit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a neutral statement of uncertainty.


Passage number 736.
MR. BOYKIN. I think we need it because we address it for1987 and now we're talking about 1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or belief about needing something, and there is no contrasting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 737.
MR. ANGELL. Tentatively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Angell is saying something in a tentative manner.


Passage number 738.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply responds affirmatively to a question without expressing any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 739.
MR. JOHNSON. All you need is that one sentence: "The issuesinvolved in establishing a target range for M1 would be carefullyreappraised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Johnson about the need to carefully reevaluate the issues involved in establishing a target range for M1.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 740.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is awfully thin. It saysnothing about the targets. Did we write this sentence in the pastpattern. It says we established the ranges for M2 and M3 and doesn'tsay another word about them. It goes on to a little baloney about M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker criticizes the sentence for being too vague and omitting important information about the targets and focuses on the lack of details about M2 and M3.


Passage number 741.
MR. KOHN. I think that is the past pattern for the tentativeranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn is simply expressing his opinion about a past pattern without contradicting or challenging anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 742.
MR. BERNARD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 743.
-61-7/7/87MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no apparent contention or disagreement in the given passage as it consists of a name with a date. Without any additional context, it is not possible to determine any potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 744.
 But I think we might have some language--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I was wondering about is thisdiscussion of M1. Why shouldn't it all be combined in that oneparagraph on M1. So what would we change. With respect to M1 and soforth [as shown]. Then, "because of its sensitivity the Committeedecided not to [target it] over 1987 and has established no tentativerange for 1988." And then start with "currently the appropriateness,"and then add this last sentence saying "issues involved withestablishing a target range for M1 will be carefully reappraised inthe beginning of 1988." I would make M1 all one sentence. I thinkit's a little more straightforward that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a suggestion or opinion about how to rephrase a paragraph for clarity and organization.


Passage number 745.
MR. ANGELL. I just wonder what, tentatively, we might thinkabout. Although we may not want to put it in, what would we have inmind. If at this stage you had to suggest M1 ranges for 1988 whatwould you suggest, Don.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a series of questions and does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 746.
MR. KOHN. Our projections, of course, are keyed to theprospects of rising interest rates. And in that case we have prettylow M1 growth--on the order of 4 percent. Without those risinginterest rates, we'd probably have growth for 1988 in the 5 or 6percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 747.
MR. ANGELL. So, you'd want a range at least 3 percentagepoints wide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is simply stating a statement without any opposition or disagreement from others.


Passage number 748.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 749.
 Well, with--MR. ANGELL. Or more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention as indicated by the interruption with "MR. ANGELL" after "Well, with." This interruption may indicate a difference in opinion or an argument.


Passage number 750.
MR. KOHN. More than 3 percentage points wide would be myrecommendation. If you had 3 percentage points on M2, a comparable[M1] range that would encompass the same kinds of possible outcomes, Ithink, would be close to 6 percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their recommendation for the range of percentage points for M2 and expressing their opinion on what would be a comparable range for M1.


Passage number 751.
MR. ANGELL. So, you think 3 to 8 percent would be--SPEAKER(.). 3 to 15.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell poses a question or statement and the Speaker does not respond.


Passage number 752.
MR. ANGELL. 3 to 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that indicate contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or response from Mr. Angell.


Passage number 753.
MR. JOHNSON. There's a lot of uncertainty about the interestrate scenario that goes with these nominal GNP numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is simply stating that there is uncertainty surrounding the interest rate scenario related to the nominal GNP numbers.


Passage number 754.
MR. ANGELL. I know, but I just want to have some notion incase we're going to discuss this seriously in January. I want to havesome notion about how well we might do between now and then as towhether or not we will be able to redo it. Otherwise, I don't want tosay we're going to discuss it seriously. You think it would take 3 to9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement of personal opinion and a request for information.


Passage number 755.
MR. KOHN. Right now, if you asked me, I'd say 3 to 9percent, or 2 to 8 percent, or something along that line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion or estimate on a certain percentage, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting statement present.


Passage number 756.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. ANGELL" as the passage is only a name or title. It does not contain any statements or arguments that can be agreed or disagreed upon.


Passage number 757.
 Then it would be---62-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This doesn't say we're going to establisha target range. All it says is that we are thinking of it; it justsays we're going to reexamine whether we want one at all. I don'tthink it commits you to anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the mentioned statement does not commit anyone to anything and is simply suggesting a reexamination of the matter.


Passage number 758.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "MR. JOHNSON."


Passage number 759.
 That's the same kind of range we were saying wehad--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that just leaves it where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that the range mentioned by both parties aligns and does not create any conflict.


Passage number 760.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply states "MR. ANGELL," which does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 761.
 Yes, but it just doesn't--MR. JOHNSON. We have to have a target so we would--.Obviously, we wouldn't at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. While there is a statement followed by an interruption, there is no direct disagreement or conflict between the speakers.


Passage number 762.
MR. ANGELL. I'm just suggesting that sometime we will runout of ability to continue to say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Angell, offering a suggestion or possibility without any conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 763.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 764.
MS. SEGER. We've always said that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: no


Passage number 765.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We've run out of some other things,too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We've run out of some other things, too" simply indicates that there are other items that have been depleted or exhausted, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas being expressed.


Passage number 766.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just [review]. Logically, I thinkthis M1 sentence would come after both of them, then. The M1paragraph would be as it is with a small change in the middle of theparagraph: "The Committee again decided not to establish a specifictarget for growth in M1 over the remainder of 1987 and no tentativerange has been set for 1988. The appropriateness of changes in M1this year will continue to be evaluated," etc. Then right at the endbring up that other sentence: "The issues involved for establishing atarget range for M1 will be carefully reappraised at the beginning of1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 767.
"VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the position or title of Vice Chairman Corrigan.


Passage number 768.
 I would be--MR. ANGELL. You know, ironically, we took away M1 the yearthat we would have hit the target range if we had set one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker is stating a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 769.
MR. BLACK. I've been telling them they were playing withfire.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The statement "I've been telling them they were playing with fire" suggests that Mr. Black disagrees with someone or opposes their actions, possibly warning them about the potential consequences of their actions.


Passage number 770.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would depend upon [unintelligible].Well, this leaves us one sentence for the long-term ranges for 1988.Is that all right. It says "the range is _ to _ percent;" itdoesn't say anything about [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 771.
MR. KOHN. The one you had last July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is incomplete and lacks context.


Passage number 772.
MR. PRELL. That also was the last one, August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement by Mr. Prell, and there is no indication of a disagreement or contention in this specific sentence.


Passage number 773.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes. We have a range on debt, which iswhat. Is debt 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a range for debt, without any opposing views or conflicting information being presented.


Passage number 774.
MR. JOHNSON. That's what I get: 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the percentage range that Mr. Johnson gets.


Passage number 775.
-63-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We start out with no change in the rangethis year but we agree that growth in the aggregates around the lowerend of the ranges may be appropriate in light of developments withrespect to velocity and signs of underlying inflationary pressures,provided that economic activity is expanding at an acceptable pace.We will vote separately on these things. That is the pattern, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that there is no change in the range at the beginning of the year, but growth in the aggregates around the lower end of the ranges may be appropriate under certain conditions. It also mentions that there will be separate votes on these matters. The passage does not present any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 776.
MR. BERNARD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "yes" indicates that there is agreement or confirmation in the passage.


Passage number 777.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we prepared to vote on 1987 ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking if the group is ready to vote on the 1987 ranges.


Passage number 778.
Unchanged ranges with that sentence--MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne *President Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern Yes*--[Note: Mr. Boehne was out of the room at the time of this vote. Asindicated below, Mr. Boehne voted 'yes' when he returned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 779.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we move to 1988. We have twosentences: one saying 5 to 8 percent and one saying 7-1/2 to 10percent on the associated range for debt. But we also have thissentence or paragraph on M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about different percentages and a reference to M1.


Passage number 780.
MR. JOHNSON. Say that again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 781.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All it says is "5 to 8 percent for M2 andM3 and 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 for the associated range for domesticnonfinancial debt." It's two sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It simply presents numerical data without any conflicting viewpoints or contrasting statements.


Passage number 782.
 Then this paragraph on M1--MR. STERN. Can we establish that that's the way we've doneit in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking whether a particular method has been employed previously.


Passage number 783.
MR. JOHNSON. Move toward price stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Move toward price stability" is a neutral and objective statement that does not indicate any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 784.
MR. STERN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The given passage, "MR. STERN," does not provide any context or content to analyze for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 785.
 Or Governor Angell's thought about maybe lookingat it again with a bias toward--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You can get a vote from Mr. Boehnenow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply discusses Governor Angell's suggestion of taking another look at something, without any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement implied. The mention of Mr. Boehnenow is unrelated to any potential contention.


Passage number 786.
MR. KOHN. Last July we simply had a paragraph that gave thetentative ranges with a little extra verbiage about M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a previous paragraph.


Passage number 787.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or additional information. The phrase "Mr. Johnson" does not provide enough information to make a judgment on the presence of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 788.
 I would prefer to have at least that sentenceabout why we're ratcheting the range down, saying--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I prefer to have one on why we arenot ratcheting it down enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention between the speaker and the person they are addressing. The speaker expresses a preference for including a sentence explaining why they are reducing the range, suggesting that the other person disagrees or has not provided sufficient explanation.


Passage number 789.
-64-7/7/87MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage seems to be a name or reference without any context or statement of opinion, thus it does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 790.
 But we want to continue to ratchet a longerperiod of time--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we've got to say that in theexplanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their intention to continue something for a longer period of time.


Passage number 791.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that operational languagehas always been that stark. It has been in the other part of thepolicy record and in the testimony that we had all the verbiage andthe hallelujahs and hosannas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the author's opinion about operational language being stark and mentions that there is more expressive language in other parts of the policy record and testimony.


Passage number 792.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have 5 to 8 percent, 7-1/2 to 10-1/2percent and the paragraph on M1 for the record. Does anybody needthat read to them. I will read it to you. Are you ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 793.
MR. BERNARD. Can we pick up President Boehne on 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the possibility of picking up President Boehne on 1987.


Passage number 794.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:


Passage number 795.
MR. BERNARD. President Boehne on the 1987 ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that Mr. Bernard is addressing President Boehne about the 1987 ranges.


Passage number 796.
MR. BOEHNE. What was the number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about a number, without expressing any opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 797.
 5-1/2 to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "5-1/2 to-- Unchanged" simply states that something has not changed.


Passage number 798.
MR. ANGELL. Just vote no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement of agreement or support.


Passage number 799.
MR. BOEHNE. I vote yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their vote as "yes" without any opposing view or argument.


Passage number 800.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 801.
 For 1988:Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we get down to the operationalparagraph. Just to remind you: It is "maintain"; same language aslast time, but totally symmetrical with "woulds"; 5 and 7-1/2 percent,respectively, for M2 and M3; growth in M1 while picking up from recentlevels is expected to remain well below the pace in 1986; and 4 to 8percent for the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply lists the positions or opinions of different individuals regarding a certain topic.


Passage number 802.
MR. ANGELL. In other words, just like last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a previous occurrence.


Passage number 803.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Please call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply a request to call the roll, which is a routine administrative task often done in meetings or classrooms to confirm attendance.


Passage number 804.
-65-7/7/87MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states "MR. BERNARD" without any further context or information.


Passage number 805.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything else to discuss. We can justquit. If any members have changes in their projections, Mr. Prellwould like to receive them by noon on Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply lists the names of individuals and states that if any of them have changes in their projections, they should inform Mr. Prell by a certain deadline.


Passage number 806.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd like for the record to show, ifI may, that of the other occasions to [unintelligible] us, in thisparticular case I think we have to acknowledge, at least I would doso, that this will be the Chairman's last Open Market Committeemeeting, hopefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their acknowledgment and recognition of the Chairman's last Open Market Committee meeting.


Passage number 807.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for information or clarification and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 808.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Hopefully. But it has been, Ithink, 12 years and something like 119 or 120 consecutive--I don'tthink he's ever missed one--meetings of the Committee as a member andas Chairman. We've all come to learn the subtleties of "mights" and"woulds" and "snugs" and "oozes." But I think we've learned a lotmore sensible things and I think that we should acknowledge thisparticular occasion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their hope and acknowledging the Chairman's long-standing commitment to the Committee.


