Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 3, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 3, 1987, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehnKelleySegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, Hoskins, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer and Morris, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Cleveland, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Fousek, Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rosenblum,Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account11/3/87Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis,Mmes. Munnell and Tshinkel, Senior Vice PresidentsFederal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco,Richmond, Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, andAtlanta, respectivelyMs. Lovett, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York'Mr. Weber, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of MinneapolisSecretary's Note: Prior to this meeting, noticehad been received of the election of W. Lee Hoskinsas an alternate member of the Federal Open MarketCommittee for the period October 9, 1987 throughFebruary 29, 1988, and Mr. Hoskins had executedhis Oath of Office.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the individuals present at the meeting.


Passage number 2.
Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof November 3, 1987CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everybody. Will somebodyplease move the minutes. [The minutes were moved and approved at thispoint.] Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The minutes were moved and approved without any further discussion.


Passage number 3.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is a statement made by Mr. Cross. It does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 4.
]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions of Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply asks if there are any questions for Mr. Cross.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 5.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a question that may be broader than forMr. Cross. A week ago, we were talking about walking a thin linebetween the dollar and the domestic economy and I get the feeling thatthat thin line has broadened out some since a week ago. How wide isit and do we have a policy or don't we have a policy. Is it theTreasury that's making U.S. policy or are we just kind of letting themarket take us where we go or do we have some sense of where we wantto go with the dollar. There have been a lot of changes in sevendays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether there is a clear policy regarding the dollar and the domestic economy, expressing uncertainty about whether the Treasury is determining the policy or if the market is driving the direction. This suggests a lack of consensus or agreement on how to handle the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't I respond to that, and thenSam Cross can correct me. There have been significant disputes overthe years as to precisely what the relationship is between theTreasury and the Federal Reserve with respect to the question ofexchange rate intervention. As I understand it, even though there aredisputable issues here, we largely tend to follow Treasury's lead inthis question. The Treasury's position, while basically favorable tothe Louvre [Accord] as a general procedure, is that they nonethelessare interested in making certain that we don't endeavor to defend aparticular position which is indefensible. And, I would think thatwhile the general view of the Secretary sort of backed and filled onvarious occasions, ideally, he would like to see the markets stabilizeon their own without any actions on our part, whether through monetaryor intervention policies. But, should that not occur, his willingnessto commit U.S. resources is limited. And the general impression thatI get, although it is not articulated necessarily sharply at alltimes, is that if the market moves us down gradually without anysecondary consequences until we reach a market equilibrium, that wouldsuit the Treasury just fine. There is, however, I think a generalawareness that this all could get out of hand and that there could bea lot of dangerous, secondary problems. But it is the Secretary'sview--maybe I should use the word "hope" because that is morerelevant--that that will not materialize. So, I would say at themoment, that while the Louvre [unintelligible], it is clearly fading;and it will continue to do so unless and until there are dramaticpolicy shifts on the part of the Treasury, which I must say to you, Ithink would not be appropriate. Irrespective of what has beenhappening recently, I would say that we are not freely floating but weare floating in a way in which the degree of intervention that theTreasury is willing to commit is very minor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that there have been significant disputes over the relationship between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve regarding exchange rate intervention. Additionally, the Treasury's position is portrayed as being cautious and not wanting to defend an indefensible position. The speaker also expresses their own belief that the Treasury's willingness to commit resources is limited. Therefore, there is contention in the passage regarding the appropriate level of intervention and the potential risks involved.


Passage number 7.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman. Is there, if you can tell us,any plan to reconvene the G-5 or G-7. Things have changed markedly,obviously, since the Louvre agreement. I must say that the reason Iask that question is that I find it a little anomalous that we aredraining reserves to defend the dollar while, at the same time, we are11/3/87adding reserves to add liquidity to the domestic economy. Maybe it'sconsidered to be a disorderly market at this point, or potentiallydisorderly, but it seems a little anomalous to me to have this dividedpolicy in a sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked by Mr. Forrestal.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is an element of that. There is avery fundamental question that we never seem to confront: Howsuccessful is intervention under various, different conditions. Ithink that the major thrust of our policy, as I understand it, isbasically to exhibit our hand [to show] that we have not completelylost interest in the exchange rate, leaving the impression that shouldsomething really significant occur, we would be in there with bothfeet. But, that is a very mild position, I think, relative to what itwas several months ago, and certainly at the beginning of the Louvreagreement. But, as best I can read it, there has unquestionably beena significant change in the position at Treasury in the last severalmonths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing the speaker's understanding and interpretation of a change in policy at Treasury, but there is no clear contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 9.
MR. FORRESTAL. Do you think that they will be thinking aboutanother Louvre-type meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question about the possibility of another Louvre-type meeting.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, not necessarily. Do you mean toreset the exchange-rate question or just to get the G-7 meeting forcoordination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 11.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I was thinking of both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they were considering both aspects.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. At the moment, I think that there's adisinclination on our part to do it unless we have something to bringto the table. If something significant materializes out of thesenegotiations currently going on, then I would suspect that we aredealing with the possibility of a G-7 meeting which, in effect, wouldendeavor to exchange fiscal actions on our part with comparableactions on the part of Germany and Japan. Presumably, at that point,they would revisit specific paragraphs of the Louvre agreement,probably to reset where the intervention points would be. We have nowrun through all intervention points of which I am aware.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it is simply discussing a potential course of action and the speaker's thoughts on the matter. It does not involve conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 13.
MR. BOEHNE. Do you have any insight as to why Karl OttoPoehl was so blunt last night. In one sense, they had a lot to losewith a weaker dollar, and the sense I got out of his remarks was, ifthe dollar weakens, so be it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their interpretation of Karl Otto Poehl's remarks about the weaker dollar.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 14.
 This strikes me as--MR. MORRIS. I think they are very much concerned about toomuch intervention increasing the German money supply as it did in1978; and they want to avoid that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement in this passage as Mr. Morris disagrees with the speaker's point of view. The use of the phrase "I think" indicates a difference in opinion or perspective.


Passage number 15.
MR. JOHNSON. I think they are more concerned about that thanthe dollar exchange rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit disagreement or contention in the passage. It is simply stating Mr. Johnson's opinion about what he believes the concern of others might be.


Passage number 16.
 They pretty much got all their tradingpartners pinned down in the EMS, and I think that's about all theycare about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that a group has successfully established trading partnerships and suggests that it is their primary concern.


Passage number 17.
 If the EMS were to break up, you would see themconcerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a hypothetical situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is concern of that. I found thatPresident Poehl is, I would say, somewhat less firm than Mr.Stoltenberg on this question. And, I think what Manley Johnson istalking about is really to the point: they have constructed forthemselves a series of monetary targets carved into granite by means11/3/87unknown to anybody; and the credibility of the Bundesbank is at stake.If you go into the market and intervene heavily, you may think you arefully sterilizing [unintelligible] but it sort of leaks all over theplace. I think that there are significantly different views. I wouldgather, but I'm not sure, that what President Poehl was saying lastnight necessarily is speaking for the German government in total, butit does reflect a significant part of his views. You were there,Jerry. Is that your impression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the phrases "somewhat less firm than Mr. Stoltenberg on this question" and "I think what Manley Johnson is talking about is really to the point." These phrases suggest that there are differing opinions or views on the subject being discussed.


Passage number 19.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think it's just the moneysupply question. I think that President Poehl, in particular,believes that if push comes to shove, the Germans and the Germaneconomy can handle a somewhat stronger mark and weaker dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses one person's belief about President Poehl's perspective on the strength of the German mark and the weakness of the dollar.


Passage number 20.
 And hequite firmly believes, whether anyone happens to agree or not, thatthe risks are squarely on the side of the United States--that therisks of a weaker dollar are greater risks to the United States thanthey are for Germany and--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And that's probably correct, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact and there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument mentioned.


Passage number 21.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is correct. I was justgoing to say that I find it hard to violently disagree with that. Thequestion that I think Ed Boehne is raising goes beyond the technicalmechanism of the Louvre or anything else and that is: What are therisks. At least that's how I think of it. What are the risks of oneset of policies, however broadly defined, versus another set ofpolicies. I ask myself this question: What event of a foreseeablenature could really get us in the soup again. And I'm thinking, inpart, of the events of the past couple of weeks. I must say that Ithink the dollar is still high on that list. If the dollar were tofall out of bed--however one might choose to define that--first ofall, whether we like to admit it or not, I think the dollar/domesticinterest rate linkage is still there. I'm not quite sure it is--orever was--as precise as some people thought, but I certainly thinkthat linkage is still there. I think the danger is clear; I can'tassign probabilities to it but the danger is clear that you can end upwith the worst of both worlds: a lower dollar and higher interestrates. The collapse of the exchange markets could easily trigger arenewed outburst of chaos in the financial markets. There is oneparticular thing that we have to keep in mind, and that is that adecidedly weaker dollar could be the straw that breaks the camel'sback, especially for the Japanese stock market. I think that is avery real danger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and concerns about the risks of certain policies and the potential dangers of a weak dollar.


Passage number 22.
MR. JOHNSON. Why don't they do something about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What could they do. What theyshould have done was do something several years ago. But what shouldthey do right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two different opinions or courses of action that could be taken, suggesting a disagreement or indecision about what should be done.


Passage number 24.
MR. JOHNSON. I'm just saying that's their responsibilityrather than ours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about a matter of responsibility.


Passage number 25.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that may be; but we can't beindifferent to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is a difference in opinion ("that may be"), there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 26.
MR. HELLER. Let me go back for a second to Germany. Ithink you are quite right. There has always been a split between the11/3/87Finance Ministry and the Bundesbank. The Finance Ministry, as well asall the regional presidents of the State Central Banks, has alwayswanted to have a strong dollar because they were more concerned aboutthe employment effects, while the Bundesbank clearly was moreconcerned about inflation. I think it is questionable whetherPresident Poehl would have a majority on that council if he wanted tohave a policy that would defend the exchange rate at the present time.So, in essence, he has to give in to a majority on his governingboard. As far as the dollar is concerned, however, I disagree withyou a little, Jerry. The danger of the dollar falling out of bed hasbeen very substantially reduced during the last week because we nowhave [an exchange rate against the mark of about] 1.70, and not eventhe [unintelligible] that will go below 1.60. When you are on thehigh perch, the danger of falling is not much higher; so a freefallbecomes less and less of a likelihood because the markets will supportthe dollar at some level. I think we are getting reasonably close tothat level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with some points and disagreement with others, but there is no contention or argument between multiple parties.


Passage number 27.
MR. CROSS. I would read it the other way: that it gets moreprecarious as we get into these new and heretofore unseen levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Cross is simply expressing his interpretation or opinion of a situation.


Passage number 28.
 Thepossibility of people getting really frightened and responding in someway--MR. HELLER. Like the stock market, I think it's going tobounce back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion that, similar to the stock market, people have the potential to bounce back after getting frightened.


Passage number 29.
MR. JOHNSON. At this stage, really, the perception in themarkets, given the new world we are in, trying to defend the dollarwith higher interest rates here--I think that's where you would see atailspin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is stating the speaker's opinion about the perception in the markets regarding the defense of the dollar with higher interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 30.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have to remember what theissue of the dollar is. It is not that it is falling per se, but thatwhatever it is doing creates a judgment in the market that it willcontinue to do that. There are really two ways to look at this andthat is really, I think, what divides the economic fraternity at thisstage. If, somehow, somebody could wave a wand and move the exchangerate down sharply to a point where the expectation of future changewas zero, then the yield spreads between intermediate or long-termissues in dollars and those denominated in the other currencies woulddramatically come together; and we would get the type of stabilitythat we would like. The problem, unfortunately, is that the otherpotential is that a sharply [falling] dollar merely will beextrapolated, as Sam Cross has implied. Here, we don't know, largelybecause we don't know where the bottom is. Obviously, the lower weare the closer the bottom is, by definition. Exchange rates tend tobe non-negative, though sometimes you wonder. Judging from the waythe markets have been behaving the last several weeks, I think theprobabilities that a freefall is about to happen or could happen havediminished. Unfortunately, the trouble is that even if theprobabilities have diminished, the consequences of that event areextremely dangerous. Even if we get to the point where we are allfully, unequivocally, convinced that there are no secondary reactionproblems in the exchange rate, I think we had better keep up ourguard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two different perspectives on the issue of the falling dollar, which divide the economic fraternity. One perspective suggests that if the exchange rate is sharply decreased, it would lead to stability and yield spreads between different currencies would come together. The other perspective, as implied by Sam Cross, is that a falling dollar would continue to fall and potentially lead to a dangerous event. The speaker acknowledges that the probabilities of a freefall have diminished but emphasizes the need to remain cautious. This difference in perspectives reflects contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 31.
MR. ANGELL. If we were to go back to 1983 and 1984 and havepeople look at it in terms of where the dollar should have been at11/3/87that point in time, the dollar didn't stay within what anyone wouldsuggest was a workable U.S. balance-of-trade level. When the marketcould go to the extreme on the upside and run the dollar up to 161 onour index--when any careful analysis would say that that didn't makeany sense--why do you have such confidence that somehow or other onthe downside true market forces will prevail in the midst of politicalwhims and a political climate that could be devastating. A trulyfloating exchange rate environment is really quite different than anenvironment in which you have political posturing and then it appearsthat [the floating exchange rate environment] is gone. It seems to methat there is extreme danger that at some point in time the dollarcould become a serious problem. Given the Treasury's policy, I thinkwe have only one choice: we have to make domestic price levelstability our primary objective and, if the world believes that, thenI think the dollar will be okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell expresses concern about the potential danger and problems that could arise with the dollar due to political factors, while also suggesting that domestic price level stability should be the primary objective. This implies a difference in opinion or viewpoint.


Passage number 32.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only way we can do that is toeliminate intervention, assuming it works in the first place, and doit through market rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply provides a suggestion or solution that involves eliminating intervention and relying on market rates.


Passage number 33.
MR. ANGELL. Of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 34.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And you will find, as you just heard,that you have people who don't agree with you on the other side ofthis table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement between the speaker and the people on the other side of the table. This is indicated by the statement "you will find, as you just heard, that you have people who don't agree with you."


Passage number 35.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think it's quite that blackand white. I think there is something of a workable middle ground andwe have to try to find it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting the existence of a middle ground to be discovered.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what we're doing at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 37.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Manley, when you're talking about abrave new world, the thing that is most new and most brave about thisworld right now is that we have no policies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a personal opinion about the current world and highlighting the absence of policies as the newest and boldest aspect.


Passage number 38.
 We have no fiscalpolicies; we have no exchange rate policies,MR. JOHNSON. That's exactly what I mean. There are a lot ofthings new here; there are a lot of changes in expectations. Wereally don't know. We are on uncharted waters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are discussing the absence of certain policies and expressing uncertainty about the situation.


Passage number 39.
MR. ANGELL. But instability breeds instability, and that'ssomething we have to be very careful of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a point about the relationship between instability and instability.


Passage number 40.
MR. JOHNSON. Maybe I'm off in the bushes somewhere, but Ithink it's clear to the market that the risk on the dollar today ismainly being caused by foreign central banks who are resisting thekinds of pressures on their markets and are forcing the dollar down.For us to try and deal with that situation here would be catastrophic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 41.
MR. ANGELL. Being in such a position, with our fiscaldeficit and our balance of trade deficit, as a net debtor nation, Idon't understand how we think we ought to blame all these problems onsomeone else. To me, that's naive. We have to run policy in a mannerthat is consistent and sound. And what's appropriate for our domesticeconomy can very well be appropriate for the others, if we considerprice level stability important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the matter and stating their belief that blaming others for their problems is naive.


Passage number 42.
11/3/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are now on agenda item 12 or 13. MayI ask you to hold such remarks until we discuss policy questions. Arethere any more specific questions of Sam. He never had a chance toanswer questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply addressing the agenda item and requesting that any remarks or questions be held until later in the discussion.


Passage number 43.
MR. HOSKINS. I have one question--and this is back on thedollar again--and it has to do with your sense of any large shortpositions currently in the market. In other words, is there aperception that the only risk is on the downside and not on the up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question being asked by Mr. Hoskins.


Passage number 44.
If that is the case--MR. CROSS. We don't get the impression that there is anopportunity to flip it and get a big run on the other side. Thecorporations have been noticeable nonparticipants for some time,generally speaking; everybody tended to sit on their hands during allof this chaos that was occurring in the market. So, the short answeris, I'm sure there are a lot of people shorting the dollar but we arenot, so far as we can tell, in a technical position where we couldflip that and get a runup.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and stating that they do not believe there is currently an opportunity for a large increase in value for the dollar.


Passage number 45.
MR. PARRY. Doesn't the futures market support thatconclusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of the futures market and its support for a conclusion does not indicate any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 46.
MR. CROSS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Cross, is expressing his agreement or affirmation with a previous statement or question.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone have any further questionsfor Sam.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply asking if anyone has any additional questions for Sam. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 48.
MR. CROSS. On the question of [unintelligible], the FederalReserve does have the legal authority to intervene and the Treasuryhas the legal authority to intervene. But there are a number ofstatements and letters and so forth to the Congress which indicatethat from the point of view of the Federal Reserve, we will operate incooperation and coordination with the Treasury on these matters, giventhe Secretary of the Treasury's role in international financialpolicy. And it is important that we not act in direct violation ofTreasury's stated views; or if we did, it would be such a major eventthat we would feel it necessary to tell the Congress. So, basically,we have operated for many, many years on the basis of trying to workthese matters out with the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement indicates that while the Federal Reserve has the legal authority to intervene, they need to coordinate and cooperate with the Treasury. This implies that there may be differing views or potential conflicts between the two entities regarding intervention.


Passage number 49.
MR. BLACK. There's a constitutional basis for that position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or opposing arguments. It simply states that there is a constitutional basis for a certain position.


Passage number 50.
MR. CROSS. I'm not disputing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that they are not disputing something.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's a wonderful debate that goes onin the legal literature, which somebody gave me earlier on and which Ifound fascinating. I came away from it deciding that this[arrangement] works in ways that are very mysterious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 52.
MR. CROSS. I have another comment, Mr. Chairman. We havebeen operating through this period more or less simply to resist thedownward pressures and not in an aggressive way, as you can tell fromthe numbers. We have done $500 million since last Monday; theJapanese have done about almost and the Germans havedone almost And there have been very, very heavypurchases of dollars by the British, partly for reasons other than thedollar situation, but it adds up to total dollar purchases in the past11/3/87week or so of, I would say, over $5 billion. So, we have done arelatively modest amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Cross, is simply providing information about the foreign exchange activities of different countries.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no other questions, I willseek a motion to ratify Mr. Cross' activities. I also need a motionto approve a one-year extension in the swap line agreements.Approved. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The requests for motions and the approval of them seem to be straightforward and accepted without objection. Mr. Sternlight's response is not provided in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 54.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of "Mr. Sternlight" suggests that there is at least one other person involved in the conversation or discussion, indicating possible contention or disagreement.


Passage number 55.
]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we wait [on the leewayrecommendation] and see first if there are any questions on yourreport.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting waiting and seeing if there are any questions before taking a decision on the leeway recommendation.


Passage number 56.
MR. MELZER. Peter, on your assumption of excess reserves of$1.2 billion, how long do you think that will be in place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a question asked by Mr. Melzer to Peter about an assumption regarding excess reserves.


Passage number 57.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in fact, we upped that a littlefurther yesterday, President Melzer, to $1.5 billion based on what wewere seeing from actual holdings of excess by some of the smallerinstitutions that already had a lot, and because some of the majorinstitutions had built up such a lot of excess that we didn't thinkthey could get rid of it all and still have some positive balance onthe day. That's relevant to this current reserve period; we will belooking again at the next reserve period. I have no reason to thinkthat we would be thinking in such high terms for the next reserveperiod, but we'll have to evaluate it as we get into it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their decision to increase the reserve amount based on the excess holdings of some smaller institutions and the inability of major institutions to get rid of all their excess. They also mention that they will reevaluate the reserve amount for the next period.


Passage number 58.
MR. MORRIS. Peter, during most of the year, the bond markethas been very sensitive to the foreign exchange rate, but in recentdays we have seen the dollar under a lot of pressure and that has notbeen transmitted significantly to the bond market. How do youappraise this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating a fact about the bond market's behavior in relation to the foreign exchange rate.


Passage number 59.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's a bit of an on-and-off thingnow. It certainly is not the overwhelming presence and the tick-for-tick linkage that was there early in the year, although on some recentdays the bond market has weakened in response to the dollar weakening.But, as I mentioned, I thought one reason for that linkage having beenmuted recently was that [market participants] saw the earlierweakening of the dollar as likely to be followed very rapidly by sometightening of monetary policy, whereas in the current context, theydon't see that as following on so quickly. There is still concern,though, that a weaker dollar is a discouraging factor either to newinflows of foreign capital into our market or perhaps a reason forforeigners with existing holdings in our market to want to pull out.So there does remain some sensitivity, but I think it's less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their observations and interpretations of the relationship between the bond market and the weakening dollar.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have to be careful here whenwe say that a lower dollar basically induces individuals to be lessinterested in dollars. Obviously, that goes against everything elsewe know: that the lower the price, the greater the demand. In atechnical sense, every time we get a change in the exchange rate whichleads to a change in long-term yields, what we are looking at, ineffect, is a change in the far-distant forward position of theexchange rate. In other words, if the exchange rate is falling andthe bond market is collapsing--assume it's against the yen and theyen-denominated securities are not moving--what effectively is11/3/87happening is that the short-term decline in the dollar-yenrelationship is creating an expectation of a very much sharper declinein the future. That's the critical issue. It is the expected rate offorward deterioration in the exchange rate which translates into basispoints on the yield spread in the long-term, risk-free instruments.And, it is conceivable that we will get to a point--at some point, Ihope--that the exchange rate will arrive at a level which the marketsperceive will not go very much further, and the forward position ofthe dollar will begin to rise and we will get a decline in long-terminterest rates. The danger here is that with the huge block of U.S.dollar-denominated securities outstanding, psychological cracks couldinduce tremendously rapid changes and create high degrees ofinstability. So, I think that something happened last week. I thinkone can argue that there has been an odd form of delinking--that thereis a presumption that declines in the dollar do not imply that therewill be future declines in the dollar. The trouble is that it mightbe what happened last week, and it may be what's happening this week,yet next week the markets might turn right around on us and go in theother direction. But, I do think it's important not to think of it inthe sense of a tight linkage about what Federal Reserve policy isgoing to do, although it does seem that way. I think we have toremember that we are dealing with real variables and that the marketstell us a great deal in this respect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The author presents the idea that a lower dollar induces individuals to be less interested in dollars, which goes against the conventional understanding that lower prices lead to greater demand. The author then argues that changes in the exchange rate and long-term yields indicate a change in the future expectations of the exchange rate. The author also mentions the danger of rapid changes and instability due to the large amount of U.S. dollar-denominated securities. The author concludes that while it may seem like there is a tight linkage between Federal Reserve policy and the exchange rate, it is important to consider real variables and pay attention to market signals.


Passage number 61.
MR. JOHNSON. Peter, my interpretation of what has gone on inthe bond market lately is simply that it was just some backing offfrom some of the flight to quality. When things were extremelysensitive and unstable, we had a lot of movement in the Treasurysecurities on the long and the short end--maybe a little more on theshort end, but a lot all over the yield curve. And I think as thestock market has shown some stability over the last several days, weprobably have seen less pessimism there, and probably some movementback out of the quality assets--I don't know if back into the stockmarket, but maybe into other types of instruments. I don't know whatyour reading is, but if that really is going on, it seems to me thatmaybe those excess reserves will start to wind down a little. Myguess is that quality spreads look a little better than they didbefore; maybe not, but that's my impression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is simply providing his interpretation of recent activity in the bond market and suggesting possible reasons for the movement.


Passage number 62.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I have some impression of some of thosetensions abating, some subsiding of the flight to quality. Somebodywas saying a couple of days ago that the flight to quality has landed;I think that is probably going too far. But I think there is somebacking away from that. Nevertheless, I think it remains a basicallysensitive picture. I just had a report a few minutes ago indicating afurther stock price decline today. It was down 40 some points in theopening half hour or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply shares their impression and observations about the current state of the market.


Passage number 63.
MR. KOHN. It was down 60 points at five after ten and billrates were going back down again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply provides objective information about the stock market and billrates.


Passage number 64.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What was the bond market doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking a question about the bond market and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 65.
MR. KOHN. It was essentially unchanged, but it had been downsharply earlier and has rallied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply describing the change in a variable and its current state.


Passage number 66.
MR. PARRY. I have a question about borrowing. Since October19th there has been a change in the willingness to borrow. What are11/3/87your assumptions about how the demand for borrowing may change overthe next week or two. Are you assuming that basically the shift isgoing to continue over that period or that there is going to be arestoration of more normal relations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about borrowing and inquiring about the assumptions regarding its demand in the upcoming weeks.


Passage number 67.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's terribly hard to say. My sensewould be, as you say President Parry, that there has been somereluctance to borrow; but it's very, very difficult to come up witheven the rough and ready kinds of pronouncements that we have tried tomake in the past about a relationship between borrowing and expectedfunds rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight is expressing his opinion and acknowledging the difficulty in making precise pronouncements about the relationship between borrowing and expected funds rates.


Passage number 68.
MR. PARRY. Wouldn't that suggest that as long as there isthat uncertainty it's probably wiser to focus on rates rather thanborrowing levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Parry suggesting that focusing on interest rates is wiser as long as there is uncertainty.


Passage number 69.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any additional context or information. The passage mentioned is incomplete and does not provide enough information to make a judgment.


Passage number 70.
 Well, I think there has to be a lot offlexibility in anything we try to--MR. PARRY. I'm sorry, I'm not used to using words like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The interruption by Mr. Parry does not suggest any disagreement, but rather a lack of familiarity with the language used.


Passage number 71.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's the funds rate expectation at$450 million borrowing under normal conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints. It simply asks for the funds rate expectation under a specific borrowing amount.


Passage number 72.
MR. PARRY. Probably 7 percent or a little below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This is a statement of factual information without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 73.
MR. KOHN. Seven percent or a little below. I guess theequations that we estimated might say a bit below 7 percent--perhaps6-3/4 or 6-7/8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kohn is simply stating an estimate of 7 percent or slightly below, and then provides a more specific estimate of 6-3/4 or 6-7/8 percent based on some equations. There is no indication of disagreement or contention within this statement.


Passage number 74.
MR. PARRY. That's what I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, is simply stating their personal opinion or belief.


Passage number 75.
MR. HOSKINS. Let me ask Peter a question. I might be toosensitive to the markets, having just left those wharves. But in thisenvironment if, for technical reasons, the funds rate were to tradeabove 7 percent, what in your judgment would the perception be withrespect to either Federal Reserve policy in general or the linkage tothe dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question asked by Mr. Hoskins, seeking Peter's judgment on the perception of Federal Reserve policy or its linkage to the dollar if the funds rate were to trade above 7 percent for technical reasons. There is no argument or conflicting views presented in the passage.


Passage number 76.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I guess it would depend partly on whether itwas perceived that what was happening was occurring for somedeliberate reason on our part or despite what we were doing. Theinterpretation of it would depend on how our role was seen in thewhole thing. A good many people would say that's in the range oftheir expectation, I suppose. If I had to pinpoint an expected rangenow, narrowly, it might be 7 percent or a shade under; but I don'tthink 7 or 7-1/8 percent cropping up occasionally would be terriblydisturbing in that context, either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their perception of a certain situation and the potential interpretations of it. There is no argument or conflicting views presented.


Passage number 77.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions Governor Seger without providing any additional information or engaging in any argument or disagreement about him.


Passage number 78.
MS. SEGER. I just have two questions in areas that I need tobe educated on. First, when you were talking about our policy oflending securities, did I hear you say that we had not been willing tolend for a short sale. Maybe I just didn't hear you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply requesting clarification and expressing a lack of understanding.


Passage number 79.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, that has been the past standard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the past standard.


Passage number 80.
11/3/87MS. SEGER. How do we know. Do you ask them in advance whatthey are going to do with the proceeds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking about how the speaker knows something.


Passage number 81.
MR. STERNLIGHT. They certify that they are not borrowing tofacilitate a short sale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Sternlight is certifying that he is not borrowing to facilitate a short sale. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 82.
MS. SEGER. I see. My second question: When we have beenso-called "accommodative" in the last couple of weeks, why have wedone all these transactions with repos. I realize a million dollarsworth of repos has the same reserve impact as a million dollars ofdirect purchases of T-bills, but I think the market perception of whatwe are doing is different in the one versus the other. I guess I justdon't understand why we have done it [that way].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification.


Passage number 83.
MR. STERNLIGHT. In mid-October, the beginning of thatperiod, the outlook was that we had a reserve need for what is now thecurrent period but that in the following period there would be only amodest reserve need. So, if we had done a lot of outright buying thenwe would have had a concern that we would come up to an overabundanceof reserves and it could be awkward, as these are not the kinds ofmarkets where we would want to try to be going in and drainingreserves. As the period went along, we kept getting revisions of theout periods, so it looked as though we would have a more long-termneed. If one had it to do over again, it might have made sense tohave done some purchases outright. I don't think our broad purposesof providing liquidity were ill-served by concentrating on repurchaseagreements, though. This gave us a chance to have a rather continualpresence and to be providing relief to what was potentially one of thevery sore points in the system, the ability to get day-to-dayfinancing. So I don't think that part of it worked out too badly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 84.
MS. SEGER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. This can be inferred from the polite response of "Thank you" given by Ms. Seger.


Passage number 85.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. Sternlight.You have a recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone else has any questions for Mr. Sternlight and also stating that they have a recommendation.


Passage number 86.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have a leeway request.Current projections suggest a somewhat enlarged need for outrightpurchases in the upcoming intermeeting period. Normal seasonal needsfor currency and increased required reserves could be enlarged evenfurther if current financial market tensions persist. While we maywant to leave a sizable margin of needs to be met with repurchaseagreements, it would also be useful to have the flexibility forsubstantial outright activity. I recommend a $3 billion temporaryincrease in the normal $6 billion leeway, although we may not needvery much of the enlarged amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply a recommendation for a temporary increase in the leeway.


Passage number 87.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we separately move on theactions the Manager has taken since the September meeting and thensettle the motion on the specific request. Motions approved. Mr.Prell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 88.
MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage is a statement by Mr. Prell, and there is no indication of any contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 89.
]MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, yesterday I talked to Tom Jesterof the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan and hesaid that in a survey taken after the stock market decline, thatdecline turned out to have had a very sharp effect on consumer-10-11/3/87confidence. He said they think the big effect is not going to be thewealth effect on consumer spending but the uncertainty. He thinksconsumers' reduced confidence level as to the future, generally, islikely to produce a major slowdown in consumer spending. He thinksthe confidence index they report will be showing about a 10 percentdrop when it next comes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply relaying information from an expert without expressing their own viewpoint.


Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We also got the Conference Board indexin a post October 19th [survey] and it didn't show that at all. So wehave a problem on how to read these things. Mike, why don't youreport on the differences for just a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply mentioning that there is a problem in interpreting the data from the Conference Board index.


Passage number 91.
MR. PRELL. Well, both of them were down. The Michigansurvey's sentiment index was down, as President Morris noted, in theperiod after October 19th. Basically, they had about a third of theirmonth's sample in that period and they looked at that group alone.Obviously, the statistical reliability is less, but they felt that thesharp drop was statistically significant. That put the level wellbelow the plateau we have been at, and that is the clear distinctionfrom the picture that one gets in looking at the very limited pollthat the Conference Board did after October 19th. That showed a drop,but it was only a small departure from a very strong uptrend in thelast several months; it seems to have reflected people's perceptionsthat the job opportunities were very good, and that propels that indexdirectly in a way that the Michigan index doesn't reflect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and compares the results of two surveys.


Passage number 92.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage only mentions the name "President Parry" without providing any context or details that indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I have a comment and two questionsconcerning the Greenbook forecast. My comment: considering the modestwealth and cost of capital effects of the stock market decline, andalso what is referred to as an expected appreciable fall in interestrates, it's surprising to me to see real growth for 1988 at less than2 percent. Now, my first question deals with real disposable income.We have talked about this in the past but I think it has even greaterimportance today. Real disposable income in the Greenbook forecastrises so slowly relative to real GNP that I really doubt that thatforecast will occur. The difference in growth rates is 1.2 percentagepoints. In our forecast, there's a difference of one tenth of apoint; in the Blue Chip consensus of 30 economists, it's two tenths ofa point. A distinction of that magnitude is, I think, pretty muchwithout historical precedent. It is my understanding that the waythat occurs is that you have an increase in inflation as a result ofhigher import prices, which causes the PCE deflator to rise verysubstantially relative to the GNP deflator. And, as I am sure youknow, the relationship between the PCE deflator and the GNP deflatoris one of the most stable relationships we have. We looked back to1973 and that relationship varied between .988 and 1.021. In theforecast, it gets up to 1.026, which is an incredibly high level. Idon't think it has ever been that high. And my question is: If youhad a ratio between the PCE deflator and the GNP deflator which ismore traditional, how would that affect the staff's forecast of both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, expresses disagreement with the Greenbook forecast and raises questions about the projected real growth for 1988 and the differences in growth rates between real disposable income and real GNP. He also challenges the forecasted increase in inflation and the ratio between the PCE deflator and the GNP deflator.


Passage number 94.
MR. PRELL. Clearly, one of the things in our forecast thatall along has been a key factor affecting the pattern of output growthhappened we believe, in large part, because of the exchange ratedepreciation. Partly because of the oil price movements earlier, webelieved that we would have some erosion of real disposable income-11-11/3/87growth and thus some damping of consumer demand, which would releasethe resources to support the substantial improvement in real netexports. I might just say that the pattern we are projecting is not adeparture from what we have been seeing over the past year or so.Rather consistently, PCE prices have been rising faster than GNPprices in a period in which real disposable income growth has beenconsiderably slower than real GNP growth. We have a continuingdecline of the dollar in our forecast and we have a continuation ofthis pattern of relative price movements. We looked at the historicalrecord. We think there are perceptible relative price movements thatcan be seen during a period of the dollar's appreciation--aninterruption of a previous trend. We have seen this ratio of PCEprices to GNP prices rising rather markedly over the past year and weexpect that to continue. Clearly, if somehow this didn't occur, therewould be implications for income shares and output patterns that couldsignificantly affect the outlook. We think this really has been aperceptible trend recently and that the conditions that brought thatabout will be prevailing still in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their forecast and projecting a pattern of relative price movements.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, I think it rests on two issues:one is the movement of import prices at a rate higher than domesticprices; second, and just as important, is the renewed share of importsin total domestic demand. You need both to have this effect. Theinteresting question is: How do you get this small a number. Is itthe fact that your import price estimates are much lower than thestaff's.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement presenting two issues and raising a question for further exploration without indicating any opposing opinions.


Passage number 96.
MR. PARRY. No. I think what happens in their forecast isthat the higher import prices show up very dramatically on theconsumption side but not on the investment side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Parry about his perspective on import prices and their impact on consumption and investment.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But we are importing computers on whichthe prices are going down; that's probably the reason that it'shappening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement that suggests a possible reason for a certain occurrence (the prices of imported computers going down).


Passage number 98.
MR. PARRY. Well, perhaps this will happen, but I don'tthink it has happened to date. I'm not sure. I will have to look atthe 1987 data; I'm not sure we agree on that in the second half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Parry simply states that he is not sure and needs to look at the data before reaching a conclusion.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you're raising a terriblyimportant question here. I think it's important that we get thatright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the importance of the question being raised and emphasizes the need to find the correct answer.


Passage number 100.
MR. PRELL. If I could just cite some figures: Going back tothe third quarter of 1986, the PCE fixed-weight price measure rose 1percentage point faster than the GNP prices; in the fourth quarter itwas 0.7 faster; in the first quarter of 1987 it was 1.2 percentagepoints faster; in the second quarter it was 1.1 faster; and in thethird quarter it was 0.8 faster. We have a more moderate relativemovement in the forecast than we have been experiencing. We also havelooked at outside forecasts and, generally, they have this relativemovement in a similar range; some of them have it less than ours, someof them have it considerably more than ours. When we look at thefixed investment prices and what might be going on there, there may besome wrinkles in terms of the construction of the index. As Iunderstand it, that is constructed largely out of PPI data, whichwould be the domestically produced goods. You might not have thedirect kind of import price measurement in the way these numbers are11/3/87constructed as you do with consumer goods, which would sample importsdirectly as well. That's a minor factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting some figures and discussing the methodology used to construct the index, but there is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
MR. PARRY. The statistical work that we have done indicatesthat all of the increase in the PCE over that period that you justcited can be attributed to oil and none of it to foreign exchange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker is stating that all of the increase in the PCE can be attributed to oil and none of it to foreign exchange. This statement may be disputed by others who hold a different perspective or have different data.


Passage number 102.
MR. PRELL. We would certainly be happy to consult furtherwith your staff. In the second half of last year, energy prices inPCE were falling rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing willingness to consult further and is providing information about the decline in energy prices.


Passage number 103.
MR. PARRY. Yes, but it depends on the lag, of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate contention or disagreement. Mr. Parry is simply expressing that the answer to the question depends on the lag.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
MR. PRELL. Well, I guess we differ on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "Well, I guess we differ on this" indicates that there is disagreement or contention between the speaker (Mr. Prell) and someone else.


Passage number 105.
 We have hadsome discussion with your staff who raised the question with us and--MR. PARRY. It's a difference in the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that there was a discussion and then Mr. Parry interrupted with his own comment or statement. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Heller without providing any information about his actions, beliefs, or decisions to assess whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 107.
MR. HELLER. One number that surprised me a little in theGreenbook--especially the contrast between the 1988 number and the1987 number--was the capacity utilization in manufacturing, which isinching up. If you look at producers' durable equipment, it is stillgoing up at a rate that is in excess of real GNP. The unemploymentrate, as you pointed out, is leveling off. Is the driving force justthe composition of imports--that they have such a heavy weight inmanufacturing. Or what explains the increase in the utilization rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, is simply expressing surprise and seeking clarification on the increase in capacity utilization in manufacturing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
MR. PRELL. Obviously, as you know, it's a confluence of twothings. One is how fast industrial output is growing, which is quitesensitive to the mix of output in the economy; and the improvement intrade is reflected in growth of industrial production and amanufacturing component that is stronger than overall GNP growth by apoint or more next year. The other component in this calculation,obviously, is an assessment of capacity growth. Business fixedinvestment, which had been weak for a while, rebounded in the lastcouple of quarters; some of this rebound reflected a spurt inautomobile sales which presumably will not be sustained. Of course,it takes a little while for growth in PDE to feed through thesubstantial increases in the stock of capital goods. We have arelatively weak investment outlook, so from that side of things wewouldn't see tremendous additions to capacity over the coming year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that industrial output is growing fast, but the improvement in trade is reflected in growth of industrial production and manufacturing component that is stronger than overall GNP growth by a point or more next year. However, they also mention that business fixed investment is weak and there is a relatively weak investment outlook, which suggests a different perspective on capacity growth.


Passage number 109.
We have a relatively moderate growth in capacity--about 3 percent or abit below--MR. HELLER. But that's higher than your GNP number. That'sprecisely the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller is simply pointing out that the growth in capacity mentioned is higher than the GNP number mentioned.


Passage number 110.
MR. PRELL. It's higher than GNP but it is in line with thegrowth of industrial output and slightly below the manufacturinggrowth rate. So we get this very slight inching up--it probablyshould not be called inching but milimetering up--of the capacityutilization rate. Assessing capacity utilization is always difficult.As you know, we recently put out our annual revisions; the revisionsdidn't really adjust the overall level very much but there werenoticeable changes in some of the industries. We have to be alert to-13-11/3/87whatever we can pick up on what is going on in actual capacity. Thelinkage between investment and actual capacity is not all that tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 111.
MR. BLACK. Mike, with businesses having become so muchleaner and meaner in recent years and increasingly willing to bringabout permanent layoffs and temporary layoffs, some of our contactshave been telling us that if the downturn does intensify, they wouldexpect the unemployment rate to jump pretty sharply because of thischanging attitude on the part of businesses. Does that seemreasonable to you. If so, have you factored it into these highunemployment rates that you are projecting here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question and discussion about the potential impact of businesses becoming leaner and meaner on the unemployment rate.


Passage number 112.
MR. PRELL. Well, I hope so. Of course, to the extent thatthey are currently lean and have not been hoarding extra labor, asthere are dips in output, there is not going to be as much room toreduce employment. Of course, once we have determined how aggressivethey are, then we would [know more about] how persistent the effect ofweakness will be. We have distinctly slower employment growth in ourforecast than we have been experiencing; and we do have theunemployment rate going up, read literally here, 0.4 of a point overthe next couple of quarters from the 5.9 percent level we saw in thepast month. It's hard to say how far this would go once the processis underway; but our forecast is one in which we have only a briefinterruption of the recent growth path. And under thosecircumstances, we presume they would not have unloaded tremendousamounts of [unintelligible] labor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the potential impact of weak employment growth and the forecasted increase in the unemployment rate. They are presenting their analysis and predictions without any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 113.
MR. BLACK. I agree pretty much with your forecast. It juststruck me as an interesting thought, since business people seem tofeel that they will not hesitate this time like they sometimes have inthe past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is expressing agreement with the forecast mentioned.


Passage number 114.
MR. PRELL. Many of them clearly have more flexibility thanin the past because of their use of workers who were not strictly ontheir payrolls but were hired through temporary help firms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that many companies have more flexibility in their workforce due to hiring workers through temporary help firms. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 115.
 So, thoseworkers probably would be laid off during--MR. BLACK. It is interesting that they got so much leanerwith such a big rise too in the participation rate in the labor force.It seems to have happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by an observation, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 116.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Corrigan has probably perceived one of thesharpest jumps in unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement by Mr. Prell, acknowledging that Mr. Corrigan has likely noticed a significant increase in unemployment rates. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement between the two individuals.


Passage number 117.
MR. BLACK. He may see some jumps of other types too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that Mr. Black might see jumps of different types in addition to the ones mentioned.


Passage number 118.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know about the demand forBMWs and Mercedes, but that shouldn't affect the productivity numberstoo much. Actually, they should go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the demand for BMWs and Mercedes but asserts that it should not significantly impact the productivity numbers, and in fact, suggests that they may increase. The statement is conveyed without any conflicting opinions or contradictory information.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is simply asking if there are any additional questions.


Passage number 120.
MR. PARRY. It appears to me that recent developments havehad a very substantial impact on [your forecast for] final sales andinventories in the fourth quarter. There's a very large impact oninventories in the fourth quarter and then these unintendedinventories are worked down over 1988 and that's in large part whygrowth is so weak in 1988. Why is there such a large impact on final-14-11/3/87sales in the fourth quarter, given the assumptions about modestimpacts of wealth and cost of capital effects in recent developmentsand also the lower interest rate. What if you have an inventorysituation that really colors that entire forecast very substantiallythrough the end of 1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a question and requesting an explanation for certain assumptions and effects on sales and inventories. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 121.
MR. PRELL. Well, it's very difficult to assess preciselywhat the demand and production adjustments are going to be in thisshort period of time. As I suggested in my remarks, we built in afairly prompt response of consumption and we also built in a fairlyprompt response of production. The inventory accumulation we have isa combination of the automobile inventory rebuilding that is occurringas sales have dropped off after the special incentive period, and theautomakers' having moved up their production a bit from the very lowthird-quarter level. We also, though, have some significantaccumulation outside that sector. Some of that is involuntary but,going into the early part of this quarter, some is still voluntary inthe manufacturing sector where it appeared that inventories were verylean and that there was some desire to at least keep the stocks inline with sales. So, I think it's a mixture of voluntary andinvoluntary elements that leads to some adjustment early next year inproduction. But, we have assumed a relatively smooth path fordevelopments in the next several months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the difficulties in assessing demand and production adjustments and explaining the factors that contribute to inventory accumulation.


Passage number 122.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. After the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only mentions the time period "after the fourth quarter."


Passage number 123.
MR. PRELL. Apart from the auto situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement about the topic being discussed - the auto situation.


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 125.
MS. SEGER. I just wanted to tell Mike that I admire hiscourage for attempting to put specific numbers down on a sheet ofpaper because, although I'm older than most of the people sitting atthis table, I can't think of a time in my lifetime when we have hadcomparable events in the financial markets. So I'm not sure I knowhow your econometric models can pick anything up when the data fed inare like what we have just been through in the last couple of weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing admiration for Mike's courage and discussing their uncertainty about how econometric models can accurately predict outcomes in the current financial market situation.


Passage number 126.
MR. PRELL. Well, we don't rely totally on our econometricmodels, of course. Sometimes we depend on them very little when thecircumstances suggest that there are just tremendous departures fromthe historical norms--shocks that would disturb recent trends. But, Iguess in this case I'd say that they are reasonably supportive of thiskind of view. It's clear, though, that there are downside risks inthis forecast, should the stock market have a more dramatic effectthan we have gauged it to have at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they rely on econometric models but also acknowledge that there are circumstances where these models may not accurately predict outcomes. However, they ultimately state that the models are reasonably supportive of their view.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
MS. SEGER. One thing that concerns me, as I said before--whether you formalize it or don't formalize it mathematically--is thatnot having experienced this kind of period, I just suffer fromuncertainty about what it will bring. Also, I wonder if a 20 somepercent decline in the Dow on one day is really the equivalent of fourmonths' worth of 5 percent declines each month. I have a feeling thatit's not comparable. I don't know, but I have a feeling that thereare a lot of things in here that, at least based on my inexperience, Icannot really judge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses uncertainty and doubt about the equivalence of a 20% decline in the Dow in one day compared to four months of 5% declines each month. They specifically mention that they cannot judge based on their inexperience. Therefore, there is disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 128.
-15-11/3/87MR. PRELL. I did try to highlight the fact that this mighthave greater shock value than it otherwise would have, if that'spossible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their intention to highlight the potential shock value of something.


Passage number 129.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we are now at a point where notonly Mr. Prell has to be adventuresome, but the rest of us do as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement expresses the belief that both Mr. Prell and the rest of us need to be adventurous.


Passage number 130.
MR. PRELL. I think the amount of courage that is required isfar less for the staff than for the policymakers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is presented as a statement made by Mr. Prell, and it does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses his opinion about the differing levels of courage required for staff versus policymakers.


Passage number 131.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone want to open up [thediscussion] around the table. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking if anyone wants to start a discussion. 


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, uncertainty certainly prevailsdown my way. In looking at what might be appropriate for forecasting,we really would not have much basis for argument [with the staffforecast], but in our own forecast we have come down a full point;that is very judgmental, obviously. As far as the effect on ourDistrict economy, our initial reaction is that probably whatever theeffect, it is likely to be a little less in the Eleventh District thanin the rest of the country, simply because we are so much fartherbehind the rest of the country. We have seen signs of sluggish growthin the District. We think the situation continues to be extremelyfragile. The real estate problems keep coming up and are a pervasivecloud in the psychology. The earnings reports that we have just gonethrough with our financial institutions, and the added provision forloan losses--most of it triggered by real estate--just put anotherdamper on that. The cautious optimism that I tried to express for acouple of meetings seems to have abated somewhat. I'm not sure we caneven be cautiously optimistic right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially mentions that they wouldn't have much basis for argument with the staff forecast, implying agreement. However, they then state that their own forecast differs by a full point, which suggests disagreement or contention with the staff forecast. Additionally, they express uncertainty and a decrease in cautious optimism, indicating some level of disagreement or disagreement with the current outlook.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage only mentions President Parry without providing any information or statements that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 134.
MR. PARRY. With regard to developments in the TwelfthDistrict, I think economic conditions remain relatively upbeat and, atthis point, very few effects of recent financial developments haveshown up yet. But, it's clearly too early to see the real effects.We are, however, seeing broad-based effects of the reduced value ofthe dollar, in addition to the greater exports of lumber and selectedagricultural products that I mentioned previously. For example, aUtah steel plant which was formerly owned by U.S. Steel recentlyreopened and it was interesting to note that part of the decision toreopen was based upon a German firm's five-year commitment to buy 40percent of the plant's production. I think that is ratherinteresting. In addition, the price of titanium dioxide, which is akey ingredient in paint, has increased substantially due to thedollar's decline; and a major paint manufacturer in our District isturning increasingly to domestic suppliers. So wherever we look, weseem to be seeing some effects of the declining value of the dollar interms of expanded export opportunities or increased importsubstitution.With regard to the overall economic outlook, we estimate thatthe wealth and cost of equity capital effects of the stock marketdecline would reduce real GNP by slightly less than 1 percentagepoint, assuming an unchanged path for interest rates. Given theeasing that has already occurred and the expected lower path forinterest rates that is mentioned in the Greenbook, we would have-16-11/3/87growth closer to 2-1/2 percent than 2 percent and the employment ratebasically unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and observations about economic conditions.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply mentions the name "President Keehn" without providing any context or information that suggests any kind of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 136.
MR. KEEHN. Well, like Mr. Prell, I think I will divide mycomments into pre-event and post-event. Starting with the pre-eventactivity: certainly, the District continued to operate on a reasonablyfavorable basis, much along the lines that I previously have beenreporting, with the exception of the auto industry. The manufacturingsector has been moving along pretty well and the employment statisticshave been good, very much in line with the national numbers. Thesteel business is operating again at very, very high levels; thedemand for steel products is the best we have experienced in our areasince 1981. The delivery times have stretched out very considerablyand many products really are being sold on allocation. Constructionactivity remains reasonably good. The conditions in agriculture arecontinuing to improve; land prices are up and commodity prices haveimproved somewhat. By and large, the harvest is in and it really hasbeen a very good harvest in our area.Moving to the post-event comments, it is too early to assessthe damage but, so far at least, I don't sense from any of the peoplethat I talk to that any of these fundamental trends that I've justnoted have been badly affected. Certainly at the outset, consumerspending was affected; there was a decline in retail sales as we wentthrough the market trauma, but that seems to have leveled out. I amtold from people who have October retail numbers in our area that, byand large, retail sales came in this October about level with lastOctober. Looking ahead to next year, the retailers are reducing theirexpectations but, so far, nobody has suggested a negative trend onretail sales. On the auto side, it's awfully early to tell, but oneof the major producers that I talked to yesterday said that they arereducing their sales [estimates] for 1988 cars and trucks together byabout 800,000 units; but they do emphasize that it's very, very earlyyet to assess how the consumer will react. On capital expenditures,so far I have been quite impressed that there are no early signs of asharp curtailment. Most of the companies that I've talked to--thosethat have significant programs in place--intend to continue, unlessthere is a very sharp downturn in the economy. They have embarked onprograms that they say they will, by and large, stay with. And I dofind that quite encouraging. So net, I think it's still too early toassess the damage. I keep being favorably surprised that our earlyassessment isn't a little more negative than it is. I think ourexpectations for next year will certainly be down a bit, but it is fartoo early to quantify. We are just going to have to go through aperiod of some uncertainty. Nonetheless, so far things seem to havecome through better than I might have expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing information and observations but does not express or indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Boehne without providing any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 138.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, there haven't been any actual changes thatI can see in my District. It's more that the worry level has risen.What I sense is that the psychology is more important than the wealtheffect; if we have another shock in the market I think we would have areal tumble in psychology; if we continue to mend without anothershock I think the effects may be minimal. This psychology is apparentin some of the conversations that we have had with regional retailers.11/3/87Their merchandise for the Christmas season is already on hand, so theyare stuck with it one way or another. While no one we've talked tohas observed any decline in sales yet that they can attribute to thefinancial markets, their view is that if Christmas sales do run belowplan, then they are going to run their inventories much lower thanthey ordinarily would, and that would affect their spring ordering.So, I think they just don't know. They are thinking beyond theChristmas season if that turns out poorly. The same attitude isapparent in manufacturing as well, where I think most manufacturersfeel that the orders that they have on their books are there and theyare going to fill them. What they are concerned about is six monthsout. But, overall, my sense is that the risks have changed in theeconomy. Whether they have changed a lot or a little remains to beseen; but they have changed in the direction that real growth will belower than we thought. If we are wrong, then we'll probably be wrongin the sense that we'll have still lower growth. And I think therisks have shifted, too, on the inflation side; to some extent,concerns that we had about inflation six weeks or so ago arealleviated. I admire the bravery of Mike Prell and the staff forforecasting precise numbers and I think their numbers are reasonable--not because they are necessarily right, but because I can't improve onthem. They seem to be broadly reasonable. Just one other point: I dokeep hearing some very favorable news on the export side. At my lastfull board of directors' meeting and other meetings around theDistrict, people spoke almost with one chorus: the news coming in fromtheir salespeople is that they are able to compete in the exportmarket, both by selling abroad as well as by competing with theimports that have been coming in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Forrestal and does not provide any information about any disagreements or contention related to him.


Passage number 140.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, the statisticalinformation on the evaluation of the economy in the Sixth Districtthat we had prior to October 19th reflected continued improvement inthe District. Economic activity seemed to be very good pretty muchacross the board. I would echo what Ed Boehne just said aboutexports: they seem to be increasing, and we also are getting reportsabout better export performance. It's very difficult at this time, Ithink, to assess any impact in the region of the events of a couple ofweeks ago. Everyone I talk to says it is business as usual, althoughI find that a little hard to believe because I am sure that manybusinesses are re-assessing their plans for the future. But, at themoment, nobody has indicated to me that they have made any change intheir business plans. I think what they are really saying is thatthey feel that it is too early and they are adopting a "wait and see"attitude. The only preliminary indication that we have that peoplemight expect less robust activity is that many firms--the majority ofthose that I talked to--are, in fact, repurchasing their own stock.And, of course, the Christmas sales are going to be very critical.One concern I have is that I have been hearing scattered reports thatdeposits have been moving out of thrift institutions into the banks,reflecting greater public confidence in the FDIC than in the FSLIC andthe thrifts. That's not a widespread movement, but it is somethingthat I have noted. The regional banks see very little impact from theweak equity markets, given their loan portfolios and the relativestrength of regional growth. That was reflected in their stockdeclines, which were much less than for money center banks.-18-11/3/87Like others, I think it is very, very difficult to come upwith a precise forecast on the national economy, although I think wehave to make an attempt to do that in order to set policy. We havemoved our forecast down somewhat, although I think we would show alittle greater strength than the Greenbook. But it's not a matter ofgreat difference. We would move our forecast down further if wecontinued to see increased volatility in the markets. I might justnote, in passing, that we are developing an alternative forecast whichis a less comprehensive one than others; I don't want to place a greatdeal of emphasis on it at the moment, because it only has one quarterof experience. But that one quarter was very good--better than mostof the comparable forecasts. That model shows much less growth in thefourth quarter and through 1988 than most of the others that I'veseen. So we will continue to develop that model and watch itcarefully. But, in general, I think the Greenbook forecast is abouton target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly a statement of observations and ideas without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 141.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains the title or name "President Black" without providing any further information or context. Without any information or statements to analyze, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 142.
MR. BLACK. This seems to be a day of confessions, Mr.Chairman, and I will have to join those who confess that they don'thave much confidence in their own projections. I have less now than Itypically do, of course, which is saying that I don't have a greatdeal. We have these two elements of uncertainty to be sure: first, wedon't know what the impact of the decline that has occurred in thestock market thus far is going to be; second and more importantly, wedon't know how much further domestic and foreign markets may decline.And I don't think a further decline is a risk we can completely ruleout. So, the uncertainty level is extremely high. But we don't knowthe answers to these questions. Assuming that the market settles downsomewhere in the 1900-2100 range, I think the staff's forecast ispretty reasonable; I don't think we could improve on that a greatdeal. That seems to be what the business people in our District feel;at least that's what we have been able to uncover up until now. But Ido think there's a lot of risk in this, regardless of where you comeout. It is clear to me that there has been a big blow to inflationand to inflationary expectations in the short run from this. But ifthe decline turns out to be as moderate as the staff has projected,and as we have endorsed, I don't think it's unreasonable to supposethat by the middle or last half of next year the same kind of worriesthat we had on the inflation front earlier might reemerge. And Ithink that we ought to have that in mind as a definite possibility aswe address what we do in the immediate future, because the effects ofactions we take now are going to be felt down the road, and we oughtto be well aware that that possibility is at least out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing his lack of confidence in projections and acknowledging the uncertainty in the stock market. He also discusses the possibility of inflation reemerging in the future.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot make decisions without consulting his advisors.


Passage number 144.
MR. STERN. Responses in our District to what has happened inthe financial markets have been all over the lot. Of course, peoplehave been preoccupied with the baseball season until recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that responses in their District to what has happened in the financial markets have been varied, with people being preoccupied with the baseball season until recently.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I missed it. What happened there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions that the speaker missed something and is asking for an explanation of what occurred. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 146.
MR. STERN. I am sure the staff can prepare a memo.Initially, there was a lot of concern coming from the financialcommunity; that seems to have diminished. There have been somescattered reports of postponement of purchases of big-ticket items but-19-11/3/87first of all, it seems to me, that is to be expected. Second, I wouldreiterate the word "scattered" because it by no means is universal atthis juncture. One of our contacts who is pretty well plugged intothe retail picture--not just locally but nationally--reported that hiscompany opened six new stores the day of the collapse of stock pricesand business in all of them was terrific.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing an explanation and discussing observations.


Passage number 147.
MS. SEGER. That's because they were giving things away thatday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact that "they were giving things away that day."


Passage number 148.
MR. STERN. Well, I'm sure they highly promoted the openings;on the other hand, these were all in new communities for them. Healso had been to a national retailers' trade convention and reportedwhen he came back that, basically, people were reasonably confidentabout the Christmas season. Again, though, I think you would have tomake a distinction between those people selling big ticket items andthose selling more normal kinds of goods. I think his statementpertains particularly to the people who are selling the broad-based,moderately priced, kinds of consumer goods. We have heard some moregeneralized comments about people reassessing their capital spendingplans for 1988. I guess that's the one thing I would point to at thisjuncture.With regard to the national economic outlook, I certainlysupport the general tenor of the Greenbook forecast although I guessmy own view, and the one that comes out of our forecasting model, isthat the economy will grow more slowly pretty much throughout 1988than indicated in the Greenbook and, of course, more slowly than wehad thought previously. I think the major difference is in capitalspending and, for what it's worth, that does seem to be consistentwith the view that people are reassessing their capital spendingintentions and will probably do some postponing. At the risk ofperhaps going beyond courageous to foolhardy, we did run the model outthrough 1989 to see what it produced. While originally I thought thatwas maybe just an ill-advised exercise, in fact, it produced somereassuring results. It showed a resumption of growth pretty close to3 percent and a continuation of moderate inflation. I would not put alot of emphasis on all this, obviously, but it seems kind ofconsistent, if you think that what is going to happen is somepostponement of expenditures in 1988. That ought to suggest that 1989could be a reasonably good year, assuming we don't get further largedown [unintelligible] in things here. So for what it's worth, Isimply report those results.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing the speaker's opinion and analysis on the state of the economy and consumer spending. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 149.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But we will hold you to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The phrase "we will hold you to it" implies that there is a sense of accountability or expectation, but it does not suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 150.
MR. STERN. I have lots of time to revise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Stern simply mentions that he has lots of time to revise. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 151.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 152.
MR. MELZER. Echoing what Gary Stern said on the retailfront, I talked to national retailer in our areaand he said they looked at the week-by-week comparison of sales attheir outlets throughout the country in the twofull weeks since October 19, and only one store showed a decline inthat first week. That was the World Trade Center store andsales picked up in the second week. He is really quite optimistic;his attitude is that this is not going to have an impact. Now, you-20-11/3/87have to believe that the loss of wealth, long-term, will have someimpact. But I guess my own feeling, based on this isolated commentand other comments I have heard, is that it's a little too early totry to sort it all out and to decide how to respond in a long-termsense.The other comment that I wanted to make is that the area thatshows particular strength in our District is manufacturing employment.Implicit in what Jerry Corrigan was saying about the risks of a lowerdollar, it seems to me, would be the inflationary risk at a microlevel. I think what we have been seeing in terms of pressures oncapacity and wage rates has really been on the manufacturing side.When I say that, I base it on anecdotal evidence; I don't mean that ithas been reflected in the data. And to the extent that a rapidlydeclining dollar causes a more rapid external adjustment in [themanufacturing] area, it seems to me that we could get greater pricepressures in those industries that are producing for export or areimport competitive--the shoe industry, the apparel industry, and someother industries where even before the most recent developments, wewere already hearing reports of some pressure. So I think on theinflation front, that is something to be mindful of on the microlevel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of observations and personal opinions.


Passage number 153.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 154.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In the very near term, Mr. Chairman,I don't think there's much doubt that the stock market and relateddevelopments do work in the direction of weaker spending and lowerinflation. But I am not at all sure as to amounts and I am not at allsure what one should infer for the longer term. There are probablyseveral dozen scenarios that anybody could think of. Unlike Mr.Prell, I don't have to put one on paper but, in my thinking, there aretwo more likely scenarios in the near term. One is that the financialmarkets, and by that I mean all of them--exchange markets, bondmarkets, stock markets--kind of settle in more or less where they havebeen in the last couple of days. I don't know where they are rightnow, so I have to qualify that. But suppose the Dow settles in at the1900-2000 range, the long bond settles in at 9 percent or a littlemore or a little less, and the exchange markets are roughly in linewith [the levels of] recent days. Now, in that scenario, my hunch isthat economic performance will be respectable but not spectacular overthe intermediate term--probably something like what I heard Mr. Parrydescribe, which I don't consider to be all bad, by the way. The otherscenario, which I think has to be thought about along with that one,isn't so pretty. And that's a scenario in which for whatever reason--because the exchange markets go south or the budget negotiationsrupture--there's a sudden hit to the system. Who knows what the exacttrigger might be, but we could find ourselves confronted with anothervery, very difficult and turbulent set of conditions in the financialmarkets. Obviously, I can't put a probability on that. But if I wereto just think of the two broad scenarios that would warrant theclosest attention from a policy point of view, I guess those are thetwo that stick out in my mind. Interestingly enough, at least from myperspective, they both seem to me to have the same immediate policyimplications in that they both imply the need for a great deal ofcaution in policy, and a very measured and disciplined approach topolicy in which we maintain maximum flexibility for the future.11/3/87I would also, if I may Mr. Chairman, like to make a commentor two about the longer-term situation as I see it, because I thinkit's extremely germane both to where we are and to policy options forthe future. There is, of course, a great deal of discussion in allcircles about imbalances in the U.S. and the world economy, whether interms of trade or payments or whatever. But, we should not lose sightof a couple of powerful forces on the domestic side that I think aregermane. One is the dramatic increase in debt, in leveraging, that wehave had in recent years: the ratio of overall nonfinancial debt toGNP--and I understand all the limits in the data--has risen fromsomething like 1.41 in the early 1980s to almost 1.81 early this year.It may be coincidence--it probably is--but the fact of the matter isthat the last time we saw that ratio in a range that high was in thelate 1920s. And it's not all government debt, although governmentdebt has a lot to do with it. Since the first quarter of 1984, thenet issuance of equity is down $270 billion and corporate debt is up$600 billion. Again, if you look at this problem of governmentdeficits and savings, it's really quite dramatic. In the late 1970s,the general U.S. government budget deficit as a percent of net privatesavings averaged about 10 percent. It has risen sharply throughoutthe 1980s, peaking at 66 percent in 1986. Indeed, in 1986 the federalbudget deficit itself absorbed more than 90 percent of net privatesavings. And even in 1987, that absorption rate relative to domesticsavings will fall only to the mid-50 percent range. I stress thatbecause in the context of all this discussion about budget packagesand all the rest, I think we have to keep in mind that, even under thebest of circumstances, the kinds of things that are talked about inthe area of budget reform are really quite small. Indeed, there is agreat likelihood that the budget deficit in 1988 in absolute termswill be larger than in 1987. It is in that context, I think, that alot of these acute dilemmas and very, very sharp risks have to beevaluated and considered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two different scenarios for the near term and highlights the potential risks and uncertainties associated with each scenario. There is disagreement about the potential outcomes and the appropriate policy approach.


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the Governor Angell but does not provide any information about any contention or disagreement involving him.


Passage number 156.
MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the economy was headed for abox in a corner and it wasn't going to work the way it was [earlier].We had really slow money stock growth for a nine-month period. But wehad something else going on that it seems to me has been missedsomewhat--that is, the dramatic improvement in labor productivity.Now, I know you wouldn't expect me to mention the manufacturing sectorof the U.S. economy, but it is much larger than agriculture.Manufacturing is 24 percent of our economy and we have a 4-1/2 percentgrowth rate in labor productivity in that sector. And thatimprovement is running faster than any edging up of wage rates, so wehave unit labor costs falling in a dramatic way while the dollarexchange rate is adjusting. That leads, of course, to what I think weexpected to have happen--dramatic increases in real exports: 17.9percent in the second quarter and 16.8 percent in the third quarter.And it seems to me--and here's where I differ somewhat with the staffforecast--that that is apt to continue. I see no reason why thatwon't tend to continue as far as the eye can see, because there arejust so many adjustments underway, given the wonderful newopportunities of labor productivity. That, of course, carries with ita need to have higher capital expenditures in the Rust belt, themanufacturing sector; and so that makes our economy stronger than itotherwise would have been. Then, on top of that, instead of reducinggovernment deficits by $73 billion, according to the staff forecast we-22-11/3/87have a $16 billion increase in the deficit. So that's an $89 billion[swing] and it just seems to me the economy wasn't going to work. Thestock market event seems likely to bring some relief in that it mightbe expected to slow consumer spending enough so that there is room forthis other rather rapid expansion to continue. But this doesn't giveus a bad inflation environment at all; it indicates, of course, withthis productivity going the way it is that you have less inflation.In fact, it seems to me that the inflation rate in 1987 is justunbelievable, in view of the oil price rebound and the import priceadjustments. To have the CPI, which should have more imports thanother measures of inflation, peak out at 6.2 percent in the firstquarter, and move down to 4.6 percent in the second quarter and 3.6 inthe third was just unbelievable. So, in a way, everything was goingall right except that expectations were bound to derail the train; andthose expectations came out of the lack of understanding as to howinflation wasn't going to return; it wasn't there in spite of the factof a falling dollar. I don't know that there's any appreciation ofthe way in which the Federal Reserve's commitment existed in thatenvironment. So, we have a rather unusual occurrence. With regard tothe forecast, the one item that I think seems like a rather rapidreversal for the fourth quarter would be the income velocity of money.The income velocity of money spurted up to about a +4 percent annualrate in the third quarter from zero in the second quarter; and then itlooks to me like it falls at about a 6 percent annual rate in thefourth quarter, which would be a swing of velocity of 10 percentagepoints. That seems a little stronger than I might expect. The realtrick is: how can we maintain confidence in the domestic value ofmoney in a period of declining foreign exchange rates for the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Instead, it primarily presents the speaker's analysis and observations about the economy, labor productivity, and inflation.


Passage number 157.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 158.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I too agree that the outlook isextremely difficult to forecast because we are in a fairly newsituation here. But, it seems to me that the events of recent monthssuggest that the Louvre Accord was an agreement to maintain the U.S.exchange rates at levels that were not sustainable. We have haddifficulty financing the deficit this year with private capitalinflows. In the first quarter of this year, that reluctance of theprivate foreign investor to keep on providing money at the pace neededwas reflected in the downward movement in our exchange rate; but thatwas stopped by the Louvre agreement. Subsequently, it seems to me,the pressure generated by this reluctance of foreign investors to putas much in as they had so willingly in earlier years was reflected inrising interest rates. We had marvelous stability in the exchangerate but our bond rate was under upward pressure because of reducedforeign demand. And that is what ultimately led to the big drop inthe stock market. The market had become extremely overvalued relativeto bond rates of return. Standard & Poor's 500 was yielding 2.7percent at a time when intermediate-term governments were yieldingalmost 10 percent. That was the biggest spread between dividend yieldand intermediate-term bond yields in history. So it was clearly anunsustainable situation. Now we have to try to figure out how wepermit the dollar to adjust downward without that being transmittedinto upward pressure on the long-term bond markets. And I thinkthat's going to be a very tricky proposition for us. But there is nodoubt in my mind that we have to go to a much lower level of thedollar. The question is: How can we keep the domestic economy movingahead even at a relatively modest rate in that context. I attended a-23-11/3/87meeting at the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank where a couple of brightyoung people from the Board presented a superb paper. I hope that ithas been distributed at the Board because it tells a lot about why wehave not had any more adjustment in our trade account than we have hadthus far. And the reason is that the import price levels have gone upat an amazingly low rate. In the most recent period, reportedyesterday I think by the Bureau of the Census, import prices went upin the third quarter by less than 2 percent; I think that reflects,and the paper supports this, that foreign producers who have gotteninto this market are very reluctant to give up markets here and aregoing to try to hang in here as long as they can. It seems to me thatit is going to take a level of the dollar well below any long-termequilibrium level to begin to make the kind of progress I think wehave to make in reducing our foreign deficit. So our problem for thenext few months is going to be a very tough one: How do we handle thisball of wax on the declining dollar and avoid not putting all kinds ofpressures on long-term bond rates that are going to be verydestabilizing for the domestic economy. If we have another runup inrates, we are going to see a new low in the stock market. I don'tthink there's any question about that. So, I think it's a mostunstable financial situation. I wasn't around in 1929--at least I wasnot old enough to know what was going on--but I can't recall a periodwhen we have had such an unstable financial system as we have right atthis moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The author expresses disagreement with the stability of the financial system and suggests that the current situation is highly unstable.


Passage number 159.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Heller without providing any context or information that indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 160.
MR. HELLER. At the last meeting, I argued that we weremoving toward a much better balance in the real economy and I thinkthat is still on track. I think we now are moving also toward abetter balance in the financial economy. While there is uncertaintyaround, we have eliminated some of the excesses that Frank Morris wastaking about a minute ago. If you look at the stock market, afterall, we came from a high of over 2700, so the glass has been drainedby about 25 or 30 percent but it is still three quarters full. Andthat is not a bad position. Essentially, we are back to where we wereat the beginning of the year. In one fell swoop, we have wiped outinflation, or sharply reduced inflationary expectations, and that hasgiven us a lot more breathing room on the interest rate front as well.And now I think what's in train is a better balance in the worldeconomy as well, with exchange rates now getting very close to levelsthat would be sustainable on a long-term basis; and the imbalances inthe world economy will be reduced, as a lot of people have talkedabout before. By the way, on the budget deficit side, the lowerinterest rates also clearly will help in holding the budget deficit toapproximately current levels. And nobody has been talking about thethreat of protectionist legislation; that has also gone away, I think,to a large extent. So, I think there are a couple of bright spots ina gloomy situation that we shouldn't overlook. I agree that there isall this uncertainty but, if we keep following that path, I think wewill see the light of day pretty soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own perspective and opinions on the state of the economy, acknowledging some uncertainty but also highlighting positive aspects and potential improvements.


Passage number 161.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there anyone else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage is a question, which does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks whether there is anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 162.
MR. JOHNSON. I really don't have much to add but I'll put inmy two cents' worth. I basically agree with Ed Boehne's view aboutthe domestic economy that it's too early to tell what the effect isgoing to be of all this. We really don't have any serious data at-24-11/3/87this point to evaluate the situation. I think we are probably notgoing get data that we are going to feel confident about, in terms ofbeing symptomatic of the effects of this, until a couple of weeks,maybe. Retail sales data are three weeks away; we may have some earlycar sales data and things like that but the orders impact of this isdown the road. There's a lot of information that still is notavailable; the only thing we really have at this point is some of thesentiment indexes. So, we don't know how to read the overall impact,although I agree with Ed that it's hard to imagine sentiment improvingas a result of this. I think it's pretty clear that there is anadditional air of pessimism about the outlook that didn't exist beforeand that expectations definitely have changed. What effect that'sgoing to have is difficult to tell.If you look right now at the fundamentals in the economy,they do look good; I agree with Bob's point on that. Things areadjusting fairly nicely in the way that we expected and in the way thestaff had described in the forecast. We are seeing a transition, Ithink, from domestic aggregate demand to more externally generatedgrowth. I think that is positive and it still seems to be continuing.One of the things I worry about now--after the fact, with this changein the financial markets--is that that export-led growth may comeunder some pressure. Even though the dollar is obviously weaker, itis going to improve, I think. In that relative sense, other problemsare going to [damp] the prospects for export-led growth. One of theissues in the financial markets is that foreign stock markets aroundthe world actually have fallen more than the U.S. market. Inpercentage terms, they have all come down by more than the New YorkStock Exchange composite. So, the stock market impact abroad isgreater than it is here. What that means is really not clear. Butcombine that with [these other developments]: the fact that interestrates in those countries are relatively higher because of the fall ininterest rates here recently and the not very large adjustment ininterest rates abroad; the fact that their currencies areappreciating, and therefore, damping their ability to export; and thefact that if income is going to be falling here, we are going to bedemanding less in terms of imports from those countries. So, not onlyis there going to be an income effect on them, there is going to be asubstitution effect. And I think the question is: How strong arethose economies going to be. And how strong is our externalperformance going to be under those conditions. I don't really know;I just think there are big uncertainties. And I agree with what Jerrysaid: we need some flexibility at this stage, but it's really tooearly to tell what is going to happen. We need to maintain ourflexibility, but we need to face the reality that the world haschanged. Sentiment and expectations are different, both in realgrowth and in inflation; and I think we have to acknowledge that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson agrees with Ed Boehne's view on the domestic economy, but expresses uncertainty and concerns about the impact of recent financial market changes on export-led growth and the overall external performance of the economy. He acknowledges that there are big uncertainties and the need for flexibility, but also mentions the need to face the reality that the world has changed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 163.
MS. SEGER. The two words that I think describe mostcompletely what is going on are confusion and uncertainty. All of thebusiness economists and business people I have spoken with in the lastcouple of weeks admit to both of those. Practically no one pretendsto know exactly what the impact of the financial market disturbanceswill be, but almost everyone expects some sort of an impact. Probablythe most dramatic adjustment that I witnessed was atwhere, unfortunately, the event caught them in the middleof the planning season for 1988. They immediately knocked 5 percentoff their sales forecast up through the next year and also looked for-25-11/3/87two plants to close--a truck plant and a car plant. Their view wasthat back in the early 1980s, when the auto industry was going intothe pink, they said they were cutting off a finger at a time ratherthan doing major surgery. So, this time around they want to beprepared for more dramatic and significant adjustments if, in fact,they are needed. They are watching very carefully what is actuallygoing on so that they can do additional adjustments if necessary.They also have made some dramatic changes in the management of theirpension funds, which are very, very large. They have cut back on thepercentage invested in equities. They also have cut back on thepercentage in long bonds and have moved into a very liquid position.I just mention that because I think it is one specific example thatsome people in the business world are reacting.Not knowing what is going to happen, I guess one of mynightmares is that what might happen is that consumers will cut backon their spending, as Mike has laid out in the Greenbook estimates,except that they will cut back a little more dramatically even than weare estimating in the next couple of quarters. The rich lawyers willcontinue to buy Mercedes and Peugeots and Hondas and things like thatthat are produced abroad but they will cut back on their consumptionof domestically produced items and, therefore, we will get sort of adouble whammy: we will have the weak consumption but, also, we willnot see the import situation improving as much as we are expectingnow, and as much as I certainly would like to see. Yet, I am notsaying we are going to get a recession; I don't really know. But Ithink we ought to think about what the risk is, and ask: If we do geta recession, is that going to help the problems that Jerry Corriganhas ticked off. I don't think so. Going into a recession with aheavy debt load doesn't usually make the debt load any lighter; itjust makes it look a lot heavier to service. Also, I don't think thata recession here would help our trading partners. As I read thegrowth numbers in Germany, Japan, Canada, and some other countries, itseems to me that they are not all that robust anyway. They do dependa lot upon their business dealings with us and, therefore, I can'timagine that we wouldn't take many of them with us, which in turn,would make our new-found ability to export a lot more difficult totake advantage of because you have to have somebody to buy thoseexports that we now can produce efficiently. So, to summarize, I justam concerned. And I really think that we ought to watch the incomingdata extremely carefully for signs of more weakness than we are nowexpecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses uncertainty about the impact of financial market disturbances and presents a different perspective on how consumers may react and the potential consequences of a recession.


Passage number 164.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "Governor Kelley" as the context or specific content of the passage is not provided.


Passage number 165.
MR. KELLEY. Very briefly, Mr. Chairman, I think most thingshave been said, but just to get on the record here: While I agree withBob Boykin and others that the situation is fragile, particularly inthe Eleventh District, which I am still pretty close to, I share BobHeller's view that there is a lot of room for being optimistic about alight at the end of the tunnel. The risks here, I think, are twoprimarily. Number one, as Ed Boehne and others have said, no moreshocks is the key. If we can avoid that, I think things will beenormously optimistic. I also agree with Governor Seger that it isvery important that we--and I mean we in the corporate sense--dowhatever we can to avoid a recession, which is in nobody's interest ata time like this. So, those are the two things that I would like tokeep a weather eye to: have no more shocks and avoid a recession to-26-11/3/87the extent that we can do that. I would like to comment briefly onJerry Corrigan's concern about the high level of debt, which has beenone of my favorite themes also. I think that ties together with FrankMorris' comment about the pressure for market share that people feel.The creation of all of this debt has put people in a situation wherethere is enormous pressure to produce; that's not only true forforeign economies and their pressure to maintain market share here butit is also true domestically. People who are in debt need to keeptheir jobs. So perhaps if there is a good side to all of this debtcreation, it lies in the fact that it puts tremendous pressure oneverybody to be productive and, thus, it should have a long-termdownward drag on the inflationary concerns that we all have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses agreement with the views of others and shares their optimism about the situation. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We haven't heard from Presidents Guffeyand Hoskins. Do either of you wish to add to the body of knowledge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating that they haven't heard from Presidents Guffey and Hoskins and is asking if either of them would like to contribute additional information.


Passage number 167.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't think that I can; soI will respectfully pass.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, is simply expressing his inability to answer the question and politely declining to do so.


Passage number 168.
MR. HOSKINS. I would speak only with some trepidation,since my first FOMC meeting by telephone resulted in a 508 point dropin the stock market. I will make another observation, however. Ihave been a Reserve Bank President about three weeks now and I'veprobably participated in more FOMC meetings in that time than anyother three-week President. In terms of the Fourth District, it isprobably very typical--similar to what Si Keehn has indicated. Wepolled [District contacts] prior and after the problem in the marketand, basically, heard of no major pullbacks in either capital goods oron the retail side. The only comment I would like to make is that Ido have some concerns about the dollar and any attempts to keep it ata level that is other than what the market wants, particularly, if wesignal that as policy makers through interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their own observations and concerns.


Passage number 169.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In view of the time, it's probablyadvisable to break for coffee, assuming that it hasn't gotten coldyet. Then we will come back and Don Kohn will brief us on monetarypolicy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply suggests taking a break for coffee and mentions that Don Kohn will later brief on monetary policy.


Passage number 170.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Kohn taking a coffee break.


Passage number 171.
MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is a simple statement by Mr. Kohn.


Passage number 172.
]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there questions for Mr. Kohn. Mr.Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply inquiring if there are any questions for Mr. Kohn and Mr. Stern.


Passage number 173.
MR. STERN. Given all the uncertainties and everything, whatdo you have for the forecast of aggregate growth for the first quarteror two of next year. You seem to have a sharp, or at least what Iwould call a significant, slowing late this year. I'm just curiousabout what you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for a forecast and expressing curiosity about the projected slowdown.


Passage number 174.
MR. KOHN. We would have growth picking up in the firstcouple of quarters of next year, primarily because of the effects ofthe lower interest rates in the fourth quarter. For example, we haveM2 picking up a little to a range of 6 to 7 percent in the first halfof next year rather than the 6 percent we have this year. We have M1-27-11/3/87slowing down a little, but that's partly because demand deposits pushup the fourth quarter. Basically, we have these offsetting effects:we have interest rates declining and that tends to push up growth,especially as the previous increase in interest rates wears off towardthe end of this quarter and the beginning of next quarter; but, ofcourse, we have lower income growth and reduced wealth, and that tendsto keep monetary growth down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different factors that contribute to the expected growth in the first couple of quarters of next year, acknowledging both positive and negative influences on monetary growth.


Passage number 175.
 We see some stronger growth--MR. PARRY. Why is there such a significant change going fromNovember to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact (stronger growth) and asks a question about the reason for a change in growth. It does not present any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 176.
MR. KOHN. On M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage only features a statement by Mr. Kohn. There is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 177.
MR. PARRY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any specific information about Mr. Parry's statement or any potential conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 178.
 Yes M1, and a little on--MR. KOHN. It's partly the monthly averaging results of thegyrations in demand deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple addition to the previous information.


Passage number 179.
MR. PARRY. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply starts with the phrase "All right," which implies agreement or compliance.


Passage number 180.
MR. KOHN. In fact, we had demand deposits not declininguntil another week or two; they declined earlier than we wereexpecting, so I'd expect a lower November and then a little strongergrowth rate in December. It wouldn't affect the September-to-Decemberpath.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn is simply providing an observation and making a prediction based on that observation.


Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any more questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Any more questions." It is a simple inquiry to see if there are any further queries.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 182.
MR. MORRIS. I have an impossible question for you, Don. Ifthe dollar goes down significantly in the next couple of months, whichI think is going to happen, how do we prevent that from spilling overinto a rise in bond yields. That is the conflict we are going to befaced with in the next month, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the dollar will go down significantly in the next couple of months, while also expressing concern about a potential rise in bond yields. This suggests a conflict or contradiction in how these two scenarios might interact or impact each other.


Passage number 183.
MR. KOHN. I'm not sure you can. But my thinking on this isthat the important variable here, as to whether or not that happens orthe degree to which that happens, is the way people are assessing theeconomy. Think back a year or a year and a half ago, to 1986, when wehad easier monetary policy, dollar declines, and the bond marketdeclining for the first part of the year. Now, oil prices andinflation expectations were important there; [they were expected] tobe stable through the rest of the year even as the dollar continued todecline. But that was in an environment in which inflation wasn'texpected to pick up: incoming data were suggesting very littleinflation and the economy was widely viewed at that time as beingquite weak. So, I think if a dollar decline occurred in anenvironment in which people thought that the economy was weak or thatthe chance of a pickup in inflation wasn't large, then the bond marketeffect would be muted; but if the economy didn't look [weak], as aresponse to the stock market, for example, and the dollar starteddropping rapidly, we could be back where we were this summer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is presenting his own thoughts and analysis on the relationship between the economy, inflation expectations, and the bond market.


Passage number 184.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions of Don. Let mestart off with a review of where I think we have been. In a certainsense, we have been very fortunate for the last couple of weeks. Wechose to supply the demand for excess reserves in the system. We didit essentially by endeavoring to target the funds rate because,obviously, if we target the funds rate then we automatically supply-28-11/3/87the demand for reserves at that interest rate. And, in that context,it's crucial that you come out with the right rate. I think wefumbled into it and, at least in retrospect, it looks as though itcame out to be about where it should be: namely, slightly under 7percent. As a result, I think we have seen a marginal return towardthe normal relationships, defined in this context as reflecting thedifferential yield spreads and the basic flight--or crash--to qualitythat seemed to be occurring at that point. We can go on with thispolicy for a while, and my impression is that we have very littlechoice but to do that. I think, however, it is important to rememberthat we have a number of sequential dangers out there. I think theone of utmost importance, against which all efforts have to bedirected, is what I would call a flight from the future. At themoment there is investment going on in the longer term of thiscountry. In other words, people are buying longer-term bonds; theyare still buying stocks, and yields are not all that bad; the exchangerate is soft but it's [not] falling on its face. It is not all thatdifficult to imagine a less developed country scenario where what wehad would have led to a dramatic collapse in the exchange rate, a hugerise in long-term bond rates, or the effective disappearance of thelong-term bond market. Obviously, under those conditions the stockmarket would fall away and everything would implode into the shortrun. And the bill rate would collapse, and we would have all thesecrazy, horrible events that none of us thinks can happen until we seethem. Now that's the type of scenario that would force us, just topreserve the system, to move the discount rate up two or three points.And then we would get into the types of problems that a historicmonetary collapse always creates. We are far from that at this stage,but I suspect a lot nearer than we would like to believe, becausefinancial markets have been so inherently unstable, just looking atthe variations in volume and prices. The evaluation process whichruns stocks the way they have been running in the last two weekssuggests a degree of uncertainty--especially a degree of uncertainty,potentially, in the foreign exchange markets. We could very readilysee a major endeavor to shift portfolios out of dollar-denominatedsecurities into those denominated in other currencies. That obviouslycan't be successful, after the fact, but it can have powerful effectson the exchange rates. I think, as a consequence, this is a potentialdanger out there.Obviously, we have to be very cautious about how we move fromthe path that we are on toward a more stable regular policy-orientedposition. Consequently, as I said, I see no real alternative totrying to operate, roughly, along the lines of what we are callingalternative "B" at this stage. Hopefully, if this situation continuesto stabilize, we will be able gradually to pull away from funds ratetargeting and allow the supply of excess reserves to fall with thedecline in demand. At that point, obviously, we will be seeing aclosing of the bill rate/funds rate spread and presumably we will beseeing the longer-term corporate Baa less U.S. Treasury spread comeback down, and the junk bonds even will look almost saleable. But weare still a goodly way away from that; we are still not normal. Theseare not anywhere close to normal relationships, normal creditconditions, or normal attitudes in the market. I think there's asense of relief out there, but I don't think it's anywhere close to asense of stability. The fact that we have had a 500 point drop in theDow, as far as I'm concerned, has now changed all the program trading,all of the different types of risk operations [unintelligible] people11/3/87take. It's hard for me to see the stock market going all the way backto where it was. I think the risk premiums that are now associatedwith what could happen have [unintelligible]. It is conceivable,therefore, that in retrospect this whole thing could turn out to havebeen a remarkable blessing. I must tell you that the odds of itcoming out that way cannot be very large, but they are not zeroeither.In any event, strangely, I don't think we have a policyproblem, at least as I see it, as to what our policy should be,because it seems that it should be just an automatic continuation ofwhat we have been doing, so we can phase into something morepermanently. There is also the issue of how we portray ourselves tothe public. And that's not only the issue of what we do but of how wesay it--how we write down the directive--because this particulardirective is going to be disaggregated in such detail that periods andmisprints are going to be read as having great, great importance. So,I merely wish to say that I'd appreciate not only your thoughts andyour usual comments here on the issue of policy--the borrowing--butalso your recommendations on how we portray ourselves to the public atlarge in the specific formulation of the directive, taking anyrevisions from what we tentatively put down in the Bluebook. GovernorAngell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 185.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, Mr. Chairman I'm delighted to have you takethat position. I support you and alternative "B" and borrowings of$450 million. But I'd like to suggest somewhat of a variation on thatin regard to the fed funds range. Ordinarily, we would leave it at 5to 9 percent; but it seems to me that there are about three reasonswhy we might lower that to 4 to 8 percent under alternative "B". Andin part, this speaks to how that would be interpreted as people readthese minutes. In regard to President Morris' comments about upwardmovement in interest rates, a dramatic movement upward to the 9percent fed funds level seems to me very unlikely; that probably wouldbe destabilizing in financial markets. So I'd really rather have thatupward bound down a point. I'd also like to have the lower bound downa point to 4 percent because, while we are not anticipating it, theremight be some circumstance between Open Market Committee meetings thatwould give us the flexibility [to move] downward, and that might beappropriate. So, 4 to 8 percent on the fed funds range, even thoughit would maintain the policy stance about where we are, would give usa slight variation. Frankly, I would prefer staying with variation IIof the language [shown in the Bluebook], which is the more normalexpression. It just seems to me that the additional language shown invariation I could pose difficulties. The very nice thing about thestatement that was released by the Board Tuesday morning, October20th, was that it was very simple and short. And I would prefer invariation II to have the words read "slightly greater ... might" and"somewhat less ... would" be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage over whether to lower the fed funds range to 4 to 8 percent or leave it at 5 to 9 percent. Mr. Angell suggests lowering it to 4 to 8 percent for three reasons, but also mentions his preference for staying with variation II of the language.


Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 187.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, Mr. Chairman, you're very persuasive interms of keeping things where they are, but I have a somewhatdifferent interpretation of where we are. It seems to me that we aresomewhere between alternatives "A" and "B"; we may be closer to "B"than to "A", but I think that we are in the "A" -"B" range forpolicy, with a federal funds target of something under 7 percent,-30-11/3/87perhaps 6-7/8 percent or just a touch higher. It strikes me,therefore, that if we go with "B" that we will, in effect, betightening somewhat even though it's a subtle tightening. And I sensethat if we deviate at all from where we are, that it might be betterto ease just a touch. So I come down being in the alternative "A"column. It's true that we have a lot of uncertainty and we don't knowwhat's going to happen. But I do think there have been enoughchanges, at least in terms of shifts in the direction of the risks,that it is important for us to help anchor the lower rates that wehave achieved the last couple of weeks. And it seems to me thatsomething closer to "A" than "B" helps to do that, because those lowerrates that we have had are important for offsetting the effects thatwe are going to get from the stock market. I think that it ought tobe clear that the Federal Reserve is trying to do that; and I thinkthat alternative "A" does that less ambiguously than alternative "B".Clearly, there is a risk in the dollar but, as I judge the situation,we're not talking about very much of a change in rates and it seems tome that the environment is such that we could probably absorb thatrisk at the moment. I would prefer Variant I of the language becauseI think it says more clearly what we are doing, and I think it'simportant that the directive that we put out says what we're doing.Even though the language is different, and we have words like "beingflexible" and so on, that's exactly the situation that we are in. Soit seems to me that's what we ought to go with. If we go withalternative "A", then I think some symmetrical language isappropriate, with "somewhats" and "mights" on both sides. Now, we areeffectively operating on a federal funds strategy. When we were on afederal funds strategy in the 1970s, we tended to have Open MarketCommittee meetings every three or four weeks. As we moved more into areserve-based strategy, we were able to lengthen out the meetingintervals to every six weeks or so. So it seems to me that whereverwe set the funds rate today, we are going to have to look at it veryfrequently. And I would think that we ought to plan at least onetelephone meeting two or three weeks hence, simply because if you'regoing to operate on a federal funds target, by necessity you have tohave more meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, expresses a different interpretation and viewpoint from the chairman, suggesting that there may be a difference in opinion on whether to keep things as they are or make changes in policy. Boehne argues for a more cautious approach and potentially easing monetary policy, while acknowledging the uncertainty and risks involved. This differing viewpoint creates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just interpose that we haveinterpreted what we are doing as alternative "B". Let's try to makecertain that we are not dealing with differences of currentperception. Don, do you want to address this issue. What I don'twant to happen here is to have differences which really relate to whatwe are doing as distinct from where we want to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any kind of contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for clarification and making sure everyone is on the same page.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
MR. KOHN. We, of course, wrote "B" as $450 million becausethat's what we have been writing into the reserve path. I think youcan make an argument, and Peter perhaps will want to comment on this,that we really have been operating a bit easier than a $450 millionborrowing level might suggest. If you wanted to be certain, or ascertain as you can be on this sort of thing, that the center ofgravity for the funds rate really was below 7 percent and that it'smore likely to average in the 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent area and touch 7percent only seldomly, then a $400 million borrowing target might giveyou a little more assurance in that regard than a $450 millionborrowing target. And maybe that is a little more consistent withwhat we have actually been doing. Peter, do you have more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kohn suggests that a $400 million borrowing target would be more consistent with the actual operations, while Peter's response is not mentioned.


Passage number 190.
11/3/87MR. STERNLIGHT. No, I think that would make my point; Iregard that kind of thing as within the flexibility that is stated inthe directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion about the flexibility stated in the directive.


Passage number 191.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, rather than say alternative "A", "B", or"C", let me say that I would prefer to have the funds rate centered on6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent rather than around 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a preference for a specific range for the funds rate.


Passage number 192.
 Now whetherthat's "A"--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's actually where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It is simply stating the current situation without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 193.
MR. ANGELL. That's where "B" would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply indicates a location on an unspecified topic, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's where we think we are at themoment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states the speaker's belief regarding their current position or situation.


Passage number 195.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or additional information provided. The phrase "MR. BOEHNE" alone does not indicate any kind of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 196.
 But we are talking here about alternative "B"delivered--MR. JOHNSON. Just take whatever borrowing is consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage is simply mentioning an alternative option or scenario without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 197.
MR. BOEHNE. Right, but as I read the Bluebook, underalternative "B" we're talking of a funds rate centering more around 7percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Boehne regarding the Bluebook and the funds rate centering around 7 percent.


Passage number 198.
MR. ANGELL. No, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No, no" simply confirms or agrees with something that was previously mentioned.


Passage number 199.
MR. JOHNSON. That's what "B" says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states what "B" says without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 200.
MR. BOEHNE. That's what "B" says, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's a rounding question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 202.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I'd like to round it to 6-3/4 percent, ifthat's current policy. I'm for current policy; if that's "A", I'm for"A".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with a current policy and asking for clarification.


Passage number 203.
MR. ANGELL. Mine also would be [current policy]. I wouldpresume that bringing the wide range for the fed funds rate down to 4to 8 percent would be more consistent, in the short run while we arein this period of greater flexibility, with a short-run policy inwhich we would really hold it and not let it go to 7 percent and notlet it go above 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is expressing his agreement with the current policy of bringing the wide range for the fed funds rate down to 4 to 8 percent.


Passage number 204.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ed, what borrowing number were youthinking of. Are you thinking of $250 million, which is what the "A"number actually is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on the amount the person was thinking of borrowing.


Passage number 205.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I am not very concerned about theborrowing figure. I want a 6-3/4 percent funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Boehne expresses his lack of concern about the borrowing figure and states his desire for a 6-3/4 percent funds rate. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this statement.


Passage number 206.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You are targeting the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 207.
MR. BOEHNE. If that takes $300 million in borrowing, I'm for$300 million; if it takes $400 million, I'm for $400 milion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their support for either borrowing $300 million or $400 million, depending on what is necessary.


Passage number 208.
11/3/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the borrowing assumption is inthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the borrowing assumption is present.


Passage number 209.
 When you're dealing with this sort of market it just breaksaway from--MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about dealing with a particular market.


Passage number 210.
 That's right, so I don't think--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You have to make a distinction ofwhether you want to do borrowing or you want to do the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a suggestion.


Passage number 211.
MR. BOEHNE. I want to do the funds rate; that's what I wantto do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their desire to focus on the funds rate.


Passage number 212.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You have made your point. PresidentBlack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 213.
MR. BLACK. I think the point at which you arrive has to bedependent in part on what you think really happened to the stockmarket: whether it came from real shocks or liquidity shocks or somecombination. I lean to the view that it was more real, along thelines of what Frank Morris was describing earlier, in that theearnings-price ratios had gotten totally out of line with the bondyield. And then there were a couple of sparks that set it off: theproblems in the Persian Gulf and the likelihood that we were going toenact some very severe protectionist legislation. At the same time, Ithink there were liquidity shocks once this happened. And I think wemet those liquidity shocks, as we ought to in such a case, when weissued a statement that we would provide liquidity. But as far asthese real shocks are concerned, I don't think there's a lot that wecan do about that through policy. So, I would come out, I think,right where you did on this, Mr. Chairman. And like Ed Boehne, Iwould look through the borrowing to the federal funds rate and [seek arate] of around 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent, which I had interpreted asbeing a little on the easy side of "B" as it was written in theBluebook, but which you now have convinced me is really what you hadin mind. In view of the way in which this directive is going to bedissected, I think it would be good to go with Variant I. But thereare a couple of references in there that would bother me and mightconfuse the market. If you look at the references to greaterflexibility on lines 105 and 106 of the draft that was distributedwith the brown cover, that need for greater flexibility, I think,could be a little confusing to the market. It isn't clear to me whatit means and I don't think it would be clear to the market. I wouldhasten to add that this reference to our intention to ensure adequateliquidity is perfectly clear to me and I think it's obviouslyappropriate. So, on the wording of this, I would tend to end up thesame way Governor Angell did in saying somewhat lesser restraint"would" and slightly greater restraint "might".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 214.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage alone does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The statement "President Parry" does not indicate any specific conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 215.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would favor Bluebook alternative"B", which I would interpret to mean a funds rate of around 6-3/4 to 7percent. It seems to me that with rates at that lower level relativeto what we had been looking at six weeks ago, we will offset most ofthe negative effects of what has happened in the stock market. Inaddition, I would favor Variant I and it seems to me that, given theuncertainties, symmetrical language would be appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Parry is expressing his own opinion and preferences, but there is no evidence of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 216.
-33-11/3/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, what language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be apologizing for not understanding or recognizing the language being referred to.


Passage number 217.
MR. PARRY. Symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 218.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Forrestal without providing any context or information about any contention or disagreement related to him.


Passage number 219.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree entirely withyour analysis of the situation, given the uncertainty and thepotential for additional instability in the market. I think thatalternative "B" is the correct alternative for policy in the shortterm. I would target the federal funds rate at 6-3/4 percent; Iwouldn't worry about borrowing. In order to get the message across tothe markets as to what we are doing at this very critical time, Iwould favor Variant I. One point I would make is that the foreignexchange market developments seem to me to be more significant thanindications of inflationary pressures, so I would be inclined to movethat up in the hierarchy of expressions there. And I think it isimportant to keep the language related to frequent consultations. Weneed to let the market know that we are aggressively and activelyinvolved in this whole situation. I would prefer a tilt in thedirective towards easing, which would lead me to favor asymmetricaldirective language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Forrestal agrees entirely with the analysis and suggests specific policies and language adjustments.


Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 221.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I'm right along with everyoneelse. I favor the 6-3/4 percent funds rate, which I guess I wouldhave described as "A-" or "B+" going in [to this discussion], but yourdescription of "B" puts me there, so I don't have any problem withthat. On the borrowing number I was thinking $300 million, but Iguess that becomes whatever it becomes, given the funds rate thatwe're looking for. On the language, I favor Variant I; I think sayingas well as we can what is going on is important. Of course, thatwon't be released for about six weeks and that's a while down theroad. If any misinterpretation seems to be going on in the markets asto what we are doing, maybe another statement such as the one releasedearlier would be called for. I thought that was very, veryappropriate. I like things even on both sides as a rule, so symmetriclanguage always appeals to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boykin agrees with the proposals and statements mentioned.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 223.
MR. MELZER. I favor alternative "B". I have one question Iwant to raise. If you look at the directive in the policy record thatcomes out Friday and then you look at this language here, it's reallynot clear what "existing" means. Nowhere in the policy record is itmemorialized that there was an adjustment in the borrowing target; wedon't put borrowing targets in there. I think it was generallyperceived, but it is not recorded there in any fashion. That may besomething to think about. In any case, I would like to express alittle concern along the lines of what Jerry said about balance here.There has been a major shift in policy; and the broad perception ofpolicy, I think, was that we were headed toward further degrees oftightening at the last meeting. That has been washed out and therehas been some easing. Now, on the balance side my argument would bethis: I guess I never felt that we could defend a particular level ofthe dollar--that's going to be set by market forces. So, maybe nowthe fact that the dollar has moved down and there haven't been major-34-11/3/87adverse effects to that is okay. In the short run I think we caninfluence how that transition to the different levels takes place andwhether it's orderly or not. But it seems to me that any changes inmonetary policy that we make now add to the perception that all thatis happening is that the dollar is adjusting to reasonable marketlevels. What I'm trying to say is, if it's perceived beyond that thatmonetary policy is being conducted in a fashion that we really thinkwe have the latitude to run out of sync with the rest of the world,that would be very damaging to that future psychology that you'vedescribed. In other words, I think we have lost the flexibility toignore what goes on in the rest of the world here. Policycoordination is important and I hate to see us take a policy stance inthe short run that might fuel that perception that we somehow backedoff the need to do that for all the reasons we have discussed on thefinancial and the real side today. So, in any case, I favor "B" andsymmetrical language. I think Variant I is fine but I come out whereBob Black is: in a sense there are too many statements in theredealing with the extraordinary circumstances; it might convey more ofa sense of uncertainty about current conditions than we want toconvey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses his preference for alternative "B" and raises a concern about the language used in the policy record. He also shares his views on the recent shift in policy and the importance of policy coordination. However, there is no indication of disagreement or debate between the speaker and others in the passage.


Passage number 224.
 I think I'd stick with what Bob suggested on that firststatement--MR. JOHNSON. What did Bob say. Did he say just take outthat other sentence, or what did he mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 225.
MR. MELZER. Well, I think what he was saying was stay withthe desire to ensure the provision of adequate liquidity. But thestatements about flexibility in open market operations in lines 90 and91 and then around line 105 or so in the part about the frequentconsultations would be thoughts I would be inclined to take out. Ithink our actions are more important than our words, and I think theperception of our actions in the financial markets is a positive one.I think the perception is we are doing the right thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their own opinion and perspective on the matter, rather than addressing conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Norm tells me that the adjustment andthe switch will be noted in the next policy record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Norm informs the speaker that the adjustment and switch will be recorded in the next policy record.


Passage number 227.
MR. MELZER. It will be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that something will happen without any conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 228.
MR. BERNARD. That's our normal way to do it, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bernard is simply acknowledging that their normal way of doing something is the same.


Passage number 229.
MR. KOHN. But not in the one that will be released Friday;you're right about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the other person is right about something.


Passage number 230.
MR. MELZER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions a person's name, "MR. MELZER," without any context or details about their views or opinions.


Passage number 231.
 Right; so in the verbiage that leads up to thisdirective we are indicating--MR. KOHN. Right, the one that will be released Friday leadsup to the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a conversation between two people discussing a directive that will be released on Friday. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 232.
MR. MELZER. I think that's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Melzer expresses that he thinks something is fine, indicating agreement.


Passage number 233.
MR. KOHN. It does have a paragraph in there, however, notingthat the Committee has been consulting daily over this period; so itsays that the Committee has been meeting and reviewing operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that the Committee has been meeting and reviewing operations.


Passage number 234.
-35-11/3/87MR. MELZER. If we are adopting the existing degree ofreserve restraint now, that somehow implies that a change, in a policysense, occurred prior to this action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear statement of contention or disagreement. It is discussing the adoption of an existing degree of reserve restraint and implies that a policy change may have occurred before the mentioned action. However, without further context, it is not possible to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 235.
MR. KOHN. Right; and that would be covered in the policyrecord associated with this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining what would be covered in the policy record associated with the meeting.


Passage number 236.
MR. MELZER. But let me ask you this, Don: If there had beena telephone call at which that was specifically put to a vote would itthen have been reported as an addendum.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 237.
MR. KOHN. In the one that comes out Friday, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 238.
MR. BERNARD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the presence of the word "Yes" by Mr. Bernard, which suggests that he is contradicting or refuting something that was said before.


Passage number 239.
MR. MELZER. You know, that's a small subtlety.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 240.
MR. KOHN. A possibility, if the members would want it, wouldbe to expand the paragraph that has been added [to the policy recordthat comes out Friday] that mentions the consultations. We couldreference something about some easing in policy to go with thatlanguage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn is suggesting a potential addition to the policy record that aligns with the mentioned consultations.


Passage number 241.
MR. MORRIS(.). Yes, I think it would be desirable to dothat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his opinion regarding a particular matter.


Passage number 242.
MR. KOHN. That would be released this Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 243.
MR. PARRY. I think that would make some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry is expressing his opinion, but there is no indication of an opposing viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage, "President Stern," does not provide enough information to determine whether there is any contention or disagreement present. Without context or additional details, it is impossible to assess the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 245.
MR. STERN. I am happy to get on the "B" band wagon, or somevariant of the "B" band wagon, I guess. It seems to me that that isthe appropriate posture for us at the moment. In my mind, we havemoved a significant degree already, and I think the results generallyhave been satisfactory. One danger that I think we want to avoid hereis what I might call oversteering; and I think holding with somethinglike "B" is a step towards avoiding that reaction. I think FrankMorris has posed a dilemma: How do we keep weakness in the dollar, ifit persists, from spilling into the bond market. I bring up thatsubject just as a reminder that I think the most logical way to getout of that trap is to actually succeed in doing something meaningfulin fiscal policy here. But that's still a very much unresolvedmatter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly the speaker expressing their thoughts and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Indeed it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Indeed it is" simply acknowledges and agrees with a previous statement without expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 247.
MR. STERN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
 But that's another reason why I would--MR. BLACK. It is something we don't have a lot of controlover.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by the speaker without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas presented.


Passage number 249.
MR. STERN. No we don't; we probably don't have any. But Ithink that's another reason not to oversteer or overreact at themoment. We don't know how that is going to play out and we don't havemuch influence on it. I would prefer some language like Variant Ijust because, as Tom [Melzer] and some others have suggested, these-36-11/3/87are extraordinary circumstances and I think our language shouldreflect that. I guess I'm not all that concerned about exactly how wefine tune that language at the moment. I would pick something like"B" as a starting point, and I personally would prefer asymmetriclanguage in favor of lesser restraint because it seems to me that itis highly more likely, as we go forward here, that if we are going tomove at all that is the direction we are likely to want to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 250.
MR. PARRY. If your concern is about the dollar why would youthen go in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply questioning the rationale behind a certain decision, without expressing any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 251.
MR. STERN. No, I didn't say I would resist declines in thedollar; I just said that I think the outcome may be largely out ofour hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stern simply clarifies his position and mentions that he believes the outcome is beyond their control.


Passage number 252.
MR. JOHNSON. By a variant of "B", did you mean the revisedversion of "B".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward question asking for clarification.


Passage number 253.
MR. STERN. In my mind, it's something like a $400 millionborrowing target with the expectation that the federal funds rate willbe 6-3/4 or 6-7/8 percent or thereabouts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a personal opinion or belief about a borrowing target and the expectation of the federal funds rate.


Passage number 254.
MR. JOHNSON. Okay, that's what "B" means from now on, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. We do have a problem here, though.Let's focus on it because I may have to re-poll [those who havecommented already]. Listening to everybody so far, everybody islocking into a funds rate that is very much more narrow than the fundsrate that we are stipulating in this directive. The question that wehave to decide is this: In the process of formulating this directivedo we go with these very broad funds rate ranges, which is what wouldbe consistent with a specific borrowing target, or do we go with amuch narrower funds rate target, however we publish it, and have amuch broader range on the borrowing side. It's very difficult toencompass the type of funds rate targeting that we have been hearingaround this table in terms of 5 to 9 percent or 4 to 8 percent. Thisis a choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or contention about whether to use a broader range for the funds rate or a narrower range in formulating a directive. Some participants argue for a broader range, while others argue for a narrower range.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
MR. MORRIS. Mr Chairman, I might request that we eliminatethat last sentence in Variant I, because we are talking aboutstabilizing the funds rate for a short period. It is a temporarypolicy, and I don't think it makes any sense to talk about a range of4 to 8 percent or 5 to 9 percent. I think we ought it admit that wehave temporarily changed the operating procedures; and that wouldimply that we ought to get rid of that last sentence and not talk atall about ranges that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage regarding whether or not the last sentence in Variant I should be eliminated. Mr. Morris is arguing that it should be removed because it does not make sense to talk about a range of funds rate when the policy is temporary.


Passage number 257.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I don't think it's all thatdifferent from what we have, in fact, done. We have had this widerange but it has been understood that we have had a borrowing numberthat was associated with a much narrower federal funds range. And wedidn't change that [sentence] then. I think we probably would havemet and changed that borrowing level or changed it without meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is stating his opinion and explaining his perspective on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I would certainly be opposed to our goingto an announced narrow fed funds target. It seems to me it is veryimportant that we do not have the semblance of returning to the 1970sstyle, which would really require frequent consultations to move it,-37-11/3/87and would give some the impression that over the long run we might bewilling to allow whatever reserves might be consistent with that. Iwould much prefer to have the wider range but with a temporaryunderstanding, as we have had in these recent weeks, that we expect itto be in the 6-1/2 to 7 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, is opposed to going to an announced narrow fed funds target, while others may be supportive of it. This can be inferred from his statement that he would "certainly be opposed" to it, suggesting that there is disagreement or contention on this issue.


Passage number 259.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me just make a couple ofcomments about policy generally, and then I may have some languagehere that can encompass a lot of what is being said. First of all, toreturn briefly to this exchange rate question, I don't approach theexchange rate as a matter of theology; I approach it as a matter oftrying to balance the risks. And my principal point on the exchangerate is that I do see very real risks of a further substantialdepreciation in the value of the dollar. I know certain things thatit will do: it will add to inflationary pressures at home; it willwork in the direction of putting greater pressure rather than lesserpressure on interest rates at home. I don't know how it works; but Iknow the algebraic signs. And I also know that, at least in the shortrun, it raises more questions about growth prospects abroad, in part,because of another elongation in the J curve. Now, I have to balancethose risks against the hope that it will somehow accelerate theturnaround in the U.S. trade deficit, in a context in which there area host of uncertainties--such as growth prospects abroad--that I thinkare more important than the exact level of the exchange rate. Soagain, it's not a matter of theology for me; it's a matter of whereare the risks and what are the greater risks. Then, there is thisquestion of debt deficits and debtor nations. The point that I wastrying to get at in bringing that up before is that whether we like itor not, history tells us in rather unmistakable terms that a countrythat finds itself in the position that we find ourselves in right nowis going to have higher interest rates than would otherwise be thecase. There may be an example someplace, somewhere in history that'scontrary to that, but I don't know of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their perspective on policy and discussing the risks and considerations involved with exchange rates and debt deficits.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It doesn't exist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "It doesn't exist" because it presents a definitive assertion without any opposing viewpoints or contradictions.


Passage number 261.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think it exists. The onlyother point I'd make is on this question of a measured approach towhat we are trying to do here. I favor alternative "B" as GovernorJohnson defined it a moment ago. But let me, if it's agreeable toyou, Mr. Chairman, suggest some language here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their preference for alternative "B" and suggesting some language for consideration.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Go ahead, sure" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses agreement and permission to proceed.


Passage number 263.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is built on Variant I, and Ithink it gets at a lot of the things that you have been saying. Thefirst sentence, without prejudging decreasing or maintain or whateverwould read: "In the implementation of policy for the immediatefuture, the Committee seeks to [decrease somewhat/maintain/increaseslightly] the degree of pressures on reserve positions sought inrecent days." Tom, I think that gets at your point. And I wouldremove the next sentence after the semicolon completely. Go down tothe next sentence "The Committee ...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 264.
"MR. ANGELL. What was your first your sentence again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only includes a question and a request for the sentence to be repeated.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 265.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Take out all that stuff after thesemicolon. I'm at Variant I. The first sentence reads: "In the-38-11/3/87implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeksto [decrease somewhat/maintain/increase slightly] the degree ofpressures on reserve positions" and I would insert "sought in recentdays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker wants to take out certain information and suggests a different phrase to be inserted, indicating disagreement with the current wording.


Passage number 266.
"MS. SEGER. You think the markets know what that means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 267.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, I think they do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I apologize, but there is not enough information provided to accurately determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide the specific passage you would like analyzed.


Passage number 268.
MS. SEGER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement as it simply states "MS. SEGER. Okay."


Passage number 269.
MR. ANGELL. Recent days or recent weeks--either one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only states a period of time, without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 270.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, either way; we can come backto that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "either way" suggests that the speaker is open to or indifferent towards two possible options or outcomes. Additionally, the phrase "we can come back to that" implies that the speaker is willing to discuss or revisit a topic later. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 271.
MR. KEEHN. Jerry, what's wrong with the next phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 272.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, let me come to that in aminute because what I was going to suggest in the next sentence, Si,deals with that, I think. "The Committee recognizes that the volatileconditions in financial markets and uncertainties in the economicoutlook may call for a special degree of flexibility in open marketoperations" and then insert "depending, in particular, on demands forliquidity growing out of recent or prospective developments in thefinancial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will address a certain topic in a later sentence and then provide their suggestion.


Passage number 273.
"MR. PARRY. Would one be willing to say instead of "may callfor" just "calls for".SPEAKER(.). Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The exchange between MR. PARRY and the SPEAKER is a request for clarification or suggestion for a change in phrasing, but there is no argument or disagreement involved.


Passage number 274.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But the idea, Si, is to get that allinto one sentence so it's not too overburdening. Then the nextsentence--and in my mind this is crucial--would start: "Apart fromsuch considerations", in other words apart from the providingliquidity, etc. Then you would have your regular sentence with thesomewhat or slightly lesser or greater reserve restraint. In otherwords, that next sentence would stay as it is. Others may not agreewith this, but contrary to what somebody said, I personally would takeout the sentence on the next page about relatively frequentconsultations. We certainly can do that and may do that, but I thinkwe ought to be trying to project not business as usual but not that weare ready to jump out the window ourselves. So, as I see it, MrChairman, a directive couched more or less in those terms would allowus to do what you certainly want to do and I gather what a lot ofother people want to do. But it would stop short of a directive thatbecomes a federal funds rate directive. And at least in my judgment,it provides a bridge to go from these extraordinary conditions rightnow to a more "normal" environment, if circumstances permit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their own perspective and offering suggestions, but there is no indication of disagreement with others.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What would you do about the very lastphrase on the funds rate range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about the phrase on the funds rate range, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement surrounding it.


Passage number 276.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm agnostic on that; I would havea broad range there--5 to 9 percent or 4 to 8 percent; I wouldn'tworry too much about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion or uncertainty about a certain topic without any opposing viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 277.
-39-11/3/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, I will put your variation on thetable. President Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the request to consider a variation and stating their intention to put it on the table for discussion.


Passage number 278.
MR. MORRIS. I think I've already said my piece, Mr.Chairman. I have nothing to add to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris states that he has already expressed his opinion and has nothing more to add to it, indicating a sense of agreement or lack of disagreement.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions President Keehn without any information or context about his actions, beliefs, or any other specific details that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 280.
MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'm certainly in favor ofmaintaining the current policy, which I interpret to be alternative"B". And I must say I like the Corrigan wording of Variant I; Iprefer Variant I to Variant II because I think it is a more honeststatement of what we are doing, particularly with the language that heis proposing to amend it. I'd have a slight bias in the wordingtoward easing, and using "would" [for easing] and "might" [fortightening]. I'd be in favor of maintaining a broad range for the fedfunds rate. And I don't feel strongly about it, but I think in theinterest of consistency and stability I'd stay with the 5 to 9percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker clearly states their support for maintaining the current policy and expresses their preference for Variant I over Variant II. They also mention their bias towards easing and using specific language choices. However, they do mention that they don't feel strongly about it, indicating a lack of strong disagreement or contention.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, what was the last phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement evident in the given passage.


Passage number 282.
MR. KEEHN. In the interest of consistency and stability, I'dstay with 5 to 9 percent, but I don't feel very strongly about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The individual mentioned in the passage is expressing their opinion, but they do not express any disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Okay. Governor Heller" does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 284.
MR. HELLER. I'm also in favor of "B" and I like the Corriganlanguage. Like Mr. Keehn, I'd go with the asymmetrical version. Buton the fed funds rate, I think we should narrow it just a bit. Youknow, 5 to 9 percent--that's a barn door. I think the old practice ofcentering it around the expected value is useful. So if we narrow ita little--and everybody seems to be saying 6-3/4 percent--and insert5-3/4 to 7-3/4 percent we have a 2 percentage point range rather thana 4 percentage point range. Maybe that gets a little of that feelingin there without moving to a very narrow fed funds rate specification.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller is expressing his support for option "B" and the Corrigan language, agreeing with Mr. Keehn's preference for the asymmetrical version. He also suggests narrowing the fed funds rate range, but there is no one directly opposing his suggestion in the passage.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARRY. That barn door is no wider now that it has beenfor years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a fact about the width of a barn door.


Passage number 286.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, it's different in the sense thatit depends on what you are targeting and what you are leaving as aresidual. So in that sense there is a meaning in doing that; thequestion is whether in so doing we also suggest a change in policythat we don't want to communicate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 287.
MR. PARRY. I think so.SPEAKER(.). I think that would, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry expresses his opinion and the speaker acknowledges it without offering a contrasting view or objection.


Passage number 288.
MR. ANGELL. I think that would; that would indicate6-3/4 percent. I wouldn't do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Angell without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 289.
MR. HELLER. Well, I'm in favor of making policy clear ratherthan obfuscating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not show any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker is in favor of making policy clear.


Passage number 290.
MR. HOSKINS. I think if the Desk comes in on either side ofthe market around 6-3/4 percent, it is going to be pretty clear to the-40-11/3/87market very quickly where we are; and they are not going to pay muchattention to the borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing an opinion about the market's reaction to certain actions.


Passage number 291.
MR. BOEHNE. I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] but it's one thing tobe pegging the funds rate, which is not what the Desk is doing, andit's another thing to sort of be taking a shot at it in somedirection. To peg the rate would have some interesting implications.Governor Kelley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing different approaches and actions related to the funds rate, but there is no clear indication of disagreement or conflicting views between the parties involved.


Passage number 293.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm very much a mainstreamer here.And I have nothing to add in the way of new reasons from what has beensaid around the table. I would go with Variant I because I think weneed to be seen as being on the accommodating and concerned side here,with asymmetric language in the direction of ease. I favoralternative "B", and I would cut the announced funds rate range backto 4 to 8 percent, again to indicate tilting in the direction of ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kelley simply states his agreement with Variant I and expresses his preference for alternative "B" and cutting the announced funds rate range.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For the Corrigan language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context.


Passage number 295.
MR. KELLEY. I like the Corrigan language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Kelley likes the Corrigan language, indicating his preference or positive opinion without presenting any opposition or disagreement from others.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage that you provided does not contain any specific information or statements about Governor Johnson. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 297.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I think I'm right in line with everyoneelse: alternative "B" as we have defined it, Variant I, Corriganlanguage, and asymmetric. I think we are going to have a bit of aproblem if during this intermeeting period we finally decide that wecan move to a borrowing target. Making a transition from funds ratetargeting to that could be a little touchy, even though we don't knowwhen we will decide all of a sudden that things are stable enough togo from a 6-3/4 percent center of gravity on the funds rate to a $400million borrowing target, or whatever. I don't think it's going towork that smoothly. We may need to think about how we make thattransition at some point; that might be a good time for a call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and concerns about a potential transition from funds rate targeting to a borrowing target. They mention that the transition might be touchy or not smooth, but there is no outright disagreement or clash of opinions with others.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to respond to that: I don't seehow we can do that without a conference call. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that a conference call is necessary in order to respond to something.


Passage number 299.
MS. SEGER. I guess I can go with "B" but as I reread theBluebook here for the seventh time, it looks to me as if Don Kohn wassaying that all of these alternatives--"A", "B", and "C"--assumefinancial markets will return to conditions of normalcy, whatever thatis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger is expressing her interpretation or understanding of what Don Kohn said, she is not disagreeing with him or expressing a contradictory viewpoint.


Passage number 300.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 301.
 Well--MS. SEGER. And down deep in my stomach I'm just askingmyself: What if, in fact, we don't. Which alternative should I votefor. Should I vote for "A" now because that possibly would allow usthe greater opportunity to deal with abnormal times or do I go with"B" and assume that if the roof falls in we will at that point make apolicy shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It is a reflection of the speaker's internal thoughts and questioning.


Passage number 302.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If the roof falls in there is nothing tochoose between those two alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply points out that regardless of the two alternatives presented (presumably referring to the options available in a specific situation), the outcome remains the same if the roof falls in. There is no disagreement or argumentation presented.


Passage number 303.
11/3/87MS. SEGER. Then you go to "E" and "F" or something likethat. So having said that, I would go with "B", the Corriganlanguage, and the asymmetric language tilted toward ease. And ontargeting the fed funds rate, frankly, I would rather see it a littleon the soft side of 6-3/4 percent rather than between 6-3/4 and 7percent, because I think the fed funds rate is viewed as out of linenow with other short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the preferred language and the ideal target for the fed funds rate.


Passage number 304.
 If we are really interested incommunicating clearly what market participants--MR. ANGELL. You want what on the fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the topic of the fed funds rate.


Passage number 305.
MS. SEGER. I would put a range in the statement, but I'msaying as an operating matter that I'd rather see us go to the lowside of 6-3/4 percent rather than going 6-3/4 to 7 percent. I wouldrather see us really targeting somewhere between 6-1/2 and 6-3/4percent because I think that the funds rate is quite a bit out of linewith other short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a preference for a specific range of interest rates.


Passage number 306.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot make decisions on his own.


Passage number 307.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would join those whowould opt for "B" with asymmetric language towards ease--that is, if"B" as it has been defined means a funds rate around 6-3/4 percent ora bit higher, and I think it clearly does. I also would adopt theCorrigan language, particularly if I understood Jerry correctly, thathe wants to delete from Variant I the language referring to relativelyfrequent consultations. I think that highlights something that sixweeks or eight weeks from now, when this is released, perhaps willhave more meaning than we want to give to it. On the federal fundsrate range--although quite clearly we are targeting the federal fundsrate within some very narrow range, it is under very unusualcircumstances--to change that language in the last sentence from 5 to9 percent to 4 to 8 percent is a bit meaningless and, in my view,unnecessary. I'd leave it at the present range and keep it as broadat it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is expressing agreement and support for option "B" and the language proposed by Corrigan. He also shares his opinion on the federal funds rate range but does not disagree with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific information related to President Hoskins that could suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 309.
MR. HOSKINS. I don't have anything to add to what has beensaid with respect to alternative "B". I think I like the Corriganlanguage; I'd prefer the funds rate about where it has been--I don'thave any problem with that. I would not want to err too much on thehigh side in terms of a federal funds rate over 7 percent because Ithink that might sent the wrong signal to the market. I think thepoint that Manley Johnson raised is an important one: that it may bedifficult when do we shift from a mode of providing liquidity back tosome kind of monetary aggregate. And I think I would be remiss if atmy first opportunity with all of you I do not mention the monetaryaggregates. In that regard, they have been growing slowly relative totrend for six months or more. The staff projection for M2 is 4-1/2percent, fourth quarter over fourth quarter and that's down from atrend rate for two years of roughly 9 percent. That usually isconsidered a significant change with some real impacts; however,that's not for this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoskins, is expressing his preference for the Corrigan language and his concern about setting the federal funds rate too high. He also mentions the importance of considering monetary aggregates, specifically the slow growth of M2. However, he does not indicate any disagreement with others or present any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Chairman Greenspan without providing any statements or context that would suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 311.
 I think we can feel the consensus, whichsurprises me in a sense but--11/3/87MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 312.
 Could I ask a question about the Corrigan--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.    The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it simply presents a question about Chairman Greenspan.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
 We didn't listen to what GovernorHeller--MR. HELLER. It's a very minuscule point: in the draftdirective with the brown [Class I] cover, lines 20-21, we say"business capital spending was strong in the third quarter and forwardindicators pointed to continuing gains." I think that's a littlestrong. It's certainly getting a lot slower. Maybe we could justdrop "forward indicators pointing to continuing gains.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Governor Heller disagrees with the statement that "forward indicators pointed to continuing gains." Governor Heller believes that the forward indicators are not pointing to continuing gains and suggests removing that statement from the draft directive.


Passage number 314.
"CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is not "pointing"; it's "pointed".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. It is simply providing a correction or clarification regarding the correct term to use.


Passage number 315.
MR. HELLER. Yes, "pointed".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Heller simply acknowledges and agrees with the word "pointed." There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 316.
MR. KELLEY. No, that's an important difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact and explains the difference without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 317.
MR. HELLER. Yes but pointed to continuing gains, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Heller agrees with something, but also points to continuing gains. This does not indicate contention or disagreement, but rather a combination of agreement and further support.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it's technically correct if youthink about it. It is past tense: that the indicators in that periodpointed to continuing gains.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 319.
MS. SEGER. Since then it has changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Since then it has changed" is a statement of fact and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not discussing the continuinggains, it's discussing the indicators.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 321.
MR. HELLER. Well, I certainly misread it and I think othersmay misread it too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply acknowledging their own misinterpretation and suggesting that others may make the same mistake.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody else feel strongly aboutthat issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any opinion or contention. It is simply asking if anyone else has a strong feeling about a certain issue.


Passage number 323.
MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the actual content of the passage.


Passage number 324.
 Well, mine is not a strong feeling but I justthought there was a--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Technically, that statement is correct.It's only a question of how you read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion but acknowledges that it may not be a strong feeling and recognizes that others may interpret the statement differently based on their own perspective.


Passage number 325.
MR. HELLER. I think it sets the wrong tone a little; that"continuing gains" is what bothers me. Maybe you want to say: Andwhile forward indicators pointed to continuing gains, this is nolonger true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Heller is expressing his opinion about the phrase "continuing gains" and suggesting an alternative wording. Although he disagrees with the original statement, there is no direct contention or disagreement with another person or viewpoint in this passage.


Passage number 326.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to it.


Passage number 327.
 You can say way back when they--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage because there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting idea presented. The passage simply starts with the phrase "You can say way back when they--" and cuts off abruptly with the mention of Governor Angell.


Passage number 328.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, I'd like to look at the Corrigan language.Where it says "may call for a special degree of flexibility". I thinkthat's that first sentence where he added a phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell simply expresses his desire to examine the Corrigan language and suggests that the phrase "may call for a special degree of flexibility" was added in the first sentence.


Passage number 329.
 Would it be okayto say "may continue to call for a special degree of flexibilitybecause"-43-11/3/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not sure what it says right nowbecause it was sent out to be typed about 10 minutes ago; it hasn'tcome back yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that the author is uncertain about the current content of a document because it was recently sent out to be typed and has not been returned yet.


Passage number 330.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I understand, but I'm just looking at theamendments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is simply expressing his understanding and stating that he is only focusing on the amendments.


Passage number 331.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I make a suggestion. This might notbe a bad idea since it is a very crucial directive. I think it wouldbe useful to have it xeroxed and circulated so everyone has a chanceto take a shot at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a suggestion and expressing their opinion about the usefulness of the idea.


Passage number 332.
 Is that--MR. ANGELL. That's all I'm asking, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Angell is asking a simple yes or no question. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody have any further commentsat this particular stage on substantive questions. It's fairlyobvious that there is a consensus basically on "B", however we defineit, and asymmetrical language towards ease. Everyone is talking,essentially, 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent on the funds rate, but I presume,to depict it in the usual wider range. And Jerry Corrigan is gettingrave reviews and we will use his language. However, before wefinalize it, let's take a look to make certain that we are all talkingfrom the same set of notes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that there is a consensus on "B" and that everyone is essentially in agreement on the funds rate. They also mention that Jerry Corrigan's language is well-received. The speaker then suggests double-checking to ensure everyone is referencing the same set of notes, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 334.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 335.
MR. ANGELL. Would our transition borrowing be expected to be$450 million or $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about the expected transition borrowing amount.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement presented is a straightforward answer without any conflicting opinions or conflicting information.


Passage number 337.
MR. ANGELL. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 338.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me just take a look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 339.
MR. ANGELL. The words that I wanted to look at here would beto continue to call for a special degree of flexibility, which wouldbe an indication of continuing what we have been doing rather than ofsome new policy. And then I have trouble with that sentence: theoutlook for monetary growth over the months ahead is subject tounusual uncertainty. I'm not sure what that means; it seems to methat the only uncertainty when you look at Don's new figures is thatit looks as if we have had a liquidity bulge. But certainly we don'texpect uncertainty in regard to the downside do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification regarding a specific sentence. They are not disagreeing with any previous statements or expressing a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 340.
MR. KOHN. No, that's why I had in that reference to somewhatgreater than expected. If you keep reading, it says on lines 100 and101: "but more rapid growth is possible should preferences forliquidity be particularly strong." That was exactly the point I wasmaking. You may not need the sentence on "subject to unusualuncertainty" if you have those sentences that follow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kohn is referring to a point he made and agreeing with it. He is providing further evidence to support his viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 341.
MR. ANGELL. I'm just not sure what that sentence says. Itseems to me that the uncertainty is somewhat directed at one side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, expresses uncertainty and implies that the sentence in question is unclear. The phrase "the uncertainty is somewhat directed at one side" suggests that Mr. Angell may have a disagreement or issue with the content or message of the sentence.


Passage number 342.
MR. MELZER. When you say "apart from such considerations,"it seems that it's not necessary down below to have "conditions in thefinancial markets" in there again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is merely requesting clarification on whether it is necessary to repeat the phrase "conditions in the financial markets" in the sentence.


Passage number 343.
-44-11/3/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right; that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Right; that's right" indicates agreement.


Passage number 344.
MS. SEGER. So we have to make this asymmetrical right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that they need to make something "asymmetrical," which does not suggest any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 345.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I guess so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Since "I guess so" is a response to a statement rather than an expression of disagreement or contention, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 346.
MS. SEGER. I thought it was lesser reserve restraint wouldand slightly greater might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their own thoughts or perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
 Isn't that what we--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The sentence I think should read:"Apart from such considerations slightly lesser reserve restraintwould or slightly greater might".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The original sentence seems to be incomplete and unclear, making it difficult to determine the specific nature of the disagreement. However, the suggested revised sentence presents a different viewpoint or alternative to the original statement, indicating disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 348.
MR. ANGELL. No, somewhat, slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 349.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 350.
 Somewhat lesser reserve restraint--MR. ANGELL. Would or slightly greater restraint might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the possibility of lesser or slightly greater reserve restraint.


Passage number 351.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 352.
MR. MELZER. You need a comma after "would," too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests the placement of a comma after the word "would."


Passage number 353.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And the economy, strength of thebusiness expansion, etc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any specific information or context about the economy or the strength of the business expansion. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 354.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell, are you still concernedabout that money growth reference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The question is asking about Governor Angell's concern regarding money growth reference.


Passage number 355.
MR. ANGELL. Oh, it's not--. I think the way it is nowchanged would [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is expressing his opinion, but there is no contradictory statement or opposing argument present.


Passage number 356.
MR. KEEHN. Earlier, somebody suggested that in line 5 wechange that "outlook may call for" to "may continue to call for".That's appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Keehn suggests a change and states that it is appropriate.


Passage number 357.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Should we put 4 to 8 percent in for thefunds rate range or would you prefer 5 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. It presents two options without indicating a disagreement between parties.


Passage number 359.
MR. GUFFEY. I'd prefer just to maintain 5 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Guffey expressing his preference for maintaining a specific percentage. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I have a quick rundown on the copyof this Corrigan language for 4 to 8 percent or 5 to 9 percent.Vice Chairman Corrigan - My own preference was 5 to 9.Mr. Angell - 4 to 8.Mr. Boehne - 4 to 8, but not a strong preference.Mr. Boykin - 5 to 9.Mr. Heller - 4 to 8Mr. Johnson -Totally indifferent.Mr. Kelley - 4 to 8Ms. Seger -4 to 8Mr. Stern - 5 to 9Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Different individuals have expressed their preferences for the range of the Corrigan language, with some preferring 4 to 8 percent and others preferring 5 to 9 percent. This shows that there is contention and difference of opinion among the speakers.


Passage number 361.
 Keehn - 4 to 8-45-11/3/87MR. JOHNSON - I'm totally indifferent, but you might evendrop the whole sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Johnson is indifferent and suggests the possibility of dropping the whole sentence.


Passage number 362.
MR. ANGELL. You're not voting on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not displaying any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement made by Mr. Angell, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 363.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I'll just be agnostic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they will remain agnostic.


Passage number 364.
MR. HELLER. Well, 4 to 8 is closer to zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a factual observation comparing the numbers 4 to 8 to zero, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 365.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Unintelligible] around 6 to 7percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. The statement is incomplete and lacks context, making it difficult to assess any potential disagreements or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Before we vote, let's have Norm Bernardread the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply suggesting that before voting, someone named Norm Bernard should read the directive. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 367.
MR. BERNARD. In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the degree ofpressure on reserve positions sought in recent days. The Committeerecognizes that the volatile conditions in financial markets anduncertainties in the economic outlook may continue to call for aspecial degree of flexibility in open market operations depending, inparticular, on demands for liquidity growing out of recent orprospective developments in financial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the policy objectives and acknowledges the need for flexibility depending on market conditions.


Passage number 368.
 Apart from suchconsiderations, slightly lesser reserve restraint would--MR. ANGELL. Somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or disagreements. It simply states that slightly lesser reserve restraint would have some unspecified considerations. There is no contention or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 369.
MR. JOHNSON. Somewhat lesser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply states Mr. Johnson's response without presenting any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 370.
MR. BERNARD. --or slightly greater reserve restraint mightbe acceptable depending on the strength of the business expansion,indications of inflationary pressures, developments in foreignexchange markets, as well as the behavior of the monetary aggregates.While the outlook for monetary growth over the months ahead is subjectto unusual uncertainty, the contemplated reserve conditions areexpected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the periodfrom September through December at annual rates of about 6 to 7percent, but more rapid growth is possible should preferences forliquidity be particularly strong. Over the same period, growth in M1is expected to be well above its average pace in the previous severalmonths. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if itappears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditionsduring the period before the next meeting are likely to be associatedwith a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing information and outlining potential scenarios based on different factors and conditions. It does not involve conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I also read from everything I've beenlistening to that the official borrowing target, to the extent thatit's required, is $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 372.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, that word respectively isn't needed is it.The word respectively should be out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Angell, argues that the word "respectively" is unnecessary and suggests removing it. This implies a disagreement or difference of opinion regarding the use of the word.


Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN" simply refers to a person and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 374.
 It's out, if you put it the way--MR. ANGELL. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is out if you put it in a certain way.


Passage number 375.
-46-11/3/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since it is 1:30 p.m., I think we oughtto vote on this and get to lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that they should vote on something and then go to lunch, indicating a desire for efficiency and potentially avoiding any potential disagreement.


Passage number 376.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without providing the actual text.


Passage number 377.
Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The votenext meeting is Tuesday and Wednesday,hear a motion to adjourn.is unanimous. The date of ourDecember 15th and 16th. Do ISPEAKER(.). So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The vote to adjourn is unanimous, indicating that all those mentioned agree.


