Passage number 1.
  Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on June 19–20, 2012 June 19 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning.  I would like to start by welcoming two new members to the table, Governor Jeremy Stein and Governor Jay Powell, sitting over here in the delinquents’ corner.  [Laughter] The last time there were seven Board members at an FOMC meeting, I am told, was March 2005.  There has been a short hiatus since that time.  We welcome our two new distinguished colleagues and look forward to collaborating with them and learning from them. I am optimistic because I note that they both got their B.A.’s from Princeton University.  [Laughter] That is a good start.  Welcome, and we look forward to working with you. We also have a departure of which to take note.  This is Brian Sack’s last meeting.  Brian has served as the manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) since June 2009 and has attended 25 FOMC meetings in that capacity. Before that, he engaged with monetary policy issues, both inside and outside the Fed, as the head of the Monetary and Financial Markets Analysis Section of the Board, and then as a vice president of Macroeconomic Advisers. It’s a little hard to believe for a person of such policy experience, but Brian got his Ph.D. in Clinton’s second term [laughter], which accounts at least a bit for his youthful appearance and his energy, notwithstanding the maturity of his contributions. Brian, you have been a superb colleague, you’ve been a terrific leader and manager of the Federal Reserve’s financial operations during a very difficult and complex time, and we are extremely grateful for all you’ve done, for your dedication and your service.  And I would like to turn the floor over for a moment to the Vice Chairman to add a couple of comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple introduction and recognition of new members and a farewell to a departing member.


Passage number 2.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I think Brian has had an extraordinary three years as head of the Markets Group and SOMA manager.  It probably feels like dog years rather than people years.  [Laughter]  The balance sheet hasn’t changed very much in terms of size on your watch, but the composition certainly has. The Desk has been extraordinarily busy completing the first LSAP program of agency MBS and Treasuries, the second LSAP program, which probably got a little bit more attention than the first maturity extension program, and, of course, the reinvestment of maturing MBS securities. The fact that all of the MBS operations were brought in-house under Brian’s watch is also very important.  Moreover, Brian has been an exemplary leader, with intelligence, knowledge, the ability to relate monetary policy and macro to markets, and the ability to see the forest for the trees.  He has also managed the Markets Group effectively.  It has expanded from 230 people when I was the head of the Markets Group to about 400 people today, and its functions have broadened considerably as the financial stability mandate of the System has increased. I think you all would agree with me that he has been a terrific resource for the Committee, not only through his briefings and ability to answer all our questions but also in terms of the quality of product that is coming out of the Markets Group, in terms of the daily briefings, and the MarketSOURCE material, which has really been upgraded significantly under his watch. He has been a very able adviser to me and to Governor Yellen.  He speaks his mind, makes very good points, and has very definitely improved my own thinking.  He has kept me out of trouble on numerous occasions.  He has just been a joy for me personally to work with, and I am going to miss him not being in this role any longer.  But the good news is that the Markets Group, under his stewardship, is quite deep.  Lorie Logan, sitting next to him, is a very senior person in Markets, as is Kevin Stiroh.  And with the new head of the Markets Group, they will   continue on in the tradition that we have had in recent years.  Thank you, Brian, for your efforts.  It has been a privilege.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing appreciation for Brian's work and accomplishments. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 3.
  [Applause] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No one can replace Brian, but someone can succeed him.  Our first item is the proposal to appoint Simon Potter as manager of the System Open Market Account.  And accompanying that, because Simon is currently an associate economist of the FOMC, the item also proposes that we appoint Jamie McAndrews to replace Simon in that role.  Both appointments would be effective June 30 and would hold until the selection of successors at the first regularly scheduled organizational meeting next January.  I would like to turn to the Vice Chairman to talk a bit about the selection process that produced Simon’s name.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply discusses the proposal to appoint Simon Potter as manager of the System Open Market Account and suggests appointing Jamie McAndrews to replace Simon in his current role. There is no indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 4.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  We obviously take whom we have at the head of the Markets Group and as the SOMA manager extraordinarily seriously, and we ran a very complete and thorough process to identify a successor.  We hired Spencer Stuart as a search firm, and they identified a large number of candidates that we augmented by our own knowledge and contacts throughout the markets business.  We identified five criteria that we think are important for the SOMA manager and head of the Markets Group—macroeconomic monetary policy knowledge, knowledge of markets, knowledge of the Fed, demonstrated management ability, and demonstrated operations experience.  Now, it turns out that as far as we can tell, nobody in the world actually has all five of those attributes.  [Laughter]  But we think having three and a half of them is about as good as you can do, and I would apply that grade to myself and to Brian when we took on that job.  It is the kind of position where you are not going to be expert in all things when you start, but the Markets Group is really deep and able, and they have shown their ability to nurture the past two heads of Markets in a very successful way.  We went through the search process, and we identified a number of strong candidates both within the New York Fed, elsewhere in the Federal Reserve System, and outside working at a variety of different private-sector firms.  And after going through the process of extensive interviewing by a large number of people in New York and close consultation with the Chairman and Governor Yellen, there was a very strong consensus that Simon Potter was the right person for the job.  As the Chairman noted, Simon has been the co-head of Research over the past couple of years and been an associate economist for this Committee.  But it is important to underscore the fact that Simon is not just a macroeconomist and monetary policy person.  He has really broadened his knowledge quite a bit beyond macroeconomics.  He did spend a stint in Markets, and he took to it because when the Markets position came open he was strongly interested in the position.  The other thing that he did last year, which I think was really noteworthy and demonstrates his management acumen, was to serve as the point person for writing the Financial Stability Oversight Council’s first Annual Report, which was an extraordinarily challenging assignment because, one, it had never been done before, and, two, you’re herding cats from all the different agencies that all had different views.  That was a pretty stern test, and Simon passed it with flying colors, which really demonstrates his management acumen.  Obviously, these are big shoes to fill with Brian’s departure, but I am very confident that he will be able to do so very ably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information about the hiring process and qualifications of the new SOMA manager.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for the Vice Chairman. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements are simple and do not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 6.
 MR. FISHER.  It is not a question, but I just wanted to thank the Vice Chairman for that thorough description.  This has become, as Brian knows, a much more complex business than ever before.  I think I have known every head of Markets going back to Paul Volcker and up toyou, Brian, and your brilliant performance.  In a way, you are the whale.  [Laughter]  And we don’t want to have whale repetition occur, so, for the record, I wanted to thank the Vice Chairman for filling us in, and wish Simon good luck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and admiration towards the Vice Chairman for their thorough description and performance.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Other questions.  [No response] If not, could I have a motion to appoint Simon Potter to manage the System Open Market Account, and to appoint Jamie McAndrews to replace Simon as associate FOMC economist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a request for other questions and a motion to appoint individuals to specific roles.


Passage number 8.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "So moved" indicates agreement or approval.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any objection. [No response]  Thank you.  The next item is action on proposed adjustments to the external communications policy for System staff. Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that there are no objections to the previous topic and is moving on to the next item on the agenda.


Passage number 10.
 MS. YELLEN.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When the Committee adopted its external communications policies last June, we noted that some further adjustments to the policy for Federal Reserve System staff might be appropriate.  The Chairman asked me to oversee that fine-tuning process.  And since then, the directors of the economics divisions at the Board and the research directors at the Reserve Banks have engaged in a series of consultations, and they have identified a number of specific adjustments that would be helpful in clarifying certain aspects of the policy.  For example, the preamble would now include a sentence underscoring the benefits of economic research, and the principles and practical examples would now specifically encompass staff contacts with other government agencies, central banks, and multinational institutions.  I won’t enumerate the various adjustments that are denoted by insertions and strikeouts in the document that was distributed to all of you earlier.  Rather, I would like to propose this set of amendments for adoption by the Committee, and I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have. 1 The materials used by Governor Yellen are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the process and the proposed amendments to the external communications policies of the Federal Reserve System staff.


Passage number 11.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there any questions for Governor Yellen.  She is referring to the memorandum of May 3 that was circulated to the Committee.  [No response] If there are no questions, can I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 12.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "So moved" is a phrase typically used in a formal meeting or discussion to indicate agreement or support for a specific motion or proposal. It does not imply any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any objection. [No response]  Seeing none, we accept the proposed adjustments.  Thank you, Governor Yellen.  Our next item, item 3, is another communications subcommittee item on the possibility of developing a consensus forecast for the FOMC, together with supporting documentation.  And I will turn, once again, to Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of accepting proposed adjustments and moving on to the next item on the agenda.


Passage number 14.
 MS. YELLEN.2  Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman.  At the April FOMC meeting, you encouraged the subcommittee on communications to consider various approaches for enhancing the Committee’s monetary policy communications.  In our subsequent discussions, we examined a number of conceivable adjustments to the scope and presentation of the SEP.  However, we ultimately concluded that it would be preferable to explore the possibility of a more substantial improvement—namely, the development of an FOMC consensus forecast and a quarterly monetary policy report, which I will refer to as the QMPR.  We have consulted with all of you individually, and we very much appreciate the feedback that we have received.  We found enough interest in this approach to put it on today’s agenda for further discussion.  Before opening up a general discussion, I would like to take a few minutes to highlight some key issues regarding the potential desirability and feasibility of pursuing such an approach.  I will then set forth my subcommittee’s specific recommendations about an initial experimental exercise that could be helpful in deciding whether to proceed any further with this initiative. 2 The materials used by Governor Yellen are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).   At the outset, I want to emphasize my personal view that the SEP is an effective means of communicating to the public about the diversity of participants’ individual assessments of the economic outlook and appropriate monetary policy. Its usefulness has been enhanced by the inclusion in 2009 of our longer-run projections and the federal funds rate projections that we started publishing earlier this year.  Of course, it is not always comfortable when the distribution of our individual assessments doesn’t line up neatly with the phrasing of the FOMC statement.  But I view that as a feature, not a bug.  I have always felt that public confidence in the FOMC rests partly on the assurance that our decisions are informed by a true diversity of perspectives, and the SEP provides compelling evidence that we haven’t been subsumed into some sort of mind-meld. Nonetheless, the design of the SEP does impose some crucial limitations on our external communications.  For example, the SEP focuses on the outlook for a handful of top-line macro variables—GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation—whereas the monetary policy reports of many other central banks provide a more thorough description of the current outlook, including the components of aggregate demand, financial and external developments, and so forth.  Moreover, the SEP exhibits tend to focus the public’s attention on the modal outlook, whereas many other central banks routinely use fan charts and alternative scenarios to convey the broader contours of the outlook and to illustrate salient sources of risk to that outlook.  Of course, we could consider expanding the SEP survey to elicit such information, but we might well be faced with spending inordinate amounts of time on preparing our SEP submissions.  A more fundamental limitation of the SEP is that it is simply a survey of individual views and, hence, it is not necessarily very effective in conveying the rationale for the Committee’s collective decisions.   Under the Chairman’s leadership, we arrive at our policy judgments through a consensus-building process that truly can’t be well captured by any mechanical procedure for aggregating our individual assessments.  While we could try to address the shortcomings of the SEP by coloring the dots, or identifying participants’ projections by name, that sort of approach could harm collegiality and might well cause the public to focus on the views of specific participants rather than on our collective judgments as a Committee.  Consequently, after consultations with the Chairman, our subcommittee has concluded that the most promising way forward is to explore the possibility of developing a consensus forecast and QMPR.  We believe that such an approach could significantly enhance FOMC communications by providing a coherent rationale for the Committee’s decisions, along with the diversity of participants’ individual views.  In effect, the QMPR could serve as the successor to the SEP, which would be discontinued. Now, some of you may recall that I have previously expressed strong reservations about the feasibility of producing an FOMC consensus forecast.  Given the size and geographical dispersion of the Committee, I continue to believe that it would be utterly infeasible to replicate the intensive forecasting approach followed by some other central banks, where a much smaller and centrally located policy board refers to a single forecasting model and engages in multiple days of discussions to settle on all the specific details of the outlook.  Such an approach would be conceivable only if all of the Reserve Bank presidents were willing to spend a couple of weeks here in DC in advance of each consensus forecast.  And on many occasions I am afraid we still might not be able to reach a complete consensus.  In contrast, I do think it might be feasible to produce a consensus forecast using roughly the same approach that we follow in crafting our postmeeting statements.  Specifically, the Chairman could develop the consensus forecast in consultation with the Committee, circulate an initial draft, and make adjustments in light of participants’ comments, and then present the revised forecast for discussion at the FOMC meeting. In our policy go-rounds, we typically engage in line-by-line editing, wordsmithing, and fine-tuning of our postmeeting statement language.  In contrast, I think it would be completely impractical to do that with a consensus forecast that involves quantitative projections and confidence intervals along with multiple pages of accompanying narrative. To me, therefore, it seems fairly clear that a consensus forecast would only be feasible if the Chairman confers with the Committee in developing each forecast but has ultimate responsibility for the consensus forecast and accompanying narrative.  At the FOMC meeting, participants could endorse the forecast, perhaps with some specific reservations, or could indicate that they hold essentially different views about the economic outlook and appropriate policy, and the diversity of these views would be reported in the minutes and in the QMPR.  As a matter of governance, such an approach seems reasonable if we agree that the Committee’s policy decisions will continue to be conveyed through our postmeeting statements and, hence, that the consensus forecast and QMPR will simply be aimed at elucidating the rationale for those decisions.  In effect, the consensus forecast would be roughly similar to the Chairman’s press conferences, where he tries to express the sense of the Committee but maintains ultimate responsibility for his remarks.  The diversity of views is then communicated through the minutes as well as participants’ speeches and media interviews. To summarize, our subcommittee has concluded that developing a consensus forecast and QMPR would be both desirable and feasible, but we also recognize that its prospects for success are contingent on a host of substantive and logistical details. Therefore, it seems sensible to explore this initiative carefully and systematically while holding off on making any final determination about whether to proceed with a public launch until after it has been thoroughlyvetted through an extensive and extended sequence of proofs of concept, trial runs, and mockups.  In keeping with this approach, we think that a useful initial step would be to conduct an experimental exercise in conjunction with the July FOMC meeting.  The Chairman could draft a consensus forecast and circulate it to the Committee a week before the meeting, make adjustments, and circulate a revised draft, and then present the consensus forecast for discussion at the conclusion of the economic go-round.  If that experience suggests that this initiative is completely unworkable, we could simply agree to abandon it at that stage.  Alternatively, if the results of this experiment are sufficiently promising, we could decide to repeat it or perhaps move on to a more elaborate proof of concept exercise in September. Let me stop there and say that we are eager to hear your views today on whether you think this initiative is worthwhile, whether you are comfortable with the general approach, and whether you would like to proceed with an initial experiment in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential benefits and feasibility of developing a consensus forecast and quarterly monetary policy report. They also suggest conducting an experimental exercise to further evaluate this initiative.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Janet, once again for your hard work.  Let me express my support for this approach.  Consensus forecasts and supporting documentation, like an inflation report or monetary policy report, are a standard approach around the world for central banks to communicate the rationale for their decisions.  And in that respect, it is a well-tested approach, and one we should consider.  The problem we have, of course, is with a very large and geographically dispersed Committee, it is much more difficult to develop a consensus forecast.  And so the feasibility of that will be the key issue as we think about this. I have some criteria for success. I think if we have a forecast, it does have to incorporate Committee consensus—it can’t be solely mine, for example—and it must be consistent with the policy decision.  We need to have a flexible process, so that we can respond to events close to the meeting. In particular, if there are any developments right before the meeting, we should be  able to respond.  The forecast should have a means of expositing differing views.  It should be a vehicle for a more complete explanation of our outlook and policies, and, importantly—and this is an issue I think we will need to address—it should not be a significant net additional burden on the staff. That would be a very important consideration.  What Governor Yellen’s subcommittee has proposed is an experiment, one in which we would go very slowly, to make sure that at each stage everybody is comfortable or that we have incorporated everybody’s views. Let me modify very slightly her proposal for an experimental consensus forecast this time.  What I would do is add one slight additional round.  About two weeks before the Tealbook is produced, the staff provides me with a very preliminary forecast based on where they are at that point.  What I could do, if we decide to go ahead with this, is circulate that forecast and ask for your reactions.  Your reaction might be “This looks okay,” or it might be that “I disagree with this aspect of it,” or whatever.  It could be simply a qualitative comment, or it could be a quantitative assessment. I would take those comments, and then proceeding along the lines that Janet described, about a week before the meeting I would, working with staff, develop a consensus forecast that I would circulate.  I’d get another round of comments, and then, Friday before the meeting, circulate my candidate for the final consensus forecast.  It would be useful in our discussions, but, obviously, at this early stage this would be experimental.  I want to reiterate the experimental nature. I think this is something that would take quite a few meetings to develop.  We are not proposing to do anything that looks like a QMPR at this point.  But as we move forward, if we do, we would want to develop a mockup for how that might look and recognize that over time it would become more complete and elaborate. At this juncture, I would like to open the floor.  We don’t necessarily need a full go-round, but I want to be sure that everyone who has views has a chance to communicate them.  Why don’t we start with President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing support for a proposed approach and discussing the potential challenges and considerations associated with implementing it.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude to President Bullard.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Plosser without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 18.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I do support this initiative to explore the development of an FOMC consensus forecast and a quarterly monetary policy report. I see it as a potentially very useful enhancement to our policy communications.  As I have said before on many occasions, increasing transparency is a journey, not a destination in some sense, and I view this exploration in that light. I do see no particular urgent problem in current communications that would necessitate rushing to a policy report.  Rather, I believe we should take time to fully explore the many nuances and issues surrounding development of such a report.  We currently have a variety of vehicles to communicate to the public in addition to the statement, including the Chairman’s press conferences and speeches. We also have the quarterly SEP and the semiannual policy report to the Congress. I actually can envision, for example, that the SEP and the report to the Congress could be collapsed into one monetary policy report that would provide three very important things:  a comprehensive expression of the range of views of the Committee—as President Bullard just noticed, fan charts can help a lot in representing that—a consensus forecast that informs our policy decisions, and the opportunity to clearly articulate both the range of economic conditions that go into our thinking as well as our policy strategy. Done right, I believe that such a report can substantially enhance our policy communications. I think we can learn a lot from running the experiment that has been outlined by Governor Yellen and the Chairman in conjunction with the July meeting, and I am comfortable proceeding along those lines.  For the purpose of the experiment, it seems reasonable to proceed, as suggested in the memo and as augmented by the Chairman, with having the Chairman be responsible for drafting a consensus forecast prior to the meeting and then soliciting participants’ views on whether they could endorse the forecast, had reservations, or preferred some alternativeforecast. In July this has a particular disadvantage to it because I envision, as President Bullard discussed, that we would have a mechanism for submitting the SEPs, which actually captures the range of views.  Sitting in the Chairman’s position, it seems to me that having those SEPs at his disposal as he begins to craft a consensus forecast could be highly useful.  You won’t have that in July, but we would have it in September.  I believe that can be very useful, whereas individually trying to collapse verbal conversations that might go on with everybody would be a more difficult task.  Keeping the SEPs and doing those SEPs can be useful inputs into this process. It is reasonable to operate under the assumption that the Chairman will retain ultimate responsibility for the consensus forecast and the narrative surrounding it.  However, whether this is a stable outcome or, put differently, whether the report ultimately will be useful and a beneficial communications vehicle is going to depend a lot on how this process plays out and how it works and what goes into the consensus forecast, and more importantly for the report, how the diversity of views section is actually handled.  As President Kocherlakota mentioned, it’s going to be important that we understand that whatever process we set up, that we around this table have a lot of confidence in the Chairman and his ability and his skills to do this.  Whether that will always be true with other Chairmen remains to be seen, and we have to be a little sensitive that we set up a process and a mechanism that is robust across different individuals that may sit in that chair. Even if the Chairman retains responsibility, I still envision the Committee voting on the entire report, as President Bullard suggested, much like we do with the minutes whereby the Committee members vote on whether the minutes fully reflect what happened in the meeting.  The policy report would fully reflect the views and perspectives that went into developing our policy.  The Committee would vote both on the consensus forecast and the accuracy of the report reflecting the range of views. The only way we are going to get a better handle on how this is going to work is to try it, and we’ll no doubt discover lots of pitfalls, troubles, and things we will have to iron out, but I think it is important that we give this a fair try and be willing to adapt it as we go along to fit whatever we discover in the process. I am very strongly in favor of having a monetary policy report for some time, and I would encourage us to begin this journey, but to do so at a very deliberate pace.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for the initiative to explore the development of a monetary policy report and consensus forecast. They also provide suggestions and considerations for how to implement this report effectively.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t have any deep objections to going ahead with this experiment, but I’m relatively skeptical of the benefits it offers us. Relative to the Summary of Economic Projections we do now, it’s hard for me to see what else we could do that people out there are clamoring for. I understand the benefits of a quarterly monetary policy report that offers a richer narrative discussion of aspects of the forecast, and I agree with President Bullard, President Plosser, President Kocherlakota, and Governor Yellen on the value of that.  But it is not clear to me that the SEP doesn’t convey a fair amount already. I think the central tendency ranges aren’t that large in the grand scheme of things and that fan charts could be incorporated into the SEP without too much bother. Governor Yellen made reference to an inordinate amount of time that might be required to extract from Committee participants the textured information that goes into a broader forecast that some other central banks do.  But I am not quite sure I see how the procedure gets around requiring an inordinate amount of time of all of us without essentially foregoing gathering that information from us.  So I’m not sure what this accomplishes.  The other perspective I bring onthis is that we have made a bunch of changes in how we communicate in the past year with what we did last August and what we did in January.  I don’t think market participants have had a lot of time, and I don’t think we’ve had a lot of chances, to have some experience using it, changing it, and seeing how our communications tools vary with economic conditions.  I’m drawn to the idea of taking a pause on our journey and taking some time before we take the next step, and I’m wary of us being seen as throwing communications tools willy-nilly at the public, innovating at an excessively rapid pace in this dimension.  I have a really cautious view about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses skepticism and disagreement with the idea of conducting an experiment and implementing new communication tools. They question the benefits and see potential drawbacks, such as requiring an inordinate amount of time and innovating at an excessively rapid pace.


Passage number 21.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of polite and brief expressions of gratitude and acknowledgment. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 22.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Many of my views have already been expressed, including some concerns.  I am overall supportive.  I agree with the premise that if the Committee could formulate a consensus outlook—an outlook that served as the basis for the most recent policy decision—and if that were accompanied by the characterization of the consensus view on the degree of uncertainty and balance of the risks, all of this would enhance communication and possibly enhance policy effectiveness. I thought the May 25 memo dealt with a number of implementation ideas, and they certainly are worthy of consideration, but before tackling those ideas, I would like to raise what I would consider a more first-order conceptual question, one already discussed by President Bullard, and that is the treatment of the policy assumption.  Continuing to condition on individual policy assumptions that would serve as a starting point of formulating consensus forecasts could be problematic.  That is part of the problem with the current SEP.  And it is worth pointing out, as has already been noted, that the Bank of England avoids this challenge by basing the consensus forecast on a market expectation for policy, and although it is my understanding that it is not done today, this approach was also suggested for the Riksbank by a recent Swedish government review panel. Also I would make a slight cautionary note as we go forward, and that is that the FOMC is not designed for arriving at a consensus rationale for policy decisions, rather, just arriving at decisions.  Voters can choose to support a policy decision for quite different reasons, and I am concerned that as we try to wrap as many of us as possible into a consensus outlook and rationale, the product could be diluted a lot and might not be, at the end of the day, very effective as a communications tool.  There’s also the question of the Committee with a capital C, that is, the voters or participants.  I prefer participants so as to get beyond the changing makeup of the Committee and to avoid any question of the future relevance as we get toward the end of the year. Now, let me respond to questions two and three, which deal with practical implementation matters. On the question of does it seem reasonable that the Chairman consult with the Committee, whatever that is, in developing the consensus—yes, I certainly agree that the Chairman’s lead would be very helpful in getting this done.  But somewhat like President Kocherlakota, I’d prefer a bottom-up approach as a starting point, along the lines of the existing forecast submission versus essentially reacting to a forecast presented with the requirement of deciding how material one wants to consider differences with that forecast. Starting with something along the lines of the SEP would be my preference.  The submissions could be modified to deal with the question of the underlying policy assumptions, and then from these formal submissions, the Chairman, helped by the staff, could take the lead in deriving a consensus forecast.On the third question of whether it would be worthwhile to conduct an experimental exercise in July—yes, I think a proof of concept trial run or two or maybe three is certainly necessary going forward.  However, I am a little hesitant to go down the implementation path without first resolving the question of how to deal with the policy assumption.  The process described by Governor Yellen seems very deliberate and careful to me. I certainly endorse multiple trial runs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 24.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to acknowledge the subcommittee and thank Governor Yellen for helping us think through communication.  I also want to thank the staff who pulled together that comparative analysis.  I found that particularly helpful in looking across other central banks. It is not clear to me, though, that the consensus forecast approach offers “a significant enhancement,” as question 1 is worded, to our current policy communication or that our current approach is flawed to the point of warranting a change of this magnitude.  I think that the public has come to understand and expect this diversity of views, and the SEP, although granted it has some issues, provides a very democratic method to convey the outlooks of the FOMC participants.  Regarding a QMPR, an enhanced narrative could be useful, but it seems to me that the narrative of the staff forecast is already provided in the FOMC meeting minutes and that adding another narrative or changing a such a well-tested vehicle for communicating could raise some questions for us in the near term about explaining our decisions as clearly as possible.  Despite these reservations, I am not opposed to proceeding with a trial run of some sort, although I am, at this stage, a bit skeptical of its value relative to what we do today. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges the work of the subcommittee and Governor Yellen, expresses gratitude for the comparative analysis, and recognizes the importance of communication. The speaker does express some reservations and skepticism about the proposed changes, but there is no direct disagreement or contention.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Williams.


Passage number 26.
   MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage because it is only labeled as "MR," which does not provide any specific information or context to determine whether there is disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to add my thanks to the subcommittee who put a lot of thought into this topic, and I, too, found the memo comparing different practices across central banks very helpful. In a perfect world, I think publication of a quarterly monetary policy report similar to those published by other central banks would be useful.  It has obvious benefits in terms of more clearly and comprehensively portraying the consensus outlook, the risks to the outlook, and very importantly, the rationale for policy actions.  But I want to mention something that is very important right now in that these benefits come with significant costs.  In approaching this undertaking, we need to think very carefully not just about the benefits, but also of the costs, especially in terms of staff resources. In particular, we should focus, in my view, on the problem we are trying to solve and whether it can be addressed at lower cost using our existing outlets, such as the SEP, the Chairman’s press conferences, and the minutes. I am actually struck by the discussion and the comments so far.  There seem to be multiple objectives out there.  One is a monetary policy report as in done in other countries, which provides this very comprehensive, verbal description of consumption, investment, and the entire economic outlook, and like President Bullard mentioned, really does not take a stand on policy.  It is more of a comprehensive discussion of economic conditions and the outlook.  Then I listened to President Kocherlakota’s comments, which I am very much in sympathy with, that expressed the view that what we are trying to do is provide the rationale for our policy decisions—that is, provide the forecast that goes with the policy decision—which is very different than, say, what the Bank of England does. Regarding staff resources, I am very concerned that the Board staff, in particular, has a very full plate.  The subcommittee’s proposals represent a significant undertaking in terms of staff time.  I know that the Chairman mentioned that an important goal was to have no net additional burden on the staff, but I think that is going to be hard to do.  I would also just emphasize that key senior staff really have the greatest burden today, and they are the ones who are going to have a major role in the development of something such as a QMPR.  Moreover, given the heightened uncertainty about future events and the fact that we may soon need to dig deeper into our toolkit of unconventional monetary and liquidity policy tools, this is a particularly inopportune time to distract the staff’s attention from the all-important policy analysis, which is what we actually need here and what we rely on so much for our policy discussions and decisions. If the main problem that we are trying to solve is to focus the public’s attention on the consensus forecast that underlines and provides the rationale for the policy decision, then a lower-cost solution might be to leverage our existing communication platform, such as the SEP, the press conference, and the FOMC minutes.  President Kocherlakota gave an example of that in terms of the FOMC statement.  We could redesign, for example, the presentation of the SEP in terms of the tables, the charts, and the verbal description to highlight and focus attention on the consensus forecast, and this could be the consensus forecast of the voting members of the Committee.  It could be chosen by the Chairman based on, say, preliminary SEP submissions from the FOMC members as described in one of the memos.  I do see a great value in having the consensus forecast that provides the rationale for the policy decisions.  That is far less work, however, than actually writing a quarterly monetary policy report.  In this model, in my view, the full range of SEP submissions would still be presented in order to convey the diversity of views across participants.  That information would play second fiddle to the main message of the consensus forecast.  That is very important.  However, I also view, as Governor Yellen mentioned, that the diversity of views portrayed in the SEP has advantages and benefits, too.  It sends the important message that we are not locked into group-think, focused on one point forecast, but rather are regularly confronting and synthesizing a wide range of perspectives in coming to our policy decisions. In sum, I support developing a consensus forecast and the trial runs that are laid out in the memo.  As President Plosser said, this is a journey that we should be on.  From the point of view of staff resources, we should now focus more on improving our communication with a consensus forecast using tools we already have and should put off development of a full-blown QMPR until later, benefiting from the experience that we have from developing the consensus forecast through the existing means.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains some disagreement and differing opinions. For example, President Williams expresses support for developing a consensus forecast and improving communication using existing tools, while also expressing concerns about the costs and staff resources involved in implementing a full-blown Quarterly Monetary Policy Report (QMPR).


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 29.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to add my thanks to the communications subcommittee for their continued efforts to enhance our communications, and I am in favor of enhancing our communications.  While we clearly have enhanced transparency with the adjustments we have made to our communications so far, some of the initiatives have also generated some unanticipated complications. I am pleased to hear that the plan is to move slowly and to have several meetings to experiment with developing a consensus forecast.  I am concerned that if we pursue a consensus forecast too hastily, the revised process could adversely affect the Committee deliberations.  Historically, the diversity of views has greatly benefited our decisionmaking process, and it would be unfortunate if we moved to developing a consensus forecast that encouraged more group-think and discouraged diversity of views.  The question of how we organize our discussion around the consensus forecast is critical.   In order to maintain the value of the full range of perspectives, I have one recommendation to make that several   others have already made, and that is to suggest that we move up the SEP submissions by a week or two.  Then the Chairman would be able to consider the full range of projections along with the staff’s preliminary forecast before offering a consensus forecast.  A potential starting point for the consensus forecast might be to take the midpoint of the central tendency, which would then reinforce the value of our independent analysis. It is critical that we deliberately and carefully vet any major shifts in our policy communication strategy. As best we can, we really need to see how this new approach in generating a consensus forecast would work in different economic and policy circumstances.  I know that might be difficult, but regardless of the approach taken, I am convinced that we should see, as you are recommending, how it performs through several meetings.  When we do make this large of a change in our communication approach, it is important that we vet it. That sounds like the approach that the subcommittee is recommending, and I am supportive.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses her overall support for enhancing communications but raises some concerns and recommendations for moving forward. However, there is no direct disagreement or conflict with others expressed in the passage.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it consists of a simple expression of gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 31.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to thank Governor Yellen and the subcommittee for proceeding cautiously in an effort to get it right, and I think that is how we should proceed. I just have a few comments, Mr. Chairman, following up on the comments that have been made heretofore. In general, I share the skepticism that President George and President Lacker have expressed, and I am a little bit confused.  When you read through the memo, there is interplay between the Committee and the participants.  It is important, as President Lockhart pointed out earlier, that we reflect the full view of the Committee because, unlike the Riksbank and every other central bank that I am aware of, this is the only central bank that has rotating or occasional voters.  To capture that overall view, particularly as we approach a year-end, would   be very important.  I believe that President Bullard’s proposal, which is that the ownership of this exercise would be vested in the Chairman, is perhaps the way to get around that, but I would hope that as we and if we develop this consensus forecast the full range of views of the participants is reflected in the exercise. With regard to the three questions, again, I agree with President George and President Lacker. It may be an enhancement; I am not sure it will be a major enhancement.  We do have the meeting minutes, which I think provide a very full rationale.  We have the SEPs.  We have our semiannual report to the Congress.  This would allow us to provide more detail to be communicated to the public and perhaps, if we do it right, to present a more coherent and cohesive story about our outlook.  But I am not sure how much it really adds at the margin, and I would like to see that thought through a little bit more. I do think that, as President Lockhart pointed out, the real emphasis has to be placed on how policy is conducted, not really how to communicate or rationalize how we communicate it.  That is not the problem; the problem is the conduct of policy.  But that being said, good communication is essential for implementing good policy.  Once a policy framework is adopted, it does serve as a commitment device, and it is important to underscore what President Lockhart mentioned. With regard to the second question and the third question—I’ve partially addressed this so far—basically what we are saying is that even if we have a full range of the participants’ views, which I would insist upon as being fair, in the end the Chairman and the Board staff will be the final arbiters of the forecast and the narrative.  I do not think there is any other way to work it.  To their credit, at least in my seven years’ experience here, the Board staff has generally been fair and balanced, certainly in the minutes it prepares after every meeting, and I would hope that that would continue if we proceed with this exercise.  With regard to the third question— would it be worthwhile to conduct an experimental exercise in conjunction with the July meeting—I would say yes. I was struck by President Williams’s comment that we already have an enormous burden on the staff at a time when we have very difficult puzzles to solve, and I think it will take several trial runs, and we should proceed quite slowly.  Those are my comments, Mr. Chairman. I would just like to conclude by saying that my one concern here with regard to developing a consensus, even in your able hands, is that it be a consensus of the entire table, not just of the voters.  We need to make sure that we do not undercut what I consider to be our greatest virtue.  As I was mentioning to one of our new Governors earlier, I do believe this is the last great deliberative body in Washington, and we have to make sure that we reflect the diversity of views at this table. I know this brings a smile to your face, but I can tell you the Supreme Court is no longer as deliberative as we are.  We don’t see it anywhere else, and we need to reflect that richness that we have here at the table, and I hope it is incorporated. In summary, I would go very slow.  I would be mindful of the fact that we have other things that are very important presently, and I would hope it reflects the entire diversity of views at this table.  And lastly, we are inundating the public and the markets with information.  This may provide some new information at the margin, but I am somewhat skeptical.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing agreement with the skepticism expressed by President George and President Lacker, and he also agrees with President Lockhart's emphasis on the conduct of policy. He does express some concerns and reservations about the proposed changes, but there is no direct disagreement or contention with the views of others.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I very much support trying to move forward to develop a consensus forecast and a quarterly monetary policy report, and I thank the subcommittee and Governor Yellen, for their efforts.  A lot of thought and I’m sure a great deal of time went into this exercise.As I have noted before, where we are right now is not a good place.  The SEP is deeply flawed in a number of respects—no linkage of the individual interest rate forecast to the individual forecasts of economic growth and inflation, the ongoing potential for a disconnect between the median SEP liftoff date relative to the liftoff date expressed in the FOMC statement, difficulties in assessing what changes in the SEP mean when changes in the composition of the Committee occur, such as Governor Powell’s and Governor Stein’s accession to this Committee. That has changed the SEP, but in ways that are not going to be obvious to the public.  And, lastly, the SEP unfortunately focuses attention very much on our differences rather than our similarities. We should take our time in doing this, and we should be willing to test several different approaches before going public.  A model in which the Chairman generates an initial consensus forecast before seeking outside input does have a number of attractive features.  It is not cumbersome, and it has the advantage that the individual Committee participants don’t have to come up with their own forecasts.  Also, it presumably can be done within a relatively short period of time. It is going to be up to date as circumstances change. But there are several potential shortcomings to this type of approach that we at least need to note.  First, this approach could make the staff forecast very central to the process.  Not only could this make it more difficult for the staff, over time, to produce a truly independent arms-length forecast, but it also runs the risk that the consensus forecast would rest too heavily on a single model or perspective with respect to the economic outlook.  Second, and this is more important, a too-centralized approach without sufficient iteration might not lead to a true consensus.  This is critical because the goal should be to have the policy deliberations and judgments of the Committee match what is ultimately communicated in the monetary policy   report in terms of the consensus forecast.  If this doesn’t all hang together, then we will still have a problem in that what we are communicating doesn’t match how we are actually evaluating the outlook and the reaction function that we collectively use in the conduct of monetary policy.  For these reasons, it might be worthwhile trying out other alternatives as well, and I note in your comments, Mr. Chairman, that you introduced a wrinkle, which I think maybe goes in the right direction.  Conceivably, you could start the process with the Committee participant submissions of those who wish to do so.  The Chairman could then develop the first iteration of the consensus forecast from these submissions.  That is one alternative, and it might be interesting to try others.  Third, as others have said, in conducting these experiments we have to think very carefully about how robust the process is likely to be over time, as the composition of the Committee and the identity of the Chairperson changes.  I endorse what other people have said on that point. Now, in terms of a vote or not a vote, I have been wrestling with this.  It is not clear to me that a vote on the consensus forecast is absolutely necessary, but I do think that the process has to conclude in a way that there is an explicit endorsement of the outcome by the Committee.  This is necessary so that market participants will perceive that the forecast does in fact represent the Committee consensus.  Now, the endorsement doesn’t necessarily have to be agreement about the consensus forecast itself, but, instead, could represent agreement that the consensus forecast is somehow a “fair” representation of the consensus.  In this latter case, the Committee participants could still endorse adoption of the consensus forecast, even if their own forecast differed in material ways from that consensus. In terms of the quarterly monetary policy report, I do think it is a good thing to work toward.  I’d put the emphasis for right now, though, on developing a consensus forecast—the monetary policy report can be the caboose, assuming we actually succeed in this first process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the efforts to develop a consensus forecast but points out several flaws and potential shortcomings of the current approach. They suggest alternative approaches and express uncertainties about the process and the robustness of the consensus forecast over time. They also discuss the need for an explicit endorsement of the outcome by the Committee, even if there are disagreements among the participants.


Passage number 34.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude from someone named Governor Duke. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 35.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In order not to repeat a lot of what has already been said, I don’t have any concerns with an approach that meets all of the criteria that you laid out.  I am not certain how much stronger it is.  I agree with President Lockhart that we can come to a consensus on action; I am not sure we can come to a consensus on what led us to that action.  A lot of our discussions on communication have really been discussions about a level of consensus that I am not sure is possible with 19 different people. As we have gone around the room, everybody seems to have different ideas of what this idea actually means, and so I would be careful about that. I also agree with President Williams that we have to be careful and that this is not without cost.  And the trial period is particularly not without cost because if we are going to do this without increasing the burden on staff, it would imply that there is something we are not going to ask staff to do anymore after they start doing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that while consensus on action is possible, achieving consensus on what led to that action is uncertain. Additionally, the speaker highlights that different individuals in the group have different ideas about the proposed idea, indicating potential disagreement.


Passage number 36.
 MR. TARULLO.  Sleeping.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions someone named Mr. Tarullo sleeping without any conflicting views or debates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 37.
  [Laughter] MS. DUKE.  When you are in a trial run, you are going to be doing both.  And so I think the trial period in particular will create some burden.  The second thing is that it seems to me this changes the timing of our process because if we are going to submit projections two weeks earlier, then I need the Tealbook two weeks earlier.  I know that wouldn’t create any extra burden on staff.  And then, you would have the update to that Tealbook.  We do have to be careful on that. I would suggest a couple of things.  One is that we make a moratorium on other changes to our communication while we are testing this one.  We rushed out the changes adding the fed funds rate to the SEP, and we have now been unhappy with some of the things we learned about the peculiarities of the size of our Committee and the voters versus nonvoters.  I liked the suggestions that were made by Presidents Kocherlakota, Williams, and Plosser on ways to change the statement.  But I worry that if we go back to that, all of a sudden we are now changing our statement in ways that are pretty noticeable, and the public is going say, “Okay, why are you changing that.  Is this the communication change that was foreshadowed in the minutes, or is it something else.” If we think we have an idea of what we want to go to, we shouldn’t do other things in the meantime.  And second, because this is going to create some burden, we should be clear that this takes a backseat to policy action.  We are in an arena where policy action might require an awful lot of staff time, and I would hate to see them torn between working on the new consensus forecast and working on what we are going to do at the next meeting.  That could create some conflicts. Finally, on the quarterly monetary policy report, we already have a semiannual monetary policy report to Congress, and it certainly wouldn’t hurt to work on the format of that.  Most other central banks have shorter reports.  I can’t imagine we’d get any congressional complaints that our monetary policy report was too short or too skimpy, so we can certainly work on that as we are doing the monetary policy report.  But we are going to have to think of a way to make that report quarterly without also doubling the opportunities for the Chairman to appear in front of the Congress and explain what it is that we are doing.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern over the burden and timing of the trial period and suggests a moratorium on other changes to communication. They also express worry about changing the statement and the potential confusion it may cause. Additionally, the speaker suggests that the quarterly monetary policy report should be shorter and that the Chairman's appearances in front of Congress should not be doubled. Overall, these points of contention indicate disagreement.


Passage number 38.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you for thinking about me.  [Laughter]  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 39.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two process comments.  The first is that I would defer the trial until September for two reasons. One is that I think Europe is much more pressing right now.  We should be focused on the brewing problems in Europe andthat should be the topic of the July meeting.  And, the other is that it should be integrated with the SEP, and so doing it in September makes a lot more sense.  If we spend some time on contingency planning in July, then we can spend September, I hope, thinking about these other things.  But we ought to get the priorities appropriately aligned. The second is tied to President Kocherlakota’s comment that the policy and the forecast are intertwined.  I am worried about changing the dynamics of the meeting. I came here with an open mind about how we should be thinking about this and was hoping that I would have some of my views informed by everybody else around the table.  I would like that to continue with monetary policy as well as with this type of decision. One question I had was whether the consensus forecast and the press briefing could be tied to the release of the minutes.  It would change when you would do the press briefing, so that there would not be an emergency right after the FOMC meeting to try to integrate everything, and it would possibly allow integrating some of the information into the minutes rather than having a completely separate press report. The advantage would be that we could jointly discuss around the table both the forecast and the policy, and they would be intertwined.  Then we would have some time to put that all together, and it could come out at the time of the minutes, and that would give you more time both to reflect on the discussion and to integrate it into the minutes process.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making process comments and expressing his own views and suggestions, but there is no direct disagreement or contradiction with others.


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage consists of a polite phrase expressing gratitude and identifying the sender of the message as President Evans.


Passage number 41.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t have any major comments.  Being part of the subcommittee, I certainly endorse this proposal.  I share some of Governor Yellen’s comments about the SEP not being exactly as clear a communications device as we would like, and so I think that the consensus forecast process would help.  One of the big benefits in this is that the consensus forecast would have some common monetary policy assumption on which   everybody’s opinions about the economic outlook would be based.  At the moment, the SEP is at best a confused product because we have different policy assumptions, and we don’t identify ourselves, as Governor Yellen was mentioning.  It is not possible to sort out the pieces as to why you think inflation is going to be at our target next year and why you think it is not.  I think a common monetary policy assumption would be very good. I want to note one thing that I picked up on when I was talking to my colleagues.  As I have observed your press conferences, Mr. Chairman, it strikes me that they are not the easiest place to go out and respond to questions, especially the way that you so very correctly and authentically try to convey the opinions of the Committee and not just your own particular opinions.  I would think that you would be one of the big beneficiaries from having a consensus forecast.  In trying to describe the SEP, which is 19 different monetary policy assumptions, I am not sure if it is possible to answer some of those questions.  But if we all got together behind, as best we could, some common forecast with a common monetary policy assumption, I would think that that would be a lot easier.  I would certainly be interested in your opinions on that.  That is an important consideration, at least in my mind.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement and endorsement of the proposal. They are also suggesting that a consensus forecast with a common monetary policy assumption would improve communication and clarity. There is no sign of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  That is our list.  Thank you for the comments.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. It simply includes expressions of gratitude.


Passage number 43.
 MR. TARULLO. May I say just a couple of things, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks.  I have listened to what everybody here had to say, and one thing that came out of this—which is a truism but probably bears repeating—is that all alternatives are imperfect. A number of people have noted the imperfections in the current SEP, which I think are substantial.  People have anticipated imperfections in this as well.  I think that is why Janet proposed an elongated anditerative process here to try to figure out whether in fact we can come up with a better alternative. The second point I would make is that I do think that the SEP is not serving us particularly well right now if the aim was to give more useful information to markets. I have talked to a number of people who read this stuff and pay close attention to it, and while there is a range of views, most people seem either not to pay very much attention to it at all, or to look at it as a kind of little game in which they try to find inconsistencies in the thinking of the Committee. This gets back to another point that Janet made two or three meetings ago about the need for something collective.  We now have a divergence between forecasting and action, which creates the kind of problems that Charlie Evans and Narayana were noting earlier. As I was listening to Narayana, it occurred to me that an important point here, which Dennis underscored as well, is what people think they mean by “consensus.”  And I guess I would be a little bit skeptical if in the more literal and etymological senses of the term we could come up with a consensus here.  But what we are looking for is some sort of collective judgment or, as Narayana would have it, a series of perhaps alternative judgments.  And that is a really useful desideratum to have, whether or not we can ultimately achieve it. I believe that is what Janet is trying to test with her subcommittee. If I heard correctly, I think there is, in some cases, reluctance or skepticism but in all cases willingness to let Janet’s subcommittee do this on an iterative basis. I have a lot of sympathy for what Eric and John said about July, though. The final point I would make is, if we go down this road, this would be a wonderful opportunity to fundamentally change the nature of the economic discussion that we have here, by which I mean dispensing with a series of readings of prepared statements on the economy, and instead actually moving toward a deliberation in which people, in talking about the forecast,   bring to bear their own views and maybe listen to and respond to one another.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea that all alternatives are imperfect and that the current Summary of Economic Projections is not serving the purpose of providing useful information to markets. The speaker also agrees with the need for a collective judgment or alternative judgments. There is no disagreement or contention expressed in the passage.


Passage number 44.
 MR. FISHER.  We may be the last deliberative body, but we can be a better deliberative body.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the deliberative body they belong to has the potential to improve.


Passage number 45.
 MR. TARULLO.  You know, I think we deliberate on monetary policy, not on the economics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker simply states their opinion about deliberating on monetary policy rather than economics.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, okay.  Thank you very much.  So as usual, we don’t quite have a consensus.  [Laughter]  One thing that was very clear is this needs to be a slow and iterative process, and we can certainly try that.  Some of the key questions raised were how best and at what stage to get the input from the Committee and what to do about the policy assumption, and we will think about that.  Let me just state now I have at least a potential theoretical concern about taking the market rates as a policy assumption because that doesn’t allow the endogeneity of policy to developments in the economy.  What you would ideally want is some kind of rule, but, again, that is an issue we can look at. On the staff time, I have already had some discussions with David Wilcox and others, and we have in mind a process that will be very light on the staff.  I see Dave Reifschneider nodding his head, which is good news.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is reflecting on the discussions and questions raised, acknowledging differing views and potential concerns, but there is no indication of a heated debate or disagreement among the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 47.
  [Laughter] MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Sorry, I was nodding to something Eric Engen said, not to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement clarifying the reason behind the speaker's gesture.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, not to me.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Oh, not to me. Okay" does not express any conflicting or contradicting ideas.


Passage number 49.
 MR. WILCOX.  That was not an authorized nod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox simply states a fact about the nod not being authorized.


Passage number 50.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will try to be very undemanding of staff on this issue, recognizing the importance of the substantive policy questions that they are currently working on. I take that point.  So we will try a little experiment.  Many of the comments were extremely helpful.  We will go slowly, and if it doesn’t work, I am totally prepared to move on and do something else. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply discusses the speaker's willingness to be flexible and open to different options.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 51.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I was very struck by President Rosengren’s suggestion that the experiment be in September.  I don’t know what your thinking and Governor Yellen’s thinking was on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "I don't know what your thinking and Governor Yellen's thinking was on that" which implies that Mr. Kocherlakota disagrees with President Rosengren's suggestion.


Passage number 52.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, my original thought was to iterate on the preliminary Tealbook without having an SEP projection.  We could try that, and then we could try the other in September. Okay. If everybody is amenable, maybe before lunch we could get Brian Sack’s final report on monetary and financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a passage that discusses possible actions and requests input from the group.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for Brian.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person expressing gratitude and asking a question is addressing someone named Brian and addressing the President as an additional point of reference.


Passage number 54.
 MR. FISHER.  First, again, Brian, thank you for your service.  Following the distinguished line you followed, you filled those shoes very ably, and I want to thank you for what you have done.  And I want to draw on your experience now to address your exhibit 3, number 16.  Would it be prudent in your view to have 0 percent holdings between zero and three years in the SOMA portfolio. What would be a rational amount for us to hold, just for the sake of maintaining healthy market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing gratitude and acknowledging the expertise of the person he is addressing. He then asks for their opinion and guidance on a specific issue.


Passage number 55.
 MR. SACK. There are some consequences of taking our holdings to zero.  In particular, we won’t have any of those securities available for our securities lending facility, and we won’t be rolling over any securities into new, longer-run issues for securities lending.  The first program has already taken our holdings down meaningfully.  So to some degree, this effect is already in place, and the first program has actually left us with a very odd profile of maturities and rollovers.  The most extreme example is that in the middle of October we literally have a maturing issue of $200 that under our current procedure we would try to roll over into the   multiple securities being issued that day.  My point is that we are already facing some of these issues.  Obviously, taking it to zero will take it to the extreme. Having said that, we regard those type of issues—and securities lending, in particular—as secondary to the policy purposes of adjusting the portfolio in this way.  And of course, our not holding these securities means someone else will be, and those other investors may also make the securities available to the repo market.  So it is not clearly that detrimental to the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the consequences of taking their holdings to zero and discussing the potential impacts on their securities lending facility and the market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
 MR. FISHER.  And then the second question relates to extending the MEP in the 6-to-30-year maturity range where we would end up holding one-third, according to this table.  With regard to exit, the sell side is always different than the buy side, and we are going to be holding a significant portion of the issuance in that maturity period.  Do you have any concerns about that; do you think we can ably negotiate our way through or sell our way through in a rising interest rate environment.  And how does it affect the buy side, those we would be selling to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a potential disagreement or contention between the speaker and the person being addressed. The speaker expresses concern about the ability to sell their holdings in a rising interest rate environment, while seeking the other person's perspective on the matter.


Passage number 57.
 MR. SACK. Let me say a couple of things.  First of all, the issue I was raising in the briefing is that, as our holdings go up in size as a portion of the market, at some point, we always have this concern about impairing market functioning—just associated with our holdings, not necessarily with sales. It wasn’t long ago we wrestled with whether we could increase the 35 percent limit on any individual security, and here we are considering policies that may take us basically to that limit for the entire market.  So we are in uncharted territory; it is hard to figure out how far you can go.  But as I said in the briefing, because we haven’t seen meaningful problems with increasing our holdings to 30 percent, we are confident we can keep going. In terms of your question of whether we will be able to sell these securities, I think we are quite confident we will be able to sell the Treasury securities, even in a rising rate environment.  Obviously, the securities will reprice, and the market will be trading at a differentlevel, but there is no reason we shouldn’t be able to sell these securities through a competitive process at market prices. Doing this operation does have consequences for your exit strategy, which you may want to think through.  For example, the June 2011 exit principles rely on redemptions early and for quite a period to reduce the size of the balance sheet.  This will clearly reduce your capacity to shrink the balance sheet through that channel for a number of years.  It is worth considering at some point whether these actions warrant additional consideration of your exit strategy, but I don’t have any concerns about the actual ability to execute sales, however that falls into your strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing potential concerns and considerations regarding the Federal Reserve's holdings and their impact on market functioning and the ability to sell Treasury securities, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 58.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Fisher is being thanked by someone named Brian, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Brian, you show in number 16, “SOMA Treasury Holdings as a Percent of Outstanding.”  What is the denominator there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking for clarification or additional information.


Passage number 60.
 MR. SACK.  Total outstanding securities in the market.  So related to that, you can create alternative statistics that would be even more concerning if you took out, say, foreign official holdings, which maybe aren’t available to the market, or if you took out bonds that have been stripped, because the market can’t easily reconstitute bonds.  But what I am showing is relative to the market as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage is discussing different statistics that could be used to analyze the total outstanding securities in the market. While there may be different opinions on which statistics are most concerning or relevant, there is no explicit contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 61.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think this is a much smaller number than the U.S. publicly held government debt.  The U.S. public debt is on the order of 75 percent of GDP, which is roughly $10 trillion. What is the relationship of that number to this number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides information about the U.S. public debt in relation to GDP without introducing conflicting viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 62.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. We’re skewed to the long end now, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "We're skewed to the long end now, right" is stating a fact or seeking confirmation without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 63.
 MR. SACK.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes one statement from Mr. Sack without any conflicting or contradictory viewpoints.


Passage number 64.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And Treasury is not as skewed to the long end as we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the Treasury being less focused on the long end compared to someone else.


Passage number 65.
   MR. SACK. We own $1.6 trillion of total Treasury securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a factual statement, indicating the amount of Treasury securities owned. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You have a similar number for three to six years. Oh, it’s the fact that we don’t own bills.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "You have a similar number for three to six years" seems to contradict the following statement "Oh, it's the fact that we don't own bills." The first statement suggests that the person has a consistent number for a certain period of time, while the second statement implies that they do not have any bills to worry about. These two statements present differing information, indicating a disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 67.
 MR. SACK. It’s the zero holdings in the zero-to-three-year maturity range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. It is a simple statement of fact, mentioning the zero holdings in the zero-to-three-year maturity range.


Passage number 68.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There is lot of issuance in that sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply indicating that there is a significant amount of issuance in a particular sector.


Passage number 69.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  A two-hander from Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite response expressing gratitude.


Passage number 70.
 MS. DUKE.  Brian, remind me what percentage of the total agency MBS market we hold, and then, in addition to that, are there any exit issues or percentage holding issues with MBS that are different than for the Treasury market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question for clarification.


Passage number 71.
 MR. SACK. We face similar issues there. If you look as a share of the market that we transact in—fixed coupon, TBA-eligible-type agency securities—I think our current holdings are probably in the low 20 percent of outstandings, and I believe that the $500 billion LSAP that was presented as alternative A would take them to around 30 percent.  The same issue arises there about getting to a relatively sizable part of that market and not knowing exactly where the line is. However, when we think about capacity for MBS, we don’t just look at the effect on the net supply or on our share of the total outstanding.  We also pay a lot of attention to the flow of our purchases relative to production, because one thing we learned in the first LSAP was that, unlike Treasury securities, it was very hard to go out and pull MBS out of the secondary market.  It caused a lot of market functioning problems.  As a result, we are a little bit more tuned in to not getting too large relative to gross issuance. When we calibrate capacity there, we take that into consideration as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the speaker's perspective and considerations when thinking about the capacity for MBS.


Passage number 72.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the provided information. The passage only mentions "President Lacker" without any context or accompanying statements that would indicate contention.


Passage number 73.
   MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thank you, Brian, for outstanding service to the Federal Reserve System.  I do have one final question for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker expresses gratitude towards the chairman and acknowledges the outstanding service of Brian, but also mentions having one final question for him. This does not indicate any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 74.
  [Laughter] MR. SACK.  Is it about market functioning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement about laughter and a question about market functioning, but there is no direct contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 75.
 [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  I take it you wouldn’t claim that we have impaired the functioning of the Treasury repo market, but the increase of 15 basis points is in the ballpark of some ranges of estimates of the effect of the MEP on the long end of the curve in the other direction.  I’m wondering, do we still know that the MEP is, on net, stimulative.  Or is this a contractionary offset we need to take into account.  Related to that, my recollection of the theory of the case for MEP was that at the very short end there are close substitutes for reserves, especially given the expectation that the price of reserves would remain very low for two, three years maybe.  So should this lead us to revise that sense in which we view two-, three-year securities as close substitutes for reserves, and, thus, the theory on which we built the case for MEP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking questions and seeking clarification.


Passage number 76.
 MR. SACK. A couple of things to note.  First, we are unsure the extent to which this rise in overnight rates is associated with the MEP.  It is a common story among market participants.  We have done some empirical analysis suggesting that changes in Treasury supply do have transitory effects on repo rates. It is probably part of the story, but it is hard to know if it is the only factor or to what extent it is playing a role. And, of course, Treasury supply was increasing over this period for other reasons, not just because of our sales.  Having said that, to the extent it is putting some upward pressure on short-term interest rates—and if those were expected to persist—it would be tightening financial conditions in a way that presumably would be counterproductive.  But I don’t think that effect is large enough to offset the positive benefits of taking the duration out of the market.  And while we are unsure of the size of the effects, we also don’t think that they are permanent.  We think that, once the supply works its way through thedealer balance sheets, we will see the upward pressure on repo come off.  And for those reasons, maybe it is not quite as concerning as you suggest. But it is very much an open issue.  You could say, well, whether this is a result of the maturity extension program or not, having repo rates at 25 basis points is not productive for trying to get the most accommodative financial conditions. From a policy perspective, you could ask the question if it’s worth trying to lower them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 78.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just to follow up on President Lacker’s comment, if we were to lower the interest on excess reserves, would that likely put downward pressure on those rates that President Lacker is concerned about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 79.
 MR. SACK. We believe it would put downward pressure on overnight rates.  Our guess is that the effect on the repo rate would be less than one for one.  If you are truly interested in lowering the repo rate, you could consider an IOER change, but you could also consider just directly doing repos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief and making suggestions, but there is no conflicting viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 80.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 81.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I am looking at number 16 here, and it raises the question in my mind of whether some form of reverse MEP would be feasible in the future, to just dial back the distribution among maturities, maybe preliminary to exit, while simultaneously I would understand that the Treasury Department, in their normal course, is managing their own distribution of maturities. Is that a feasible way for us to consider undoing it, if we wish to do that at some stage in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question posed by Mr. Lockhart, expressing his inquiry about the feasibility of a reverse MEP as a potential strategy for adjusting the distribution of maturities in the future.


Passage number 82.
 MR. SACK. It is certainly operationally feasible, and maybe there would be a reason to consider that.  Thinking back to the staff discussions about the exit strategy, we didn’t see a  strong case for doing a reverse MEP under the view that, at the time you would want to be removing accommodation, you wouldn’t mind seeing the level of reserves going down as well. Of course, the MEP is designed to not further boost the level of reserves under the view that there is not a benefit of increasing reserves from here.  But on the flip side, when you are into your exit strategy, there may be benefits to get the reserves down. But if for some reason there wasn’t, if you wanted to maintain the size of the balance sheet or the level of reserves while reducing duration, it certainly could be done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the feasibility and possible reasons for considering a reverse MEP (matched sale-purchase agreement) as part of an exit strategy. They mention different perspectives on the impact on reserves and the potential benefits of reducing reserves during an exit strategy. However, there is no clear disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not include any statement or information that suggests contention or disagreement. It only mentions "President Kocherlakota" without providing any context or information regarding any disagreements or contentions related to him.


Passage number 84.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thank you, Brian.  You have given great service, and on a personal level, I have learned a tremendous amount from your briefings on an ongoing basis.  I have two questions.  The first question is about panel 14.  Do you have narratives from the survey about why the respondents felt that changing the balance sheet was so much more likely than changing rate guidance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and asking a question.


Passage number 85.
 MR. SACK.  We don’t have a good, complete narrative on that, but we certainly have a sense from our broader discussions with market participants.  I think there is a view that moving the rate guidance to late 2014 was already quite aggressive.  It is very hard to know how the forecast will unfold that far out, and there were questions about how meaningful providing a forecast beyond that into 2015 would be.  Having said that, I would note the responses would be consistent with the idea that the probability of a change in the rate guidance over the course of the next year goes up quite a bit.  As time marches on, and late 2014 gets closer, I think there is a perception of more scope to credibly give guidance into 2015.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different perspectives and acknowledging that there is uncertainty about future forecast and rate guidance.


Passage number 86.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.  And my second question is about the very low level of the term premium.  I would guess—and you can inform me if I am right or wrong on   this—that there would be information in option markets about how traders view the probability of a reversal of the low term premium, and are we seeing anything in those markets to indicate that that is more likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the information present in option markets.


Passage number 87.
 MR. SACK. Obviously, we don’t have a market reading on the term premium itself.  We have an options market on longer-term interest rates that allows us to assess the perceived skew around longer-term interest rates.  And, indeed, swaptions suggest that the skew has moved up meaningfully in the direction of higher odds of an increase in interest rates. I think that is actually a natural reaction in the market as rates get to unusually low levels and the downside of the distribution is limited.  There has generally been a greater market perception of at least a larger risk of an increase in rates.  But of course all of those risks are embedded in the yield, so this is about the shape of the perceived risk around that yield.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the market's reaction to interest rates and acknowledging that there is a perceived risk of an increase in rates.


Passage number 88.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  But this will give us some information about a low probability but still-possible event of rapid reversals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the information will provide insight into a low probability event.


Passage number 89.
 MR. SACK.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sack's statement is simply stating a fact or confirming something that is already known.


Passage number 90.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine


Passage number 91.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  Brian, the previous time when we engaged in our MEP, we had some discussion about the fact that this was, in part, a fiscal action, and that the debt management policies of the Treasury would matter in terms of the results. My question is, as we think forward to consideration of another MEP action over the coming months that is much smaller in size, there also has been a lot of discussion about what the debt management policies of the Treasury are going to be going forward, whether they are going to push out their duration in the process.  Have we had any conversations with the Treasury. Alternatively, what is the implicit assumption here about what the Treasury is going to do with its debt management   policies that may or may not impact how we think about some kind of an extension of the program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about whether there have been any conversations with the Treasury regarding their debt management policies.


Passage number 92.
 MR. SACK. Yes, I did reach out to Mary Miller at the Treasury to get a sense of how it may react to this type of option, because this option would have meaningful debt management consequences as early as the beginning of July.  That conversation suggested that there would be no meaningful change in debt management practices in response to an additional maturity extension program.  What happens is the Treasury would lose the rollovers that it was getting to the Fed, so it somehow have to make up for that financing by issuing more debt to the market.  The indication was it would initially do all of that adjustment through bills.  Treasury coupon sizes have been stable for some time. It wants to maintain that stability, and its bill issuance has actually been low relative to coupon issuance, so it would make it up through bills.  But what we would assume is, over time, it would work its way into the Treasury’s broader debt management strategy and result in it issuing more duration over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the potential consequences of a certain option and discussing the reaction and actions of the Treasury in response to it. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 93.
 MR. PLOSSER. What is your understanding of what the Treasury’s debt management strategy is going forward, in terms of both its duration plans and issuance, over the next six months, let’s say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is asking for the understanding of the Treasury's debt management strategy. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 94.
 MR. SACK. We have talked about this before at this table, and I haven’t learned anything new since then.  My understanding is its strategy is to continue lengthening the average maturity of their debt.  In fact, the decisions it has already made will keep it on an upward trajectory for some time.  And to be honest, it sounds like there is some uncertainty about how far it will go, when it will top that out.  The average maturity is going to get up to or maybe above the typical range that we have seen historically. It has already gone a long distance, and it is not entirely clear just how far it goes. But as has been pointed out before, the course that the   Treasury has been on is in no way driven by the monetary policy decisions made at this table.  We tend to think of our programs having effects around that course in terms of removing duration that would have been there without our operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Brian. [No response]  Okay.  We need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.  No objection. [No response] We had a second vote to approve the two amendments to domestic authorization.  Brian gave an explanation.  Are there any questions or comments on that. [No response]  All right.  Seeing none, I take it no objection to approving those. [No response]  Okay. I understand lunch is ready.  Why don’t we take 30 minutes for lunch, and start up again around 1:35.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 96.
 [Lunch recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we reconvene. The Vice Chair reminds me to tell you that Simon Potter’s appointment will not be public until Thursday afternoon, so please keep that confidential until then.  Reconvening, we are now at item 5, Economic and Financial Situation, and I will call on David Bowman to introduce the staff presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing a reminder and transitioning to the next item on the agenda.


Passage number 97.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for our colleagues.  Questions for Ellen.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a polite exchange of gratitude and a request for questions.


Passage number 98.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you.  When we release the projections with the minutes, is everything in here. What is in this packet that is not in the publicly released summary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 99.
 MS. MEADE.  The scatter plot in exhibit 3 is not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 100.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay, good.  That relieves my concern.  I am sure it has occurred to all of you before—but somehow I was slow, and it only occurred to me this time—that when we compare GDP or unemployment or PCE inflation levels at different stages of liftoff, they are not a comparison of like factors, right. Because my assumption would be that if we go three more years with this kind of economic growth, or lack thereof, structural unemployment really will be higher than it is today.  I just wanted to make sure that the unemployment number associated with the boxes in particular is not being compared directly with those reflected in the triangles.  That’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there any other questions about the projections.  [No response]  Okay, other questions.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 102.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That was a lot of material to digest, and you very much focused on the key issues.  It’s the first time I can remember that the international piece came first, which I think tells you that it is the number one risk. I have two general sets of questions, one on Europe and one on the fiscal cliff.  On Europe, I want to understand what has changed.  Is it that what before was a big downside risk wasn’t part of the central forecast.  Now some more things have happened that morphed the situation over the threshold, so that now it is in the central forecast.  Or did something material happen in Europe between the April meeting and today. I’m trying to get a sense of whether the shift is being driven mainly by a small change in Europe that just tips you over the line or something more major that happened in Europe.  That is my first question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the changes that have occurred in Europe and the reasons for the shift in focus on the international piece as the number one risk.


Passage number 103.
 MR. BOWMAN. A couple of things happened.  We did get macrodata for April and May. And whereas the first quarter was fairly good, the April and May data clearly show them again on the downtrend.  So part of the markdown, certainly in the near term, is the result of incoming data.  The other thing that has occurred—it was already occurring at the time of the April FOMC, but it is now fairly clear—is that financial conditions have gotten worse.  The risk of a Greek exit probably seems clearer.  We had the Greek elections—Greek election one and then Greek election two. We’ve gotten other data for Spain that show the deposit outflows that I talked about.  We had the news about Bankia; the amount of funds that it would need was a good deal more than people thought, and now it will be in the lending program for their banks.  So a number of factors have worsened, and I think they brought that tail that we always knew was out there a bit closer in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about various factors that have caused a downturn in the economy.


Passage number 104.
 MR. KAMIN.  If I could just add to those remarks on the issue of the new developments.  Back when conditions worsened in European markets between the March and April Tealbooks,   we had to decide whether this was something that actually had legs, or were we looking at normal volatility in markets.  And so we worsened our forecast maybe a little bit in the April Tealbook but didn’t do a lot.  As financial conditions deteriorated between the April Tealbook and now, we recognized that a dynamic had now set in, in which the markets were going to continue to get worse until there was a very concerted policy response on the part of the European authorities. And that became particularly evident as we passed two events that in principle could have heartened markets—the June 9 package for Spanish banks, and then, more recently, the election for Greece.  There, it was pretty obvious that the market bounce, if there was any, was incredibly short-lived.  So it became much more apparent to us that basically the dynamic had set in, and the situation was going to get worse until something made it get better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of their decision-making process in response to worsening conditions in the European markets.


Passage number 105.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So it is now sort of the central baseline as opposed to something that was a risk that might or might not materialize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact about the current situation, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 106.
 MR. KAMIN.  Right.  But to be clear, the central baseline is one of mounting financial stresses that eventually will become severe enough to prompt a fairly aggressive European response.  The central baseline is not the meltdown scenario that is in the Tealbook alternative, or the more advanced stresses that David referred to in his discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing clarification and stating the central baseline regarding financial stresses.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Understood.  The second question I had was on the fiscal cliff. From my perspective, it seems like you have an awfully mild impact of plunging over the fiscal cliff, especially given that you are at the zero bound with no ability to offset the fiscal cliff through monetary policy and the rest of the world is very weak.  You have the European economy in contraction.  For the U.S. economy you have a big fiscal contraction along with presumably a big confidence effect because if you plunge off the fiscal cliff, it is not just plunging off the fiscal cliff, but also a tremendous loss of confidence in the political process in the United States.  The CBO had, I think, a mild recession in 2013 but a deeper one than what you have.  And CBO was assuming that, absent any fiscal contraction, the economy would be growing 4.4 percent in calendar year 2013.  I’m curious why plunging off the fiscal cliff in your view isn’t more negative than what you had.  It seemed an awfully mild effect.  I wouldn’t want the Congress getting its hands on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker believes that the impact of plunging off the fiscal cliff would be mild, while the CBO (Congressional Budget Office) predicts a deeper recession. They also mention the loss of confidence in the political process, which could have a negative effect on the economy.


Passage number 108.
 MR. LEBOW.  I can mention one thing regarding the comparison of our estimates with the CBO’s.  If you look at the effects that we built in over the course of 2013 and 2014 combined, compared with CBO’s assumptions, they are actually quite similar.  However, our models assume a gradual spending response to the tax-change parts of the fiscal cliff.  The CBO was assuming a much faster spending response, so it has a bigger hit concentrated right at the beginning of 2013 than we do.  That is the more important reason for the difference between our assessment and CBO’s assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply outlining the differences in assumptions between Mr. Lebow's estimates and the CBO's assessments.


Passage number 109.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the saving rate drops a lot in the way that you set it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the saving rate drops significantly in the given setup without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 110.
 MR. LEBOW.  Yes.  The CBO’s estimates are reasonable. Obviously, ours are our best shot, but they could be larger than we have built in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the estimates from the CBO are reasonable, and their own estimates could potentially be larger.


Passage number 111.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay. Fair enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Okay. Fair enough" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges understanding or acceptance.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide the passage in question for further analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions.  What is the Tealbook scenario for Europe going out two to three years.  What I have in mind is that the periphery countries are clearly not competitive, and they need some type of devaluation, which currently is being pursued as an internal devaluation along with austerity programs.  It is not hard to speculate that this is going to lead to political turmoil and be largely unsuccessful in most of those countries.  At any rate, one bookended alternative for Greece and other countries is exiting the euro and see how things play out afterwards.  The other end of the bookshelf is full fiscal union where the northern European countries and core Europe agree to some sort of transfers. That seems likely to lead to political turmoil, too, among a different segment of the populace.  And so I am wondering if somewhere in between is there an intermediate set of outcomes that are sustainable over some two-, three-, or five-year period; how does the situation play out, or is that the empty set.  You have to be thinking about this in your outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage presents multiple perspectives on the future of Europe, including potential scenarios of devaluation, internal devaluation, austerity programs, political turmoil, exiting the euro, fiscal union, and sustainability. These differing viewpoints indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 114.
 MR. BOWMAN. Yes, we are. On the empty set part, I guess we will see over time.  But our baseline is—assuming that stresses will get worse this year—that if Italy or Spain, or both, need programs, they will get programs, and that will take them out of the market.  They won’t need to borrow at that point if the firewall prevails.  And we assume, even if the current level isn’t enough, that in a severe enough situation they would politically just simply raise the size of the firewall.  And at that point, with whoever needs to be out of the market for at least a bit, stresses will gradually decline, though not overnight.  That’s one reason why our 2013 forecast is a lot worse than many others—we have these stresses only gradually declining over time, although they do decline in our baseline going out to 2014.  We assume that over that timeframe the moves toward fiscal and financial union will gradually increase and that these governments will be able to improve their fiscal situations.  So that by the end of 2014, we’ve got overall a better situation in which the fiscal outlook has improved for these countries, the move toward a more sensible monetary union is probably in progress, and then we see not stunning economic growth but moderate growth in 2014 and going forward.  That’s the basic scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing their baseline assumptions about the situation in Italy and Spain and the potential for improvement over time.


Passage number 115.
 MR. EVANS.  When I’m in public and I get that type of question, I also try to provide that type of hopeful response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that when the speaker receives a certain type of question in public, they try to provide a hopeful response.


Passage number 116.
   MR. BOWMAN. We talked about the risks to this.  They are palpable.  We are assuming that Ireland and Portugal will need further programs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that risks are evident and that there is an assumption that Ireland and Portugal will require further programs.


Passage number 117.
 MR. KAMIN. The only point I would add—just to make it seem like we are not just giving you the same PR [laughter] as the people you are talking to—is that this outlook that we have written down for the euro area is actually very bleak.  What we have written down is that after a couple of years of recession, economic growth in 2014 will be 1 percent. And that is for the euro area in aggregate, which is the combination of Germany doing okay and France doing not horrible, and the peripheral economies going into very steep recessions.  Our baseline actually encompasses a pretty prolonged period of very lackluster economic growth, something that is shorter than Japan, but that might be the way to think about it.  This is an outlook that we think is not politically impossible and not financially impossible, but it is by no means desirable, and it is not particularly sanguine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing their outlook for the Euro area's economic growth, emphasizing that it is bleak and lacksluster.


Passage number 118.
 MR. EVANS.  The other question I had was related to the Tealbook’s long-term outlook, where you extend it to 2017.  I notice that your projection had a feature that my own projections had, which I can’t bring myself to change.  First, let me say that I thought that Tealbook B, was extraordinarily innovative this time because you showed some additional simulations of FRB/US with different loss functions and weights on the dual mandate: resource slack and inflation goals.  And so when I looked at the optimal control response, which is solving the optimization in the spirit that it is meant to be solved—that is what I can’t bring myself to do—it ends up providing more accommodative policy for a longer period of time in a way that has inflation going above the 2 percent objective for some noticeable and meaningful period.  And that is true using the standard weights, but it was true even when you put a very small weight on the unemployment leg. It was also true for the nominal income targeting, but that is not related to the optimality. Inmy opinion, it looks to me like this shows that any real attempt to do the optimal with regard to dual mandate objectives is going to lead to some ex ante expectation that inflation is going to go above that 2 percent threshold.  But I can’t bring myself to put that particular inflation path into my projections.  Like the long-term outlook, I have inflation going up to 2 percent. Isn’t there a tension in all of this.  I mean, there must be something else at work in the Tealbook.  Is the answer that you’re not doing optimal policy there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and observations about the Tealbook's projections and their own projections. There is no argument or disagreement between the speaker and the Tealbook.


Passage number 119.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes. The long-run outlook is governed by the estimated outcome-based rule, and we tie ourselves to that quite mechanically and allow the FRB/US dynamics to play out.  So the medium-term outlook is a judgmental outlook.  At the end of the medium-term period, we hand over the projections to the model, which we tried to tailor in some ways so that its dynamics more closely resemble what we think the analytics of the staff projection are. That being said, from the beginning of the long-term period out, it is quite a mechanical exercise, and monetary policy is represented by the estimated outcome-based rule.  In some sense, this is just what is ground out by that process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the process of how the Federal Reserve Board/United States (FRB/US) dynamics and projections are used in determining the long-term outlook and the role of the estimated outcome-based rule in monetary policy.


Passage number 120.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  So it looks like a rule that is not really grounded in any sort of optimality with respect to the objective function that the policymakers have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating an observation or opinion that the rule in question does not seem to be based on an optimal objective function from the perspective of policymakers.


Passage number 121.
 MR. WILCOX.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement as Mr. Wilcox confirms that the statement made is correct.


Passage number 122.
 MR. EVANS. And something that is grounded in the objective function, even with a low weight on the resource slack, would tend to have more accommodation and, ex ante, run a risk that inflation would go above the target.  I mention this because, as I noted earlier, I think the Chairman does a fabulous job of fielding tremendously difficult questions in the press conference, and this is a question that he has gotten, at least for the past several press conferences.  And I thought this was very helpful. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement of the speaker's opinion and compliment towards the Chairman's handling of press conferences.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
   MR. ENGLISH.  Just one other point, though, on the optimal control policy. It has a lot of assumptions buried in it that we have talked about before here about the credibility of the assumed future behavior of the Committee.  The Committee is assumed to be able to credibly commit to a path for the funds rate, and that path is believed by the public and taken into account by the public.  And so if you wondered about the ability of the Committee to make that commitment, or if you wondered whether—even if the Committee in some sense could commit to do that—it would be believed, then this may not be a trajectory that you could necessarily get to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker raises concerns about the credibility of the assumed future behavior of the Committee and questions whether the Committee's ability to make and be believed in its commitment.


Passage number 124.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, that is certainly true, but I don’t know how that cuts.  By “this,” do you mean it is not possible to push the inflation projection above 2 percent.  Or that taking into consideration those alternatives, you wouldn’t want to do that optimally. It just strikes me as odd. And other people who have looked at something like this might argue that when you are bringing the inflation projection in from below at a time when the resource slack objective is doing so badly, you would expect that you would do more.  And if I was running into some type of impediment along the lines of what you’re talking about, the optimal response might be to do something wildly more in order to overcome that. I’m not quite sure what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is expressing confusion and seeking clarification regarding inflation projections and optimal responses, but there is no argument or contradictory viewpoint presented.


Passage number 125.
 MR. ENGLISH.  But in the optimal control exercises all you can do is push back liftoff.  There aren’t additional balance sheet actions here, as I think President Bullard has said in the past. But if you don’t think you can credibly commit to a funds rate path way out, that may be an argument for doing balance sheet action.  That’s something you can do now, and it is credible. But if there are costs and risks associated with additional balance sheet action, you may be hesitant to do that.  So there are constraints on the ability of the Committee that are worth thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options and considerations without expressing disagreement with anyone else's perspective.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, you had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While it is not clear what the conversation between President Lacker and the other person was about, the statement itself does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that President Lacker had a two-hander, which could refer to a handshake or any other type of interaction involving two people.


Passage number 127.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  So the optimal control policy reaction function differs from what you would think best fits the recent past.  Am I right about that.  And if so, and then it represents a one-time change that is instantly fully credible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. It is a statement that is seeking agreement or confirmation from the other person.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 128.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes, I think that’s right.  It represents a behavior that isn’t necessarily consistent with past behavior.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English's statement implies that the behavior being discussed does not align with previous behavior. This suggests that there is a disagreement or discrepancy between the behavior in question and the person's previous actions.


Passage number 129.
 MR. LACKER.  It just has the past data, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions that the data being referred to is past data.


Passage number 130.
 MR. EVANS.  That’s what Lucas critique issues are all about.  It is about trying to understand the structure of the economy, and then asking whether or not you somehow choose a policy that can achieve something different than ever has been achieved before, and then go out and sell it to people.  Just because it doesn’t fit, we routinely say, well, that is not structural.  The Lucas critique would say we shouldn’t give in to that.  This is just another variant of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the concept of the Lucas critique and explaining its purpose, without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage is incomplete and does not provide any context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 132.
 MR. LACKER.  As you know, President Evans, this is the critique of the Lucas critique that Sims has raised—that one needs to be careful in drawing conclusions from a one-time perfectly credible policy change implemented in a model in the manner in which Lucas advocated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement between the two speakers. Mr. Lacker is simply raising a critique of the Lucas critique, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There could be simpler structural changes, though, in terms of the behavioral equations, for example.  The Taylor rule is just an empirically estimated relationship.  And if the economy has changed, it may no longer be close to optimal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the possibility of simpler structural changes in terms of the behavioral equations and suggests that if the economy has changed, the Taylor rule may no longer be close to optimal.


Passage number 134.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes one statement by Mr. Lacker without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given text "President Bullard" does not provide any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the title or position of a person.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to focus on the question of Greek exit.  I think we are throwing around the phrase “exit” very blithely here. What does exit actually mean.  And what can be achieved through exit.  As you know, there are two treaties in Europe for the EU and the EMU.  They have legal obligations within the European Union.  Greece could abrogate those treaties if it wanted to, because it’s a sovereign country, but that would have a lot of implications for the nation.  It probably would not want to go that route.  It is supposed to have renounced printing its own currency.  I could imagine, nevertheless, it printing its own currency and having dual currencies.  So I think there are a lot of issues here that suggest that exit is not nearly as clean an event.  It is not like you wake up one Monday morning, and you say, “Okay.  We have exited, and now we are going our separate ways.”  It is a more complicated thing than that.  That is one thing I want to get my head around—what you are thinking on that.  And the other is whether the more logical scenario is that there will just be ongoing restructuring of debt over several years, and so we gradually not pay a lot of the debt, or maybe all of the debt, for some of these countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is questioning and challenging the idea of a Greek exit from the European Union and the implications it would have. He suggests that exit is not a clean event and explores alternative scenarios such as ongoing debt restructuring.


Passage number 137.
 MR. BOWMAN.  Right.  By “Greek exit,” we mean an exit of Greece from the euro area. It no longer uses the euro as its currency.  It is not part of the euro area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply explains the meaning of "Greek exit" and clarifies that it refers to Greece leaving the euro area and no longer using the euro as its currency.


Passage number 138.
 MR. BULLARD.  So what does it mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement or question that is seeking clarification or explanation.


Passage number 139.
 MR. BOWMAN.  All right.  As you probably know, there is no actual legal way to leave the euro area.  You can leave the EU, and the ECB has interpreted that as the only legal way that you can leave the euro area because you have to be a member of the EU to be in the euro area. It’s possible that Greece could in theory do it legally under the existing EU treaty, the Lisbon Treaty.  Now, to do that, you have to say you want to leave, and then there is a committee, and the EU makes a proposal, and hopefully you negotiate an exit.  And if after—I believe it’s two years or three years—they haven’t agreed, you get to leave anyway.  It’s possible they could speed that up, and it could all be done legally.  Other than that, you could invoke the Vienna Convention, or you could simply not invoke any law, just simply leave—impose capital controls, impose a bank holiday, redenominate outside of the EU treaties.  They wouldn’t really have a way to stop that.  We don’t think it would be in any way clean for Greece; it would be a horrible disaster. In past currency union breakups, they have been able to do it over the weekend or over a week.  You just stamp the old currency and use that.  Now, we are in an electronic age. It is questionable whether they could really do it over the weekend or over a week.  This is a country that can’t really collect taxes—can’t determine how many swimming pools people have—and the thought that it could really have a solid set of capital controls that would stop the euros from leaving is not very plausible either.  We don’t think that it would be in any way clean.  We think it would be a big mess for Greece and potentially quite frightening to everybody else, but particularly quite a big mess for some of the other countries as people witnessed what was happening in Greece. But we are distinguishing that from a situation where it stays within the euro area but either defaults or simply sort of defaults by pushing back the amount that it pays over time.  That is not what we mean by Greek exit. Does that make sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing information and explaining the different options for Greece to potentially leave the euro area.


Passage number 140.
 MR. BULLARD.  What is not what you mean by Greek exit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification on the meaning of "Greek exit."


Passage number 141.
 MR. BOWMAN.  Something where Greece stays within the euro area. It continues to use the euro, but it defaults on part of its debt to the public sector or the public sector simply forgives some of it over time or just keeps pushing back the payment so that they are effectively forgiving some of the time, but that is not what we mean by exit.  Those things can be messy, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing potential solutions for Greece to stay within the euro area and address its debt, without implying any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 142.
   MR. BULLARD.  Is that the baseline scenario, what you just described.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. BULLARD is simply asking for confirmation or clarification on whether the scenario described is the baseline scenario.


Passage number 143.
 MR. BOWMAN. You mean where it stays in the euro area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of what Mr. Bowman is asking about.


Passage number 144.
 MR. BULLARD.  Stays in the euro but really restructures a default in various ways—by delaying payment, let’s say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is discussing a hypothetical scenario where a country stays in the euro but restructures its default by delaying payment. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 145.
 MR. BOWMAN. That would depend on what the rest of the euro area does in response to that default.  If, while Greece is still running primary deficits, the euro area just cut off all payments, the banks would probably collapse anyway, right.  Greece could be facing a very severe recession even under those conditions.  It is matter of debate whether at that point it would be better off leaving the euro area and letting its currency depreciate a lot or trying to stay in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. The speaker is presenting two different possibilities - Greece possibly leaving the euro area and letting its currency depreciate, or trying to stay in. These are opposing views and options, creating disagreement.


Passage number 146.
 MR. BULLARD.  There is huge support for staying in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there is a significant amount of support for staying in, without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 147.
 MR. BOWMAN.  There is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. The statement by Mr. Bowman is a simple statement and does not show any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 148.
 MR. BULLARD.  And I think especially for the European Union.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 149.
 MR. KAMIN.  Just to be clear about our Tealbook baseline forecast, we are not assuming that Greece will stay in the euro area forever or even assuming that it stays in through the forecast period.  Our assumption, which is a little subtle, is that basically we do not expect Greece to leave the euro area within the next couple of months.  On the one hand, if it did leave the euro area that quickly, we think that could be enormously disruptive both within Greece and outside for all of the reasons that we’ve talked about. But for the reasons that you and David have just talked about, we don’t think it’s that plausible that they would, indeed, want to or be able to leave the euro area that quickly.  So the most likely chain of events that would lead to a Greek exit is one where the Greek government starts negotiating again with the European Union because the current terms of the bailout   package are viewed as too tight.  Greece wants a little bit more time to achieve the fiscal goals, maybe a little bit more money, a little bit less need to repay.  That set of negotiations could take weeks or months.  If negotiations break down for any number of reasons, at that point, there is some period of indeterminacy, perhaps followed by Greece missing a payment to the EU because it has to repay the European authorities starting with a big payment in August.  Then at some point maybe there is an actual default, and they are declared outside of compliance with the program.  Then, if deposit runs have not started already, they start in earnest, and the ECB decides it cannot provide any more cash to meet that run.  As things get worse, the Greek government freezes the banks, declares a banking holiday, and imposes capital controls.  Some number of months down the road, then it might say, “Geez, adopting the drachma and getting rid of the euro is probably our best option because we are practically at a barter economy already.” That is the chain of events that could lead to a Greek exit, but it is not something that we think will happen overnight.  If that does happen, we think that by the time Greece actually leaves, European policymakers probably will be ready for it, and it could happen without huge disruptions to the European and global financial system.  That is a scenario that is very broadly within the confines of our baseline, albeit at the most pessimistic end of it. If a year from now Greece were not in the euro area, that outcome, indeed, could be encompassed within our Tealbook baseline.  On the other hand, if it somehow decided to leave tomorrow or next week, that would not be encompassed in our baseline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides an explanation of the assumed timeline and events surrounding a potential Greek exit from the euro area.


Passage number 150.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I have President Fisher, Governor Raskin, and President Kocherlakota, and I would urge us to move on after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply suggesting to move on after listing the names of President Fisher, Governor Raskin, and President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 151.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To reflect, I was happy to see the international side lead the presentation, although the report was not very uplifting.  And, toinclude Michael’s presentation on credit conditions and financial stability was a welcome addition.  It is the first time we have really gone through it during this presentation and not separately.  I want to thank you for that.  Just three quick points on your risk asset values.  You talk about institutional investors having an appetite for corporate credit. In talking to CEOs that are running companies that are high-dividend yielders, I am hearing an increasing incidence of bond funds approaching them to capture their dividends.  Now, whether or not their legal charters allow it, whether they can hedge away the price risk—nonetheless there is a lot of exploratory activity.  I just wanted to add these conditions as something to watch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
Explanation: This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his satisfaction with the presentation and adding some additional points to consider.


Passage number 152.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Thank you" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 153.
 MR. FISHER.  With regard to the presentation on inflation projections, are the projections of crude oil prices in exhibit 8 just the futures curve as usual or is that a qualitative estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about the nature of the projections.


Passage number 154.
 MR. LEBOW.  We did not follow the futures curve exactly.  We make some adjustment to the futures curve based on our estimate of the implicit economic forecast among market participants.  If that differs from ours, for us to be internally consistent you would want to make some adjustment to the futures curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that adjustments were made to the futures curve based on the company's estimate of the implicit economic forecast among market participants, emphasizing the need for internal consistency.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
 MR. BOWMAN.  That’s correct.  We look at the staff forecast versus consensus, assuming that we’re right and they’re wrong.  If we are more pessimistic, then we would expect commodity prices to fall as financial market participants learned over time that they had been too optimistic; we also correct for our forecast of movements in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing the idea that they believe their own forecast is more accurate than the consensus forecast, suggesting a difference of opinion or disagreement.


Passage number 156.
 MR. FISHER.  Again, for what it is worth, these are just pixels in a broader picture of the people that I talk to, but it is in accordance to what I’m hearing from the Exxons and so on.  The Saudis are very pleased with the current price range, and of course, you have this enormous production surge here in the United States as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's viewpoint about the current state of affairs regarding oil prices and production levels in the United States and Saudi Arabia.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 157.
 MR. BOWMAN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The simple response "yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but without any context or further information, it is impossible to determine the specific nature of the disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 158.
 MR. FISHER.  The third point goes back to the international side.  What I am hearing from nonfinancial business operators is, of course, a concern about Europe because of all the uncertainty.  But I am also hearing increasing concern about China, and that goes to your second line of exhibit 3 of the charts.  And to go back to your expression, does this have legs. If you travel through the peripheral countries to China, Indonesia, all the way to Japan and Korea, or you visit with people like Lee Kuan Yew, in Singapore, there is a deep concern over China right now, much deeper than seems to be reflected in the numbers.  And I am just wondering— because we have tended to be a little bit more negative in the Tealbook, which is good because you have been right.  We know that there is a knock-on effect from Europe.  We can see a diminution in trans-Pac cargo flows from air or sea.  How bad do you think things are in China. Are they getting dramatically worse, or is it something we just need to monitor carefully.  What I am worried about is that Europe is a much-discussed risk factor, but I want to make sure we are not taking our eye off the Chinese ball, which seems to be increasingly complicated and more difficult.  So any comments on China.  And I know that the Chairman wants to pick up the pace here, but if you could do that quickly, thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. One person is expressing concern about China, while the other person is questioning the extent of the issue and whether enough attention is being given to it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
 MR. BOWMAN.  Well, as we discussed, we believe that the risk of a hard landing has increased in China.  We did want to give ample room to China in my presentation, and the April and May data were unquestionably weaker than we had expected and, I think, than markets expected. And the real estate sector has been the source of potential risk for some time, and it is the source of concern.  Indicators, like the one I showed on the amount of unsold inventory, are a   worry, and there have been reports for a long time that real estate developers could be highly overexposed, which would then feed back to the banking system and feed into the nonperforming loans.  The Chinese authorities, to some extent, have attempted to engineer a housing slowdown, so the price declines that we have seen so far have been gradual and largely seem to have been desired on the part of the government.  Right now we don’t see a severe contraction in real estate, but we are not trying to downplay the potential risks.  On the other side, though, we believe that the Chinese authorities have ample room to increase monetary or fiscal policy stimulus if there does appear to be a sharp slowing in economic growth.  In particular, in a year in which a political transition is going to take place, they have a lot of incentives not to see a sharp slowdown in economic growth. So we see slowing as a risk.  We don’t think a sharp contraction is under way right now, and we do have some faith that there is ample room for policy stimulus.  It is not our baseline, but we do acknowledge that the risk has increased.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is a risk of a hard landing in China and expresses concern about the real estate sector. However, they also mention that the Chinese authorities have ample room to increase monetary or fiscal policy stimulus to prevent a sharp slowdown in economic growth. So, there is a divergence of opinions on the severity of the potential contraction and the effectiveness of policy stimulus.


Passage number 160.
 MR. KAMIN.  And, in fact, if we did not think it was an important risk, we would not have put it as an alternative scenario in the Tealbook, which we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and expressing their belief about the importance of a certain risk.


Passage number 161.
 MR. FISHER.  The only other suggestion I have is next time, Mike, when you make a presentation just conclude with, “Have a nice day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 162.
”  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  On that note, Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not show contention or disagreement. It appears to be a lighthearted moment with laughter.


Passage number 163.
 MS. RASKIN. Back to the fiscal cliff.  Is the question of the debt ceiling either built into the baseline or into the alternative simulation. It wasn’t clear to me what the Tealbook assumes about what I would imagine would be the confidence-deflating effects of a prolonged debt ceiling debate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about a specific aspect of the fiscal cliff and the baseline or alternative simulation's assumptions regarding the debt ceiling debate.


Passage number 164.
 MR. LEBOW.  Well, even in the baseline we do have some confidence effect built in associated with the fact that our baseline fiscal assumptions are consistent with there being some delays and some degree of brinksmanship, and so on.  So we did build in some sentiment effect for that around the turn of the year, but we are not assuming any particular effect on consumer confidence from the debt ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that there is a confidence effect built into the fiscal assumptions, but no specific assumption about the effect on consumer confidence from the debt ceiling.


Passage number 165.
 MR. WILCOX.  The fiscal situation could be even worse.  We have assumed that somewhere along the line, with all of the legislative vehicles that are going to have to move through the Congress, that there will be an increase in the debt ceiling along with appropriations or some other vehicle that will avert default on the U.S. debt.  Even in our fiscal cliff scenario, we assume that the debt gets taken care of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an assumption or expectation about the fiscal situation and actions that are likely to be taken.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Kocherlakota without any additional information or context, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 167.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will forgo the pleasures of getting involved in the discussion between President Evans and President Lacker until later. I read through chart 12 and listened to the, as usual, excellent financial stability report with an eye to the following question.  I think you amply describe the risks that are emerging in Europe, and that we should be concerned about them.  I’m puzzled by why we don’t see more of an imprint of those risks in U.S. asset markets.  I look at just one picture out of very many things that we look at, the chart in the upper right in exhibit 12 showing the equity options-implied cost of insurance—these are exactly the kind of things I like to look at—and I do not see a big change since January in that at all. If I look at VIX, I don’t know what it is today, but yesterday it was basically the same as in January.  I wonder what your thoughts are on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing puzzlement and seeking the thoughts of others on the lack of impact of European risks on U.S. asset markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 168.
 MR. PALUMBO. It is puzzling actually.  Given the proximity of these tail events especially, I would have thought we’d see a much more elevated VIX.  When we were puttingthis together last week, the VIX was hovering in the mid-20s.  That seemed low but not outside the realm, and then subsequently the VIX moved down to 18 against nothing that I could see or even hear—there wasn’t even chatter about solace over the Greek election. It wasn’t as if there was delusion in the reports.  They seemed to be negative and dire and focused on the adverse scenarios, but not showing up in the VIX.  All I can say is it’s not the first time. The VIX can— as you made clear in your speech two weeks ago—provide good information that we try to cull to get color on what investors are thinking in the tails.  But the VIX is not a terrific forecaster of what’s going to happen.  In the summer of 2008 there were plenty of days when the VIX was trading in the 18s, more days when it was trading in the 18s than in the 30s.   I think it is just one of those things where, as Brian put it, we view financial markets as in a fragile state. When you look at the liquidity reports that you are hearing about short-term funding markets, those stresses seem to be getting a little worse day by day by day, even as measures like the VIX and the overall stock price index are actually reversing course.  So I do think there is an uncomfortable tension here, and at this point, I don’t really take much solace from those latest moves.  Right now it’s in the puzzle bucket as opposed to having relieved some tension, but we will just have to keep an eye on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses puzzlement and disagreement with the behavior of the VIX (volatility index) in relation to recent events and market conditions. They find it puzzling that the VIX did not increase despite negative and dire reports, and they mention previous instances where the VIX did not accurately predict market outcomes. This shows a disagreement or contention with the usefulness and reliability of the VIX as a forecasting tool.


Passage number 169.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Thank you for your presentation.  Nellie, did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and asking Nellie if she has a comment.


Passage number 170.
 MS. LIANG.  I just wanted to add one point to that.  One of the issues we have raised was the current level of downside risk versus, say, last October.  And as we pointed out, it seems as if before the LTROs or the ECB was willing to demonstrate that they were willing to take action, there was a little more uncertainty in the markets.  However, these options prices were just volatile, and, as you can see there, there was both upside risk and downside risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the level of downside risk compared to the previous October and the uncertainty and volatility in the options market.


Passage number 171.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only includes a partial statement from Mr. Kocherlakota, so we cannot infer any disagreement or contention from this limited information.


Passage number 172.
 MS. LIANG.  So as Michael was saying, it is hard to read all of this from the VIX.  But if you just think about the overall level, once the ECB demonstrated it was willing to take some steps, like the LTROs, that may have been the reason for some of what seems to be a little bit less anxiety in the U.S. financial markets.  The other piece I might mention is the banking system.  I think the CCAR might get some credit for taking out anxiety about the banks themselves. It is not the answer to everything, but it did work through a European scenario.  At least for credit losses it appears they’ve got sufficient capital to withstand what looks like a pretty bad recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing different factors that may have contributed to a decrease in anxiety in the U.S. financial markets.


Passage number 173.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Those are very helpful interpretations.  I had mentioned the VIX, but if you go through the entire book it is hard to pinpoint big changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the interpretations mentioned are helpful and agrees with them.


Passage number 174.
 MS. LIANG.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 175.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But I think those are very helpful interpretations.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of gratitude and agreement, with no apparent contention or disagreement.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  On this general topic we have an item now, which is called an opportunity to talk about financial stability issues, either to continue the discussion or to raise issues that didn’t come up in discussion.  And I have President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply introduces a topic for discussion and mentions President Rosengren.


Passage number 177.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question emanates from exhibit 10 on the 5-year CDS with a list of firms.  I know I talked a little bit about this last time, but looking at the broker–dealer CDS from the largest banks, particularly Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, if I were asked what stress scenario that I would do if I were a risk manager at a large bank, it would be a Greek exit that’s not as managed as Steve highlighted, combined with a run on Morgan Stanley whose credit default swaps are quite elevated at this time.  In addition, they are likely to be downgraded.  We do not know by how much, and it might be coincident withproblems in Greece and Spain.  So you can easily tell a story where you start having a very serious disruption in wholesale credit that is very focused particularly on one very large institution.  The questions I have for you are:  How would you view the likelihood of that kind of scenario.  How far out in the tail do you view it. And if it were to occur, can the primary dealer credit facility be focused.  You could offer it to everybody, but if only Morgan Stanley showed up, would that be a problem for how we have been instructed to do 13(3) type of facilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 178.
 MS. LIANG. Picking up where David and Steve were in terms of our Tealbook forecast, and in some sense probably where the central tendency of your forecast is, the exit you are raising is a disorderly exit, not an exit that might be several months down the road and might have some backstops and might involve Spain and Italy getting some support from some programs.  This one is clearly, in our view, less likely—I almost hesitate to say that. It is a more disruptive one, and one we are considering not within the Tealbook forecast. We have an internal staff working group that is considering a number of alternative scenarios so that we can think through where the stresses are—the weak points, the operational choke points, so to speak—if you had something disorderly and you started to get runs on certain institutions.  To get a sense of what the disruption to the system could be, we are working through various scenarios to help identify which institutions may be able to handle a re-denomination quickly and smoothly, which ones cannot, and what kinds of contingencies they are planning for.  The idea would be to identify actions we could take now to mitigate the bad consequences if they were unexpected. That work is in early, early stages. These are tough scenarios, and we haven’t thought through all of the consequences.  You have mentioned concerns about broker–dealers in the past, and they obviously do not have direct access to the discount window; 23A is a little bit stricter than it used to be pre-Dodd–Frank, and as you just mentioned the 13(3) authorities are somewhat more limited.  Scott would have to address the issue you raise that if only one came, would that meet our standard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly discusses the possibility of a disorderly exit and the preparations being made to handle the potential consequences.


Passage number 179.
 MR. ALVAREZ.  I appreciate the opportunity to talk at the FOMC meeting.  It doesn’t happen very often for lawyers.  [Laughter] The 13(3) authority is really much stricter now, and the difficulty we have is that while the facility has to be broad based in its eligibility, it cannot be for the purpose of aiding a single failing firm.  We can certainly set up a PDCF in a way that is broad based in its eligibility, but I think folks will be looking at the participation rate and the circumstances around setting up the facility in deciding whether or not it really is for the purpose of aiding a particular firm. I think that the risk is less a legal risk and more a political risk.  There is no requirement that more than one person actually access it, but clearly the Congress would be looking at how broad based the access is and how many people come to the facility. Indeed, the PDCF when we set it up the first time around had periods of time when only one firm went to the facility, though over a period of about nine months virtually all the firms used the facility.  How it is viewed is going to depend a lot on the facts and circumstances, and whether the scenario was bad enough that it is going to attract more than just one firm’s attention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Alvarez explaining the difficulty in setting up a broad-based facility without appearing to aid a single failing firm.


Passage number 180.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Just a follow-up; the other way you can address that is to price the facility so lots of people want to use it.  Even if it primarily is focused on a run at one firm, if it is very attractively priced, presumably lots of firms might show up, and it might offset some of the stigma, in some sense somewhat like the TAF was priced attractively enough that even people that didn’t necessarily need it would take advantage of it.  If you priced it very attractively so more people showed up, would that address that concern.  How does that factor into the decision of whether or not it is broad based.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a potential solution to address a concern.


Passage number 181.
MR. ALVAREZ.  Clearly, we will design it in a way so that it is broad based in its eligibility so that a group would be able to come—all the primary dealers, for example—and we think that is a broad enough group.  The point is that there will be a lot more political scrutiny about the facilities immediately upon their activation—something that we experienced somewhat in 2008, but I think we will experience more this time around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 183.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 184.
 MR. FISHER.  By the way, Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman Dudley, at a Conference of Presidents meeting a long, long time ago when we first embarked on it, said, “We will make money off these.”  No one believed him.  Now he has been proven right.  Thank you. I want to come back very quickly to U.S. asset valuations on junk bonds because, as you showed in your charts, the healthy issuance in the early part of the year has dried up, and the spreads have widened.  I’ve been worried about this, although I comfort myself in the fact that as a result of our policy, one could argue that if you’re high quality or just an A-rated investment credit, you can borrow five-year money at an all-in cost of around 1½ percent or seven-year money around 2 percent—that’s pretty darn attractive.  Should we worry about this widening in spreads. Is it signaling something, or is it just that basically investment grade credits have been improving their balance sheets and are much more attractive to finance. I think we’re outside of the historical norm in terms of the width of that spread, and I’m just wondering what signals you’re picking up from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 185.
 MR. PALUMBO. One thing about the issuance, first.  Because a lot of this gross issuance has been for retiring existing debt, the net increase in debt almost throughout the credit spectrum has been much smaller.  Even in February and March when the high yield bonds were being issued at these strong paces, a lot of that was for retiring existing debt.  The gross numbers here are trying to give us a sense of investor appetite as much as for companies adding debt to their balance sheets—they grossly overstate how much debt is being added to the balance sheet.  In fact, I believe that the overall positions of net corporations, across size spectra and across credit ratings, are also below their historical norms.  And as you probably know, the default rates on the stock of junk bonds are actually quite moderate, especially given the state of macroeconomic performance.  The way I would think about the spreads is that there is a less-than-usual overall appetite for reaching down in the credit spectrum and that is evident in the price dimension.  Even so, pricing is clearly not so prohibitive, especially given the levels of yields; these are spreads relative to the lowest Treasury yields that we have ever seen.  I think it is conducive to fundraising in a way that is lowering debt burdens for most firms that are in the market, while satisfying some investor portfolios. In terms of the reach for yield, what we worry about are behaviors that are going outside the instruments and the practices that the money managers really have experience with managing.  The things we’re looking out for are slippages in covenants, which we haven’t seen very much to date or reaching across what seem to be securities and positions that are not in the manager’s own experience.  That’s the kind of thing that we haven’t seen too much of now, but we definitely hear about. Our sense is that with many institutional investors under tremendous  pressure to make nominal returns, there’s going to be a natural tendency for some of them to go beyond what they really have the capability to manage.  That’s what we’re trying to monitor in the aggregate.  We haven’t gotten to a stage that has us tremendously concerned, but we have to ask the questions and try to stay ahead of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing the speaker's analysis and perspective on investor appetite for debt, default rates, pricing, and potential risks in the market.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we break for coffee and come back in 20 minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests taking a break and returning after 20 minutes.


Passage number 187.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Welcome back.  We’re ready for our economic go-round, and we’ll start with President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply indicating that they are starting a discussion on economic matters, beginning with President Lacker. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states gratitude from someone named President Rosengren.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since our previous meeting, there has been a notable change in the incoming data.  Concerns about a global slowdown and escalating European problems have caused Treasury rates here and in other safe havens to fall, oil prices to decline, and consumer and business confidence measures to retrace earlier gains. These trends are also reflected in my forecast, which envisions less business fixed investment and employment than I had in my April forecast.  Business fixed investment was already weakening before European problems heated up, and my contacts with businesses around the District indicate no desire to increase investment or hire more workers until the uncertainty in the outlook is reduced.  Because of concerns among some firms that have significant trade exposure to Europe and others who will be affected by reductions in federal research and military spending, many of my contacts are more focused on possible retrenchment than possible expansion.  I now forecast the unemployment rate to remain at or above 8 percent through 2013 and the total and core PCE inflation rates to remain below 2 percent.  These outcomes are achieved conditional on assumption of appropriate monetary policy that both extends Operation Twist and engages in additional purchases of mortgage-backed securities. However, even this gloomy forecast is conditioned on Europe avoiding a severe outcome that would undoubtedly spill over to the United States.  This assumption is consistent with enlightened self-interest in Europe and seems consistent with the results from the recent Greek election.  Nonetheless, this assumption is becoming harder to maintain.  In discussions with Europeans since our previous meeting, I have been struck by the hardening of their positions and the view that it was not whether but when Greece would not be able to satisfy the conditions for continued aid.  This is in sharp contrast to views being expressed by Europeans last year.  Despite their increasing resignation about Greece’s likely failure, few Europeans seemed confident that effective firewalls are being built. In safe havens around the world, longer-term interest rates have fallen below the inflation target set by the respective central banks. In the United States, the 10-year Treasury rate declined rapidly as Greek and Spanish problems escalated. For investors to purchase 10-yearTreasury securities well below our inflation target implies either significant skepticism that we will be hitting our inflation target or the expectation of a protracted period of a negative real policy rate, or both.  These assessments are, no doubt, motivated by financial market participants’ assessments of the probability and possible severity of unfolding European problems. Similarly, wages and compensation continue to surprise on the downside, highlighting that labor costs are likely to continue to be very well contained.  Firms are describing being inundated with qualified applicants, causing them to lower the entry-level wages they are offering.  Discussions with officials at colleges and universities in New England continue to highlight the very challenging hiring environment for new graduates.  Many new graduates are forced to accept underemployment to avoid unemployment. The domestic economy is not growing fast enough.  With global pressures likely to continue to impede growth, with increasing signs that we may significantly undershoot our inflation target, and with fiscal restraint likely to increase, we should provide more monetary support for the economy, a topic for discussion tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their forecast and suggesting that more monetary support is needed for the economy. This implies that there is a disagreement with the current level of monetary support being provided.


Passage number 190.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude to President Lockhart.


Passage number 191.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It’s my sense that this is an awkward juncture as regards evaluating the direction of the economy for policy purposes.  Even with a very modest number for economic growth in the first quarter, I would argue that a data-grounded forecast just a few weeks ago was decidedly more positive than now.  The situation seems to have changed noticeably in a short period of time.  This is reflected in the Tealbook and, to a lesser extent, in my outlook.  The reason I think it’s an awkward moment is it is still early to draw conclusions about the persistence or temporary nature of the developments indicated in theweaker data.  In our recent discussions with directors and business contacts in my District, we probed for indications of slowdown, deteriorating outlook, change of business plans, and changing consumer behavior.  The results of these conversations suggest some amount of disconnect between how the economy feels on the ground and what the data indicate.  Reports from our business contacts remain mostly positive and suggestive of an economy that is still improving, if gradually.  There was broad acknowledgement of significant downside risks, but I detected no fundamental shifts in the consensus outlook. Consumer spending remains a mixed picture.  Auto sales and tourism-related spending remain strong.  Retail spending more generally is holding up but was characterized by most retailers as modestly positive.  A large restaurant management company reported that patronage had softened a bit, except for the highest-end format where receipts remained strong. A large national discount retailer targeting lower-income households reported strong sales reflecting their value proposition.  This firm intends to open a number of new stores.  My sense is that the mindset of consumers, if one can generalize, is they continue to spend with caution and purpose, increasing their credit load only when necessary to fulfill basic needs. Turning to business spending, the majority of respondents to our survey on capital expenditure plans signaled plans for modest increases over the next 6 to 12 months.  Most said their plans were based on higher sales expectations or the need to upgrade IT equipment.  Those not planning to increase spending cited greater uncertainty as the basis of their cautious approach to capital spending.  Continuing caution was also reflected in our contacts’ responses to questions about hiring plans.  A large national home improvement retailer said that while it is forecasting increasing sales, it does not plan to add to its workforce at all for the next three years.As regards inflation expectations, our June business inflation expectations survey shows a small decline in unit cost assumptions for the year ahead.  The slight moderation in cost expectations of businesses seems to be tied to the recent drop in commodity prices.  Commodity users talked about using this development as an opportunity to improve margins that were squeezed last year. Overall, firms continue to report modest gains in sales and orders, with little change in inflation sentiment.  The data suggest more weakness than we heard from contacts in my District. Turning to my assessment of the national economic outlook and my forecast for this meeting, I marked down my economic growth forecast in reaction to three developments:  softer-than-expected incoming data, a weaker global growth outlook, and uncertainty about the fiscal situation that won’t likely be resolved for several months.  The broad contours of my forecast resemble the Tealbook, but I’m not yet ready to assume as much deterioration given the ambiguity of current circumstances and the more-positive tone in the feedback from contacts. I have not yet seen enough evidence to cause me to make a major shift in my growth forecast, particularly for 2013 and 2014.  I’ve adjusted upward my outlook for unemployment, but again, not as much as projected in the June Tealbook, and I don’t see much reason yet to make a material change in my inflation outlook, which is close to the Committee’s target of 2 percent over the forecast horizon.  At this juncture I’m drawing a clear distinction between my outlook projections and my assessment of risks.  I think this is a fair characterization of the approach being taken by the business community as they look to the second half.  The risks are potentially significant, even huge, but I have not factored the most severe speculative downsides into my baseline outlook.  I don’t think we have enough clarity to make wholesale changes to the   outlook.  Nonetheless, the balance of risks for both GDP growth and inflation has shifted to the downside in my view.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own assessment and outlook for the economy, acknowledging some uncertainty and potential risks, but not expressing disagreement with any other viewpoints or perspectives.


Passage number 192.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Plosser" does not express any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply an expression of gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 193.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming information suggests that the pace of the economic recovery in both the Third District and the nation has moderated over the intermeeting period.  As a result, I have revised down my near-term forecast since April and now project economic growth to be about ½ percentage point slower than in my previous forecast. Importantly, and unlike the Tealbook, which marks down growth rates for the next two years because of the recent data, my medium-term forecast for 2013 and 2014 has not changed.  I continue to expect GDP growth to be close to 3 percent for 2013 and 2014, and that is just slightly above my longer-term trend projection of 2½ percent. While the most recent employment data were weaker than we wanted, weather-related factors probably overstate that weakness, and labor market conditions continue to improve, albeit slowly.  Employment growth has softened, but remains positive.  I would remind us that month-to-month changes in nonfarm employment are quite volatile, and revisions can be quite large.  One-step-ahead forecast errors for changes in nonfarm employment typically have standard errors of well over 100,000 jobs.  With that in mind and the magnitude of the revisions that can occur, which the BLS puts at plus or minus 100,000, we should be cautious about relying too heavily on the most recent data as we formulate policy.  Job growth in the Third District has been running somewhat below that of the nation, but that’s typical. Interesting, the pattern across our states has changed rather dramatically.  Employment growth in Pennsylvania has slowed somewhat this year, while New Jersey’s has picked up considerably. I continue to  project that job growth will be sufficient to gradually reduce unemployment by about another 2 percentage points by the end of 2014. As to inflation, I had expected the run-up in inflation due to higher oil prices early this year to abate, and indeed it has.  Energy prices have come down, and will probably stabilize.  So I have had to change my forecast for inflation very little.  I expect inflation to run near our target of 2 percent over the next three years. But this does assume a somewhat steeper funds path than is incorporated in the Tealbook or suggested by our current forward guidance.  I continue to be somewhat uncomfortable with the idea that our accommodative policy will have little or no consequences for inflation for the next several years, as it does in the Tealbook baseline. As I mentioned, I’m reading the recent weaker-than-expected data as having less of an implication for the medium-term outlook than the Tealbook does.  I do admit that the confidence bands around my forecast have widened since April.  This reflects the recent data and the continuing unsettling news from Europe as governments try to deal with their fiscal and banking crisis.  As we’ve been talking about, the high level of uncertainty about how the European situation will play out and its likely effect on the U.S. economy, as well as the uncertainty about how we will handle our own fiscal issues looming at year end, are palpable drags on the recovery in the near term. Like President Lacker, I believe the direct trade effects of the slowdown in Europe are likely to be small for the United States, but it’s the financial risks that loom large. The businesses are reading newspapers every day about the impending implosion of Europe and about our own fiscal cliff.  Can we really expect them to want to increase hiring and investment with that type of uncertainty looming.  Do we think that another few basis points on longer-term rates will suddenly entice businesses and consumers to put aside these concerns and start to spend and invest.  I doubt it, but these near-term downside risks also suggest some upside risks  over the medium term if the global fiscal issues are handled responsibly.  Additionally, the drop in oil prices and higher house prices also provide some upside risk. Recent anecdotal information from our business contacts and the data that we’ve received since April indicate continuing moderate growth in the Third District, but uncertainty around that trajectory has increased.  The most troubling piece of data comes from our manufacturing sector.  Manufacturing has been one of the bright spots in the economy over the past couple of quarters, but in May the general activity index of our Business Outlook Survey turned negative, and preliminary data suggest it will remain negative in the June results.  This is obviously disappointing.  Many respondents commented on the increased uncertainty, making it difficult for them or their customers to make hiring and investment decisions.  The decline in oil prices has hurt some of our manufacturers who service the oil drilling industry.  Obviously we will be keeping our eye on this, but I note that last August and September we had two negative readings, even more negative than the ones we have now, and activity came back fairly well.  So we’re hoping for better things as the year goes on.  A brighter note in our survey is that indexes of future activity of the manufacturers remain positive and look reasonably good.  Thus, our manufacturing firms are expecting this to be a temporary lull rather than an out-and-out recession, and they believe that activity will strengthen over the next six months. Also encouraging is that our retail contacts remain positive and that the outlook for nonresidential and residential construction in our District has improved. All in all, while my near-term outlook has dimmed somewhat since April, this is mainly because of the effects of uncertainty over the European situation and our own fiscal problems, not to mention the impending election.  I am not convinced that a change in monetary policy can  do much to address this uncertainty, but I’ll speak more to that in our next go-round.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is discussing his near-term outlook and projections for economic growth and inflation. He acknowledges that there are uncertainties and risks, particularly related to the European situation and the fiscal issues, but he does not express any disagreement or contention with any other parties.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 195.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Anecdotal information from the Eighth Federal Reserve District economy suggests a continued sluggish pace of economic growth.  Agriculture continues to be an area where prospects seem bright.  Improvement in housing markets, quite substantial in some areas, has given rise to a cautious optimism. Retailers continue to expect improvement during 2012.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing anecdotal information about the state of the economy in different sectors, without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Fisher.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You’re welcome.  [Laughter] President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple response followed by laughter.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Evans" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Evans.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 200.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President George.


Passage number 201.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since the previous meeting, the 10th District economy has continued to expand at a moderate pace.  Consumer spending gains were solid in the retail and tourism sectors, and the beginning stage of recovery for the housing market appears to be taking shape.  Energy activity continues to provide a boost to the District economy, even as an oversupply of natural gas led to declines in natural gas drilling.  Tenth District employment growth over the past two months has slowed relative to the solid pace of growth in the first quarter, although the manufacturing sector has continued to expand at a slightly faster pace in May, and contacts were more optimistic about future levels of activity.  Expectations for future production and shipments were at their highest level since February 2011, just before theJapanese tsunami and supply chain disruptions that slowed manufacturing activity last year.  The value of agricultural exports remained at historically high levels, and recent sales for the next marketing year suggested that agricultural exports would continue to be strong through this year and 2013.  Finally, regarding housing market conditions, the CEO of a national realty firm who serves on our Denver Branch Board of Directors reported much stronger signs of a national recovery for the housing market, noting increased homebuying activity by both households and investors.  According to this CEO, the increased presence of investors suggests that they view the market as having hit bottom and beginning the process of recovery. Turning to the national outlook, recent data releases indicate that the pace of expansion has slowed.  Some of the slowing may be payback from increased activity in warm winter months, but rising concerns about Europe and evidence of slower economic growth worldwide suggest that broader factors are contributing additional headwinds to growth.  As a result, I have revised down my forecast and now expect a more moderate pace of GDP growth in the near term that slowly builds over time.  Several factors, as others have noted, continue to pose downside risk to my outlook.  Obviously, the uncertainty surrounding Europe and possible spillovers to the global economy remain a key risk, as well as our own fiscal issues, which continue to be a significant source of uncertainty and potential risk.  Turning to inflation, I expect that a gradually improving economy and stable inflation expectations will keep core inflation near 2 percent over the forecast horizon.  Over the medium term, though, a highly accommodative monetary policy and large, long-run fiscal imbalances pose upside risks to inflation. In comparison with my April SEP, I have revised down my forecast for GDP growth by about ¼ percentage point in 2012 and 2013, and my path for the unemployment rate was raised by ¼ percentage point. Based on research from my staff, I have also lowered my estimate oflonger-run real GDP growth from 2½ percent to 2¼ percent, reflecting lower expectations of trend growth for both the labor force and labor productivity.  In comparison with Tealbook, I expect that growth will produce a gradual reduction in the unemployment rate, whereas Tealbook expects little change in the unemployment rate over the forecast horizon. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an update on the economic conditions in the 10th District and offering their own analysis and forecast. There is no mention of other perspectives or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" and the mention of President Williams do not express any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 203.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 204.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The term "Vice Chairman" does not hint at any disagreement or contention. It simply refers to a position of authority or leadership within an organization.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 205.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I certainly agree with others that the forward momentum of the economy has slowed.  It seems that the earlier conundrum of relatively rapid job creation and a sizable decline in the unemployment rate versus more sluggish real GDP growth is being resolved by job growth slowing down and the unemployment rate flattening out rather than by GDP growth picking up.  But I also think that taking the most recent figures completely at face value may be a mistake because, as I have noted at the past two FOMC meetings, unusually mild winter weather may have pulled activity forward, so that now we are seeing some payback. If this is indeed the case, then activity would look artificially weak during the payback period.  Moreover, I think that there is some scope for a pickup in consumer spending, given that we have had a sharp drop in gasoline prices.  That will be providing a temporary boost to real disposable income, which until very recently had been quite anemic.  Nonetheless, I am still very worried about the outlook for economic growth and the lack of progress we have been making toward our objective on the employment side of our dual mandate for several reasons:  One is what I see in terms of the economic data.  Another is the fiscal cliff that President Lacker and others have commented on.  In our discussion with business people, they really do say that the uncertainty about how the fiscal cliff is going to be resolved is slowing growth now in terms of hiring and investing, irrespective of whether the fiscal cliff gets resolved in a good way or a bad way.  I think, if anything, that is going to intensify over the next six months.  In addition, I am obviously very concerned that the downside risks to economic growth have increased significantly.  People do see that, and I think that has an independent effect on household and business confidence. On the inflation side, I think we are likely to fall short of our 2 percent objective.  Not only is headline inflation falling quickly now because of the drop in oil and gasoline prices, but there is also little inflation pressure elsewhere in the system, notwithstanding some recent firmer readings on core inflation.  For example, many commodity prices have fallen recently—it is not just oil and gasoline prices.  Labor compensation cost trends remain unusually muted.  If you put in a 1½ percent productivity trend, unit labor costs are roughly running about ½ percent a year. And the dollar’s recent strength should be another factor limiting import price inflation. In terms of downside risk, given what I said before, it is no surprise that I view Europe as the most significant one by far.  And I cannot overemphasize how dangerous the situation is.  I actually think that the Tealbook might be optimistic about how bad the effect on the U.S. would be if Europe broke up in a particularly messy way. If the situation in Europe goes the wrong way, we could see capital controls, ring fencing, and a total breakdown of financial market functioning.  And if that were to happen, the repercussions on us would be severe.  I think we understate the number of the different channels by which we would be affected.  It would affect our imports, the perceived health of our financial institutions, the state of financial conditions, general household and business confidence, market functioning, and possibly the credit intermediation process. I am a little skeptical that any model really captures all of those effects.  Obviously, we need to get ready for this as best as we can, and that means contingency planning—and that is very much under way—to deal with worst case scenarios.  The other thing we need to do with respect to Europe is think through now, if things go badly, how would we escalate on the policy front. There are really two elements of policy that we need to think about.  One is the monetary policy accommodation, supporting the macroeconomy, but two is how we would intervene to support financial market functioning.  I think we need to get that worked out in our minds today, so that if things go badly, we can respond in a timely way.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the outlook for economic growth, the lack of progress on employment, and the potential risks from the fiscal cliff and the situation in Europe. They also express skepticism about the Tealbook's assessment of the impact of Europe's situation on the US economy.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple expression of gratitude and a sign-off from the speaker. There is no contention or disagreement implied.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply express gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 208.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Compared with my April submission, my forecast is significantly downgraded, but unlike others I’m not going to identify my number in the hopes that my downshift will be blamed on one of the two new Governors.  [Laughter] I really tried hard to find something to challenge in the Tealbook baseline forecast.  I still believe there is pent-up demand for autos, but the baseline already includes a steady increase in auto sales.  And while the bottoming in house prices that I’ve been looking for seems increasingly more likely, this, too, is already incorporated into the baseline.  As always, I looked at the faster recovery scenario, but it was just too big a leap for even my optimistic nature, although I will say that it does still offer a glimpse of the strength that could show through if fiscal issues here and abroad could finally and miraculously be resolved.  The growth rate that I’m left with in my forecast is disappointing for sure, but given that I am still a glass-half-full kind of gal, I think it does indicate that there’s some growing sturdiness in the recovery of the household and business sectors that even this level of growth can be expected in the face of increasingly weak assumptions about the government and external sectors. Let me turn now to the current condition of banking and credit.  With the exception of mortgages, home equity, and some remaining workouts of primarily construction and land development CRE, credit quality metrics have returned to normal or even better than normal.  Using the flow of funds data to compare the recovery of credit volumes in this cycle with those observed in other recoveries reveals a number of interesting patterns. Consumer credit seems to be recovering in a way that’s not dissimilar to other recoveries, but I’m not sure how to adjust for the fact that most of the growth in consumer credit is really federally funded student loans.  Growth in nonfinancial business credit has been lagging other cycles until the recent pickup in C&I lending seems to have moved it back to nearly the range of the other cycles.  Residential mortgage volumes are starkly below the levels experienced in any other downturn, but are remarkably similar to the pattern faced by commercial mortgages in both this recovery and the one following the savings and loan crisis.  Certainly you would expect lending volumes to drop when the prices of available collateral drop sharply, but given that real estate price declines in 1991 were not nearly as sharp, I do think it has to do with the level of losses in that category of lending and the role of that lending category in widespread institution failure.  Credit standards remain quite tight for all types of credit, but it seems to be primarily due to an aversion to taking on credit risk rather than liquidity or capital constraints in the banks.  Indeed, by every measure, capital levels are quite high, and in the wake of continued deposit inflows, banks have steadily reduced deposit rates and reliance on wholesale deposit and nondeposit funding, which indicates to me that banks actually have access to more liquidity than they can deploy in acceptable lending.  Within the boundaries of acceptable credit quality, competition for new loans is reportedly quite fierce, and most bankers admit that what loan growth they are getting comes at the expense of other lenders.  These data offer little evidence of higher-than-expected loan volumes as a result of our actions, but the benefits of refinancing longer-term debt at low rates will be realized by households and businesses over quite a long time, and low long-term rates have probably provided support for real estate prices and are probably responsible for the stabilization of demand. With respect to bank profitability, interest margins have been trending down for some time now and are at historical lows.  With loan demand weak and available securities investments unappealing, bankers continue to lower their cost of funds.  Noninterest income is lower, as a result of regulatory changes that affected overdraft and debit interchange income. Indeed, if it were not for strong income from mortgage loan origination and servicing, the income picture would be even bleaker.  Loss reserves are still adding to income, but that source is drying up quickly.  Net income is low compared with historic rates and certainly insufficient to earn acceptable returns on high levels of capital.  So investors are losing interest in the banking industry.  They’re no longer scared off by worries about credit problems.  Reportedly, they don’t even ask about credit quality anymore in investor conferences.  Investors are looking for companies that can find new levers to pull—to cut expenses, exit businesses, and refocus  strategy.  I look for banks to do a lot of that going forward.  Right now, there is a lot of capacity to lend if high-quality demand rears its head, but I expect the cost of carrying that capacity will become increasingly problematic if loan demand remains persistently weak.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a report of the author's forecast and analysis.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses thanks to Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only consists of a thank-you statement toward Governor Stein.


Passage number 212.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, if I could just take a moment, I’d like to say how happy and honored I am to be joining this group, and I look forward to working with all of you. In terms of the outlook, the broad narrative that strikes me is one where, on the one hand, there are signs—not overwhelmingly strong, but nevertheless signs—of the private sector making meaningful progress in moving past some of the underlying fundamental problems that got us into this mess in the first place.  Banks are stronger; credit supply conditions are not improving across the board, but I would say, on balance, they’re improving; and even household balance sheets seem to be strengthening.  On this last point, because the household balance sheet drag on consumption has really been such a central part of the story, I found the data that Michael Palumbo mentioned particularly interesting.  A very related piece that I saw indicated that not only are auto sales strengthening, but in the first quarter of 2012, they were strengthening particularly among the groups with the worst credit ratings, in the highest leveraged counties, that sort of thing.  So, it’s one quarter, and you wouldn’t want to over-read it, but it feels as though there’s a little something going on that’s potentially positive in the private sector.   Now of course, as everybody has observed, weighing very heavily against all of this are both the fiscal headwinds that have been mentioned and the enormous uncertainty associated with the situation in Europe.  This uncertainty made it very hard to think about a modal outlook, and, presumably, in many ways makes the modal outlook less relevant from a decisionmaking perspective when one wants to think about the downside.  Nevertheless, I’ll try to just venture a couple of observations.  First, in the near term—I’m thinking of, through the rest of this year— the expected degree of drag created by Europe seems to me as though it’s reasonably well captured by the Tealbook, and I’m in accord with the Tealbook.  As I understand it, this drag is coming importantly through the appreciation of the dollar and the decline of the stock market.  So I would say I’m pretty much on line with the Tealbook there.  Second, over the medium run—that is to say, 2013–14—not a large difference, but I would say—again, it’s very important to qualify by saying “in the modal outlook”—I have a modestly faster growth projection than the Tealbook baseline for a couple of reasons.  One is that I understand that asset price movements and, in particular, the dollar have played a strong role in the Tealbook forecast.  And in looking at events in markets and the very strong safe-haven effects, it feels as though some of that dollar effect wants to mean-revert—that is to say, it’s a risk premium rather than a random walk type of expectation. So, feeding that through, that would lead me to slightly attenuate the negative effects that the dollar is having on exports, say, in 2013, 2014—not a big effect, but a slight attenuation.  Second, I want to pick up on something that Governor Tarullo just mentioned and others have alluded to as well, about the extent to which we have this strong effect where uncertainty is holding back corporate investment through the specific what you might call option-value-waiting-to-invest channel—that is to say, firms are sitting on positive-NPV projects, but they say to themselves, “Look, let me get past the next six to nine months and see if  the world is going to come to an end, and then I’ll pull the trigger.” If you believe that, it obviously has very negative implications in the shorter run, but has more-ambiguous implications going forward, because, of course, they’re accumulating a backlog of these deferred projects. So if the uncertainty resolves itself in an on-average way—that is to say, neither good nor bad, and we go to what Dan referred to as a chronic muddle scenario—I think you have to, by the logic of this thing, think that there’s going to be a little bit of an upward tick.  Again, that leads me to push my forecast up slightly—and we’re not talking about a big effect—maybe two-or three-tenths of a percentage point on GDP growth relative to the Tealbook.  Qualitatively, I have pretty much the same dismal picture, only a little bit different. I would say I’m also pretty close to the Tealbook on inflation—that is to say, subdued, likely to come in on the low side as opposed to the high side. Let me just make a final observation.  If we take literally this uncertainty-making-you-delay-investment hypothesis, I think it follows that when you’re in an environment with extremely high uncertainty, investment is going to be less responsive to interest rates than it usually is.  This is a point that a couple of other people made or extracted from some of their business contacts, which is, it’s not that things aren’t bad—it’s just that they may be a little less responsive to interest rates than usual.  Think about a manager who is sitting on a project that’s already positive NPV, and the question is not, do you do it or not, now or never. Instead it’s, do you wait six months and see how things resolve.  And the interest rate is not going to play a big role in that. I have no basis for thinking about whether this is a quantitatively big effect or small effect.  However, it does resonate a bit with some of the points that other people are making, and I just suspect it would lead to some attenuation of how much kick one can get out of a policy action on the interest rate at the current time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual's reflection and analysis, without any opposing viewpoints mentioned or discussed.


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Powell.


Passage number 214.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And let me echo Governor Stein in saying that it’s great to be here.  It’s a great honor.  I look forward to working with everyone.  It’s been a busy couple of weeks, as you can imagine, but I did have a chance to speak to some of my contacts in the industrial patch, which was my specialty for most of my investing career. I spoke to a modest-sized group of companies—let’s say more than 4 and fewer than 43 [laughter]—that are active globally and serve a dozen or so diverse industrial end markets in both manufacturing and services.  It’s quite a broad group of sectors, including automotive, construction, food processing, mining, aggregates, et cetera.  What’s interesting to me is that most of these companies are coming off of one or two great years, which is very different from when I was in the business.  What’s happened, as many of you know, is that our productivity has improved, Chinese wages and wages in emerging markets have gone up substantially, the dollar has weakened, and suddenly we’re more competitive, and my contacts expect that that will continue.  So it’s a bright future in manufacturing, which I think is terrific. But for now, it’s clear that the strong economic growth has slowed.  The general sense of it is that businesses that were growing in double digits are now growing in mid-single digits, and businesses that were growing in mid-single digits are flat.  My contacts see Europe as at the heart of that story, including particularly the effect on China and Brazil and other trading partners as well.  And these companies say, across the board, that their hiring is on hold.  So that anecdotal picture squares very well with the run of weak data that we’ve seen since just before the previous meeting, including industrial production, retail sales, consumer confidence, employment, et cetera. Therefore, I am in broad agreement with the 2012 part of the Tealbook baseline.  I see economic growth in the range of 2 percent and little progress on unemployment.  Interestingly,like Governor Stein, for 2013 and 2014, I projected growth that was modestly above baseline, with faster declines in unemployment and slightly higher inflation.  I am simply not persuaded that the slowdown will carry into 2013.  The channel may be asset prices, as Governor Stein indicated, but I think it’s too early to say.  My underlying view is that the headwinds will continue to gradually abate, and so that growth will strengthen if we can just avoid more setbacks, either the imported kind or the self-inflicted kind. In the baseline, the fiscal cliff takes a full point out of GDP growth, as Governor Tarullo was indicating, and that and worse outcomes are certainly possible.  I think it’s also possible that the Congress will choose to defer the pain; that has been known to happen.  However, the underlying point is that the range of outcomes is exceptionally broad, and that only adds to the uncertainty.  As for inflation in the near and medium term, I generally see the risks as weighted to slower economic growth rather than higher inflation.  I see growth slowing and inflation declining all over the world.  I also note the reports of skilled-worker shortages, as I think President Evans was noting, but I don’t see anything in the wage numbers yet.  And of course, inflation expectations remain stable. Moreover, I also agree that the economy faces an unusually long list of near-term potential downside risks.  In fact, I think we almost have to stop calling them tail risks because cumulatively they’re no longer the tail.  If I’ve got anything to add to the discussion of these risks as the year goes on, it may be on the fiscal cliff and the debt ceiling, which are what I spent the last two years of my life on.  And the fiscal debate is one we need to have, but my experience as a participant in the debt ceiling drama of last summer leaves me with serious concerns that the episode next time may be even more disruptive.  In fact, the only certainty is that there will be increasing uncertainty as the year goes on, and I see that as likely to damp risk-taking in the markets and among households, businesses, borrowers, and lenders.  Finally, in an attempt to end on a positive note, I will say that I served at Treasury 20 years ago during difficult economic times, and I felt pessimistic as we left Washington at the suggestion of the American voters in early 1993.  [Laughter] It was said at that time that the housing crash and the S&L crisis and the banking failures had done lasting damage to our productive capacity, and I thought that was probably right.  Of course, it didn’t turn out that way in the low-inflation boom of the 1990s, or maybe the point is that the NAIRU and potential output can be quite dynamic over time.  I do realize that today is different and not in a good way.  Still, I remind myself that upside surprises do happen.  Thanks very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement between different parties. It is a reflection of the speaker's thoughts and observations on the state of the economy.


Passage number 215.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Bill. Any questions.  [No response]  Seeing no questions, we will start the go-round with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No explanation
Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am supportive of alternative B, though I think there is a strong case to be made for alternative A.  My earlier remarks about the economic outlook imply that we should provide more monetary accommodation, and extending Operation Twist will provide some modest support.  However, I strongly suspect we will need to do more.  I remain very concerned about the international economic and financial outlook.  Because we’re likely to miss on both elements of our mandate through the forecast horizon even without a crisis, ideally I would pursue asset purchase policies that expand our balance sheet.  However, I would support using swaps as the tool of choice if most expect us to remain close to our inflation target but continue to miss significantly on the unemployment target. In terms of swaps, if that is the preferred choice at this meeting, my own preference would be to swap short-term Treasury securities for mortgage-backed securities.  The housing market is showing some tentative signs of improvement, and we should provide additional support for an area that is both interest-sensitive and one of the sectors that has been an impediment to a more robust recovery. It seems to me increasingly likely that Greece will not meet its obligations to Europe, that Spanish banking problems will worsen, and that we and other central banks will need to act more forcefully. I also expect that at that time, we will need to consider 13(3) facilities, with the primary dealer facility the most likely candidate, because I am concerned that broker–dealers will once again find it difficult to obtain short-term wholesale financing should we have another crisis.  We should begin to consider more-creative use of the discount window to focus on where asset spreads are particularly wide. Finally, we need to be prepared should international conditions seriously impair our outlook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses support for alternative B but also states that there is a strong case to be made for alternative A. He also mentions that he strongly suspects more monetary accommodation will be necessary and expresses concern about the international economic and financial outlook. These conflicting statements indicate a level of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Plosser.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 219.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to divide my comments into two pieces.  I’m going to presume that the Committee will in fact adopt an extension of the MEP to the end of the year, and I’ll comment on how best to craft the statement in light of that decision.  And then I’ll talk about some more-general communication issues.  Mr. Chairman, I have to say, I’ll be deviating somewhat from my prepared remarks in light of the comments that you made about the limitations on our balance sheet tools.  I think those are very importantconsiderations to keep in mind, and it really makes communication even more important than ever. Let me start by supposing that the Committee is going to adopt the extension of the maturity extension program as its policy action today.  I have three recommendations about how the Committee might craft the statement given that decision.  First, in terms of alternatives B′ versus B, as President Plosser just talked about, President Williams, President Plosser, and I circulated a memo describing an approach to rewriting the FOMC statement in a way that establishes a clearer link between the evolution of the economy, the actions being undertaken by the Committee, and what the Committee is trying to accomplish—focusing on this idea of a verbal reaction function.  I think B′ moves in that direction, and certainly we thank the staff and the Board for being responsive to our concerns in this way.  Ultimately, I agree with Bill English that this is a notable change in what we’re doing, and I think that we want to be deliberate about undertaking that change. And, as President Plosser has said, I don’t think B′ gets at what exactly we had in mind.  As I read B′, I don’t feel that it highlights the kinds of changes in the outlook that I heard highlighted around the table yesterday.  If you go to the middle of paragraph 4, the sentence after the semicolon there is a key phrase: “these risks have become somewhat greater since earlier this year.”  We haven’t heard everyone, and everyone has a say, of course, but that’s going to be a key consideration as people think about why they’re adopting this policy action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is primarily discussing their recommendations on how to craft a statement regarding the extension of the maturity extension program. They mention different alternatives and discuss their concerns and preferences, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention between speakers.


Passage number 220.
 MR. LACKER. Where is the semicolon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the location of a semicolon.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Just for your information, the Desk will release a statement, at exactly the same time as the FOMC statement, with all of the details of the program.  So that information will be out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the release of a statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 222.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  If you don’t mind, Mr. Chairman, thank you for clarifying that; it’s good that it’s going to be there.  But I don’t understand why we’re choosing—and maybe others will be able to clarify this for me—in June to describe the details of the program in that way, in the directive, whereas in September, we actually had it in the statement itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses confusion and seeks clarification on the choice to describe the program differently in June and September.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, we can discuss it, but I think the idea is to express the continuity of the program with what we have been doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker suggests discussing a topic but provides their own opinion about it. However, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker simply shares their thoughts on the matter without any conflicting views being mentioned.


Passage number 224.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only contains a statement of gratitude.


Passage number 225.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman.  May I ask Narayana a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is simply asking the chairman, Narayana, a question.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "certainly" is used to express certainty or agreement, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement in the statement.


Passage number 227.
 MR. TARULLO.  Narayana, could you repeat the reason why you favor the alternative A language for paragraph 3 over the alternative B language for paragraph 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Narayana to repeat their reason for favoring one language over another.


Passage number 228.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. When the Committee says they’re going to keep rates low through late 2014, there are multiple ways to interpret it, but I will emphasize two ways. One is that the Committee is saying, the economy is going to be really bad for the next two and a half years, and so we’re going to keep rates low.  Many people think of us as having lots of private information about how the economy is going to evolve, and then their take-away from that is, “Boy, the Fed has this private information that things are going to be bad.”  The other way, which I think is how it’s intended, is that we’re trying to actually provide stimulus to theeconomy to generate a faster recovery. I think a small step to try to correct this perception is to adopt the language in A(3).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting two different interpretations of the Committee's statement about keeping rates low.


Passage number 229.
 MR. TARULLO. I’m sorry—what’s the specific language difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: between the House and the Senate bills on this point?  MRS.  SWORDS.  The only difference in the language is—let me see if I know how to properly word it—the House says “necessary to have,” where the Senate just says “necessary.” It’s just a slight wording difference.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 230.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. If you go to the very end of the last sentence of B(3), it says something about “economic conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run.”  Whereas in A(3) that’s been crossed out, and it says that we’re “maintaining exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate . . . in order to support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, . . .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. In B(3), it suggests that low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation are economic conditions that support maintaining low levels for the federal funds rate. However, in A(3), this statement has been crossed out, indicating disagreement or disagreement with this idea.


Passage number 231.
” MR. TARULLO.  I’m sorry.  So you mean moving what’s the introductory clause of paragraph 3 into the action sentence.  Do you think that’s the difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is seeking clarification about a suggested change in sentence structure.


Passage number 232.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s correct.  Yes, that’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker confirms that the statement made by another person is correct.


Passage number 233.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay. I got it.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude for receiving information or clarification.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You said, just replacing B(3) with A(3).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a statement of fact, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 235.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That was what I said, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement indicates agreement, as the speaker confirms that what was previously mentioned is indeed what they said.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  May I ask you to think about the following.  We’ve been very clear that our guidance is conditional on how economic conditions evolve.  And A(3) could be interpreted as an unconditional statement, and that may be something people could reflect on that as we go through.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply asking the audience to consider a specific statement and reflect on its potential implications.


Passage number 237.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or statement that could suggest disagreement or contention. Without any statements or viewpoints that contradict or dispute each other, there is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 238.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The economy has slowed, and progress toward closing the large unemployment gap over the next year appears to have stalled.  Furthermore, the drop in oil and other commodity prices and the absence of wage pressures have shifted the outlook for inflation lower.  Thus, we will be falling short on both employment and inflation for years and missing from the same direction each part of our dual  mandate.  And the risks to the outlook for economic activity are overwhelmingly to the downside.  So this situation tilts the balance toward action.  The question is, should we conduct more large-scale asset purchases, as in alternative A, or additional maturity extension, as in B. Maturity extension is directionally correct.  It helps support low long rates, as we’ve already seen.  Now, I agree it won’t do much on its own, and there are inherent limits to how large a move we can make. But it will signal that we’re vigilant and we’re ready and willing to do what is needed.  So for today, I support continuing the maturity extension program envisioned in alternative B. I do have one suggestion for the statement.  In responding to President Kocherlakota’s recommendation, first, let me just say I would actually stay with B(3).  But I do think it is important to provide the rationale for our policy action in our statement.  As we all know, paragraph 1 just describes the data.  Paragraph 2 covers the outlook but does not explain clearly how or why the outlook has changed.  In essence, the policy action is justified in the statement by the addition of the modifier “very” in front of “gradually” and then by replacing “gradually” with “only slowly” in the next sentence.  I find this unnecessarily subtle.  I think, from our discussion, that we have a more fundamental shift in our view about both the economy and about the developments in Europe and financial strains. I propose that the second sentence of paragraph 2 be augmented to summarize the rationale for the change in our outlook, which would obviously set up the change in policy.  So my suggestion is that the sentence would read, “With somewhat less recent momentum in domestic demand and greater strains in global financial markets, the Committee expects economic growth to remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually.”  To me, this connects the data and our views about what’s going on in Europe to our outlook, which then sets up the policy rationale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and provides reasoning behind their support. They also make a suggestion for improving the policy statement, but this does not involve disagreement or contention.


Passage number 239.
  MS. YELLEN.  Could you read that again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. YELLEN is requesting someone to repeat something.


Passage number 240.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a response as the passage or context is missing. Please provide the necessary information for me to accurately assess whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 241.
 WILLIAMS.  Of course.  The sentence would read, “With somewhat less recent momentum in domestic demand and greater strains in global financial markets, the Committee expects economic growth to remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement from Williams about the expected economic growth.


Passage number 242.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If you did that, would you cut the sentence that starts “Furthermore”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking a question about potentially cutting a sentence that begins with "Furthermore."


Passage number 243.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no passage provided, therefore it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 244.
 WILLIAMS.  I thought about that.  It repeats that phrase, but I would keep the “Furthermore” sentence as the risk.  It seems, at least in my view, that what people here are talking about and what the Tealbook said is a big part of the change in the outlook, is actually developments in Europe and changes in global financial conditions.  In addition, I would layer on top of that that the data have been somewhat weaker. I was just trying to capture that in my suggestion for B.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and perspective on the matter.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage is a polite thank you from President Lacker and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 246.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I do not believe that the current situation calls for any further monetary policy action by the Committee.  Headline inflation is certainly falling, driven by the decline in oil prices, and we’re likely to get lower readings on core inflation in the short term as a result of pass-through of energy and import prices.  But I think the dip in inflation will be temporary.  As I noted yesterday, we often see short-run pass-through from energy prices that results in transitory movements in core inflation. Measures of inflation expectations have been well behaved, so at this point, the behavior of inflation, in my view, doesn’t warrant further monetary policy ease.  A more persistent and substantial decline in inflation below our 2 percent target would warrant action aimed at ensuring that inflation returns to target, but that’s not the situation we face today. The labor market clearly has been disappointing.  You used the word “agonizing,” Mr. Chairman, and I think that’s apt.  And I think we all share that sense of excruciating dislocation and loss at what labor markets could have done had they lived up to our expectations a couple of years ago.  But I don’t think we have any options now that are going to make a substantial difference in the path of the unemployment rate without also raising inflation by more than would be desirable and in a way that would ultimately raise the costs of achieving our inflation objective over the longer term.  As a general matter, policy actions that affect labor market outcomes will affect inflation as well. I think that’s just the economics we all understand.  We need to take both effects into account, and we laid out how we do so in our consensus statement in January.  We seem, though, to have adopted a lexicographic approach in which policy depends solely on whether we’re satisfied with the pace at which unemployment is falling.  I don’t think that’s a good approach, and I don’t think it’s helpful to describe our policy as depending entirely on the rate at which unemployment is falling, without reference to inflation. You mentioned a couple of other objectives for this policy move, Mr. Chairman.  Maintaining confidence—with all due respect, I don’t see how our action can have much effect on views about fundamentals or about the likely choices of fiscal policy authorities, either here or abroad.  President Plosser pointed out some adverse effects that this policy action could have on confidence in us and on our credibility.  And President Kocherlakota pointed out ways in which this policy action could damp expectations about future growth.  You also cited showing the Fed as engaged; that’s something President Williams cited as well.  The flip side of that is  that it encourages people to believe that we believe that we have far more effect on the real economy than we really do.  So I think the appropriate stance now would be to wait and watch for evidence that inflation expectations are likely to erode, or that there’s a shortfall in inflation below target that’s likely to be persistent. If further easing is warranted, an extension of the maturity extension program would not be my preferred tool.  I think that the theory behind the interest rate effects of the MEP is tenuous and the empirical evidence of such effects is unconvincing.  And I question whether any policy action that attempts to work through lowering longer-term risk-free rates can be expected to have much effect in the current environment. Moreover, this policy raises the question of, why not ask Mary Miller to do it.  Should we want to provide further stimulus, I think we would need to either increase aggregate reserve balances or change banks’ incentives to hold reserves by changing the interest rate on reserves. And one final note: I have pushed back my expected date for the funds rate liftoff, but it’s still well earlier than late 2014.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there may be some differences in opinion concerning the effectiveness of certain policy actions and the timing of a rate liftoff, there does not seem to be any contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 247.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will support alternative B.  As I said yesterday, my own outlook is more optimistic over the forecast horizon than that in the Tealbook.  I agree that the balance of risks to growth is to the downside, but I’m not yet convinced that the environment has deteriorated enough to justify more-aggressive action at this time. I view an MEP extension as an acknowledgment of some change in the outlook and a shift in the balance of risk.  With the risks elevated and weighted to the downside, I think it’s appropriate to signal that we are highly attentive to developments and unwilling to remove any accommodation at this point.  I view the extension of the MEP as serving this purpose.  I don’t expect that extending the MEP will have a lot of sustained incremental impact in isolation. If the  situation worsens, in all likelihood it will be because of developments in Europe and the global economy. In such circumstances, safe-haven flows will likely put more pressure on long-term rates than MEP purchases. Because I’m supporting this policy action more for reasons of posture maintenance than because of any expectations that it will turn things around, I actually like the way the decision is presented in the statement as a continuation of policy.  I hope it suggests some amount of conditionality and leaves open the possibility of scaling back or suspending the program if the economy surprises us to the upside. Regarding alternative B′, I do not favor moving to the statement structure of B′ at this time. I’m sympathetic to what the alternative format is trying to capture and accomplish, and could support going in that direction at some point.  But as unsettled as markets are now, I’m worried that any nontrivial change in the structure of the statement would create more noise than clarity. I’d like to play it safe for the moment and to stick with the alternative B formulation and defer something along the lines of B′ to a later date. Regarding the last paragraph, the question is to include it or not to include it.  I’m inclined to include it, but I will point out that it creates the issue of whether to repeat it, revise it, or pull it—and under what circumstances we would do that and what would be the interpretation of whatever we do with this paragraph in future meetings.  Every time we put in something like this, it creates the follow-on questions in the minds of the market. Still, I think the situation does call for comment, and so I will support inclusion of the last paragraph.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses his support for alternative B and explains his reasoning behind his decision. He also shares his thoughts on the extension of the MEP and the inclusion of the last paragraph in the statement. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention with others in the passage.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President Fisher.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, I think that “labor market conditions” refers to a general description of labor markets, and we use the word “promote,” implying no direct causality but simply one factor among many that should help get better outcomes. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both President Fisher and the Vice Chairman seem to be providing their perspectives on the meaning of "labor market conditions" and the implication of the word "promote." They are explaining their understanding without directly contradicting each other.


Passage number 251.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I don’t want to wait till my turn to respond to one thing that you said, President Fisher, about leaks.  I think it’s really dangerous to cast aspersions like  that on the Desk or other people on the Committee. It’s completely reasonable that the Wall Street Journal can look at the same set of evidence that we look at and reach the same conclusion that we’re going to reach; there’s nothing surprising about that.  I’m not saying that leaks never occur, but I don’t believe you can conclude that because the Wall Street Journal concludes something similar to what we conclude.  They’re looking at the same set of information that we’re looking at.  They’ve studied how we’ve behaved in the past. It’s completely logical for them to reach the same conclusion that we’re reaching without there being any leaks whatsoever. So I think that’s really dangerous to make statements like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and addressing President Fisher's statement about leaks. They are explaining their perspective on why the Wall Street Journal could reach the same conclusion as the Committee without there being any leaks. The speaker is critical of President Fisher's assertion but does not create contention or disagreement.


Passage number 252.
 MR. FISHER. I’m sure others feel the same way, Vice Chairman Dudley.  I’m just making the point that when we talk about market expectations, we should consider what affects the American people over the long term and not be conditioned by market expectations.  But I did not mean to cast aspersions.  I just worry that this process goes on.  And I see Governor Tarullo getting all upset.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing his concerns but clarifies that he did not mean to cast any aspersions. The mention of Governor Tarullo getting upset might indicate some tension, but it is not enough to conclude that there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 253.
 MR. TARULLO.  Richard, how could you say you didn’t mean to cast aspersions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is asking Richard for clarification or explanation regarding a statement that he made.


Passage number 254.
 MR. FISHER. But let me finish my sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply requesting to finish his sentence.


Passage number 255.
 MR. TARULLO.  You accused somebody here of leaking.  You didn’t identify who it was, but you said there was a leak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, there is a statement made by MR. TARULLO about someone accusing another person of leaking information. There is no explicit contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 256.
 MR. FISHER.  What I’m saying is, I think we should work extremely hard to preserve every option that is debated at this table, and I have just noticed that this has been more intensely covered than I have seen in my seven years of sitting at this table.  Everybody in this room is a decent person.  I’m not casting any aspersions against anybody in this room.  I’m just saying that if we can—in every way possible, however we do it—we should try to preserve the options to be debated at this table, and then not use the argument that markets expect us to do X or Y.  What isleading the markets to expect that.  I haven’t seen this broad-based discussion that we are having in the speeches.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and advocating for preserving options to be debated without casting any aspersions or expressing disagreement with others in the room.


Passage number 257.
 MR. TARULLO.  You haven’t seen it in the speeches.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about something they haven't seen in the speeches.


Passage number 258.
 MR. EVANS.  You haven’t seen suggestions in the speeches and in the interviews.  I get commentary from our staff all the time about what people are saying, and others have mentioned MEP as a possible option here. That’s all it takes to get that discussion going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that there is no contention or disagreement. It states that suggestions and commentary are being received, which triggers discussions.


Passage number 259.
 MR. FISHER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 260.
  Well, they are all possible options, but zeroing in on this— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that all the options are possible and then suggests focusing on a specific one.


Passage number 261.
 MR. FISHER.  Let me just summarize this way, Mr. Chairman.  I apologize if I’ve given offense.  I worry about the phenomenon, and I see it increasing.  We’ve talked about this before.  Let’s just do our best to make sure that we give out as little as possible so we don’t condition the market, in case we decide to do something else and therefore disappoint the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about a phenomenon and suggesting a cautious approach to avoid negatively impacting the market.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 263.
 MR. FISHER.  And I apologize again for giving offense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement suggests that the speaker is expressing regret and offering an apology for any offense caused.


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 265.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think yesterday Governor Tarullo made some comment about how it would be nice if people didn’t always come with prepared statements.  I can guarantee you, I don’t have anything like that.  Of course, having said that, my message won’t sound very different to those who have heard it before, but there are two new Governors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 266.
 MR. POWELL.  We’ve heard it, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Powell is simply acknowledging that he and his colleagues have also heard something.


Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple expression of gratitude from someone called President Bullard.


Passage number 268.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As you know, I’m not supposed to come right after President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and acknowledging a certain order of speakers.


Passage number 269.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLOKTA.  That’s why I sit between them. It’s my role on the Committee, actually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a lighthearted comment about sitting between two individuals, indicating that it is their role on the committee.


Passage number 270.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 271.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I noted yesterday, the recent data suggest a somewhat slower pace of recovery than I anticipated in April.  Heightened uncertainty—and indeed, now I sense some degree of fear—about the European financial crisis, the U.S. fiscal cliff and regulatory environment, and global growth prospects is currently restraining activity. That said, on balance, going forward I continue to expect the economy to expand at a moderate pace sufficient to produce a gradual reduction in unemployment.  With respect to inflation, the decline that we’ve seen in the headline numbers reflects lower energy prices. I expect that this decline will be temporary and, barring further monetary accommodation, that inflation will remain at or slightly below our 2 percent target over the medium to long term. Given these circumstances, additional policy ease is likely to have little effect on output and employment but could lead to higher inflation expectations and, ultimately, higher inflation.  Additional ease could also increase the risk of unintended consequences, such as growing financial distortions and mispriced risk.  As a result, I believe policy should remain on hold today.  The benefits of a further expansion of our balance sheet or a further lengthening of its duration appear fleeting and further complicate our eventual exit.  Of course, if the European debt crisis erupts into a severe economic and financial crisis with spillovers to U.S. markets, our policy tools would be available, including emergency liquidity through the discount window or other credit facilities.  Finally, I share President Lockhart’s concern about introducing paragraph 5 on Europe, simply because of the challenges I think it may create for future statements as events continue to unfold in Europe.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker in the passage is expressing her own opinions and assessments of the current economic situation and making recommendations for policy. There is no indication of contention or disagreement with other speakers or parties.


Passage number 272.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any topic or statement that could provoke contention or disagreement. The statement "Thank you. President Pianalto" is a simple expression of gratitude directed towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 273.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a close call for me today. I have a couple of reasons why I prefer to take no action today.  First, I think that the level of uncertainty is extraordinarily high right now.  As I said yesterday, my outlook is virtually the same as it was at the time of our meeting in January.  I expect moderate economic growth and low inflation over the forecast horizon, with slow progress in the return of unemployment to its natural rate. Like the rest of us, I had hoped that the encouraging signs of greater strength that we saw at our Aprilmeeting would endure, but of course, that didn’t happen.  With the benefit of hindsight, our decision in April not to move forward the liftoff date language for the fed funds rate was a prudent one.  So our patience was justified.  I would prefer to take action on the basis of more solid information, because it is quite possible that as events unfold, we might see today’s desire to act dissipate.  Or, if there is a material change in the outlook to the downside based on actual developments, then I could see the basis for supporting even stronger actions than are in alternative B today. The second reason I have for holding off any action today is that I think it’s worth reflecting on the fact that we have been in an environment of exceptionally low interest rates for a number of years now, and most of us expect that these low rates are likely to prevail for a couple of more years.  We have a very large balance sheet and one with a much longer duration than we are accustomed to holding.  We have done the best analysis we can, and we have decided that the risks to the economy from our actions are likely to be small.  Partly as a result of this belief, the benefits of our actions appear to clearly outweigh the cost.  However, I think that we should be mindful about how little we actually know about these costs—such as the disruption in market functioning that, Mr. Chairman, you mentioned earlier—and we should be mindful that we could be underestimating these costs. As Brian Sack reminded us yesterday, we are operating in uncharted waters.  Clearly, the risks to the outlook have increased since our last meeting.  I see considerable downside risks to the outlook for growth, particularly from Europe and our own fiscal cliff.  So I can see some benefits of buying insurance against the risk that weaker economic growth could result, as I mentioned yesterday, in an unwelcome disinflation.  I mentioned yesterday that the 10-year inflation expectations have been declining, and there is a risk that inflation could fall below our inflation objective over the medium term. As this Committee has pointed out several times in the past, given the constraints of the zero lower bound, it will be tougher for us to deal with an unwelcome disinflation than an unwelcome rise in inflation. I can also see some benefits from signaling to the public that the Committee is paying close attention to how developments in Europe pose risks to the U.S. economy and to the financial markets.  And by acting today, with the extension of the MEP, we show our willingness to take further actions as necessary. Again, this is a close call for me today, but I will join you, Mr. Chairman, and the majority of the Committee and support alternative B today. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Ms. Pianalto explains her reasons for preferring to take no action and her concerns about the uncertainties and risks in the current economic environment. However, there is no clear contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 274.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite phrase expressing gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 275.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  With respect to language, I’d like to thank Presidents Kocherlakota, Plosser, and Williams for their constructive suggestions concerning reorganization of the statement, and I welcome your further work on this topic.  With respect to policy, I agree with the Tealbook’s reading of the data that, absent further monetary policy accommodation, economic growth is likely to be insufficient to achieve any meaningful progress in lowering unemployment. Moreover, the downside risks to growth are huge and predominate.  Absent further policy action, inflation seems likely to come in somewhat below our 2 percent objective.  If this assessment is correct, we will need to undertake significant new actions.  An extension of the MEP is a very modest step and will not be sufficient to promote our objectives.  On risk-management grounds, I believe one can make a strong case for action now.  President Evans has made that case, and I’d like to associate myself with his comments on this score.  However, I can support an extension of the MEP today, forgoing stronger actions for the time being, on the grounds that it makes sense to avoid a rush to judgment that might entail an overreaction to the spate of weak data we have seen.  I see continuation of the MEP as a temporizing move, a way to signal to markets that we’re awake, that we’re concerned by recent developments, that we do not see the economy as strong enough yet to withdraw the medication regime that’s been in place, and that we’re watching and waiting to evaluate what further actions may be necessary to promote economic growth and address downside risks.  Today’s action keeps the door open to doing more.  It’s natural to extend a program that’s in place and would otherwise end now, and doing so has limited downside risk.   I consider it essential, though, for the FOMC to be forward leaning, to assure markets and the public that we will act if it’s necessary to prevent the economy from stalling out, and I think the language in paragraph 4 of B accomplishes that without committing the Committee to QE3. If, as I fear, action proves necessary in the days ahead, I’m open to a further LSAP, including a program that’s open ended, or an extension of our forward guidance. I also think we should give priority to attempting to devise something new, conceivably an innovative discount window program to stimulate lending along the lines announced by the Bank of England.  If we do decide at a future meeting to move out the date, I’d like to say that I’m attracted to the revised forward guidance language proposed in alternative A that follows the suggestion of President Kocherlakota and Governor Raskin.  The proposed language eliminates reference to the adverse economic conditions required to hold the funds rate at zero and substitutes in its place a more positive and confidence-building explanation for maintaining a highly accommodative monetary policy.  I would wait to introduce that language until such time as we decide to change the forward guidance, on the grounds that today we would lack the context—I think it would be confusing.  But it’s a very constructive suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and discussing their agreement with certain readings of economic data. They also mention their openness to further actions and suggest new ideas, but there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 276.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a simple thank you and a greeting to Governor Duke.


Passage number 277.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m in favor of alternative B. I think it’s the right move, but try as hard as I can, I still can’t say that I’m proud of it.  I actually think it  illustrates just how limited our remaining arsenal actually is.  So I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for acknowledging this in your opening remarks.  I wondered why alternative B expressed the MEP extension as a flow with an end date rather than as a stock amount.  It was my understanding, as President Plosser said, that we’d come to the conclusion that it was the stock rather than the flow that drove the market reaction.  And I also thought that the end of the year, given the election and the fiscal cliff, was an odd time to choose for ending the MEP, and then I figured out why we weren’t announcing a total.  The whole program amounts only to a measly $267 billion—and I considered “measly,” “dinky,” “small.” By December, we’re going to be emptying the lint out of our pockets to find short-term securities to sell.  We’ve talked often about the advisability of doing what we can as early as we can so that we can get the effects sooner and create a more resilient recovery in the face of shocks, but as we run out of options in the face of some pretty scary downside risks, I think we need to count our remaining moves and make sure that we use them when they’ll have the greatest impact.  Realistically, we have at best two $500 billion weapons left before the tradeoffs start getting really dicey in terms of market functioning, and while those aren’t exactly “flash bang” options, we could need them if the European situation or the fiscal cliff creates conditions that require a confidence-building move from the Fed.  At this point, I admit that my policy preferences are driven more by the desire to maintain confidence than by my forecast or a fine calibration of the costs and benefits.  And I suppose that my stance doesn’t fit well with anyone’s view of better communication. In terms of what we do with the statement, I’m going to continue to follow the Tarullo rule, which is to make as few changes that are not required as possible, and so I would keep 3 from B rather than A until we were changing something else in there.  I would not use 5.  I do think I would prefer the language that President Williams offered, but I didn’t get to write down all of it.  So I’m not entirely sure. Finally, Mr. Chairman, I’m in favor of extending the MEP as long as we can, but I’m worried about our additional options after that.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and expressing concerns about the limited options available.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 279.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will vote for alternative B.  As a number of people have already commented, the effectiveness of it in real terms is probably somewhat limited.  There’s obviously some psychological benefit associated with it, particularly in light of the forecasts that we’re all going to be putting forth. I think, though, that we’ve got, as Betsy just indicated and as others have said, a short- to medium-term problem, which is planning for what else we may do.  As I listen around the table today, it feels to me as though there’s a reasonably clear path in many people’s minds if something really adverse happens in Europe— which is to say, another LSAP.  But it’s substantially less clear to me what people think reasonable options are in the event that we continue along in the mud, to resurrect my metaphor, for some time to come, with Europe looming over us; with the fiscal cliff looming over us; with clearly subpar, perhaps even subtrend, economic growth; but without the catalyzing event of a major shock in Europe that almost forces action by us and maybe on a coordinated basis with other central banks.  I know that the answer a number of people would give would be to do nothing, but obviously there are a number of people around the table who would like options as well.  And I’d like to echo what Sandy said a moment ago about the need to better understand the costs to market functioning that would be associated with larger or continuing purchases.  We allude to those costs, and Brian occasionally tries to give us some, maybe somewhat intuitive, sense of when those costs will begin to be experienced.  But trying to understand the costs side  of the ledger with a bit more precision, I think, is something I at least would find useful—not only the question of at what point we begin to experience potential costs to market functioning, but also the specification of what those costs will be so that they can be balanced against the potential benefits of large or unusually large purchases in the future. I also think, as several people have also said, that it is worth again returning to the question of whether there are things other than straightforward, clearly stated LSAP purchases that would be available to us, once again assuming that we face a prolonged period of subpar and perhaps even subtrend economic growth. I think Charlie Evans was trying not to be alarmist while still stating a fact that is probably beginning to eat at all of us.  We’re now at least four years into crisis, recession, and poor recovery, and instead of seeing a clearer way out now and the kind of recovery that the Tealbook for a while kept bumping off another couple of quarters but still saw on the horizon, we’re facing perhaps as serious a crisis as we experienced in financial markets in late 2008, even though the epicenter now would be across the Atlantic.  This at least raises the prospect that we really are slipping into something substantially more chronic from which it’s harder to emerge.  And just sitting and waiting for things to repair themselves may be no more effective than it was in the 1930s, although for a different set of reasons and with a different set of dynamics than persisted then.  I don’t think Charlie tried to suggest that that was the case now; I’m certainly not trying to suggest it.  But I do think, in the spirit of sensible—even lower-probability— contingency planning, we’ve got to at least begin thinking about that possibility and what it means for monetary policy given the other circumstances we confront. In terms of today’s statement, as I said, I will vote for alternative B for the reasons many of you have stated.  I don’t think now is the time to move to the B′ language.  I would like to see   what Narayana, John, and Charlie would come up with as the B′ statement from their point of view.  It would be useful to look at over time. Finally, I wanted to come back to something that Narayana said in his intervention.  As most of you around the table know, I ultimately didn’t vote for the consensus statement in January, the principal reason being I didn’t think it was going to communicate effectively exactly what our policies were and, most importantly, whether we genuinely had a symmetric loss function.  And I believe Narayana points out ways in which those concerns have been realized through the perhaps unexpected mechanism of the SEP.  But I do think that paying attention to the observation that Narayana made, which others are making as well, is going to be important for communicating effectively. I didn’t hear anybody say during that debate that 2 percent was the upper bound of inflation, but it is the case that one could look at the SEP as well as at some statements that some people make, and think that was so.  I had what were obviously, from most people’s point of view, inartful suggestions as to how to make clearer that this is a genuinely symmetric loss function, but I don’t think the statement did it.  We are seeing today how it didn’t quite do it, and we may be inadvertently compounding the problem when the results of the SEP are released.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there are a few different viewpoints expressed in this passage, there is no clear disagreement or contention. The speaker is discussing the limited effectiveness of alternative B, the need for options in the event of ongoing economic problems, and the importance of effectively communicating monetary policy.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from an individual named Governor Raskin.


Passage number 281.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At the outset, I’d like to show my support for the spirit that animates alternative B′, and look forward to the continued evolution of a statement by the so-called KPW team.  Today I support alternative B as a defensible step toward the fulfillment of our public mandate.  From that perspective, however, while fully cognizant of the risks involved in more balance sheet actions, I do wonder at times whether we are doing all that we can. In particular, I do see some limited policy space worth exploring regarding the forward   guidance—not simply with the date, as we’ve discussed in the past, but with the language immediately surrounding the date.  So, like President Evans, President Kocherlakota, and Governor Yellen, I support the consideration of moving the wording from paragraph 3 in alternative A to the forward guidance paragraph because I’d like to make sure that expectations about policy are not clouded by pessimism in the outlook.  Using communication as a monetary policy tool is intended to work through future expectations about the course of the recovery.  In other words, the more we can tell the public about our long-term plans, the greater our ability to stimulate the economy, even at the zero lower bound.  It turns out that communication requires skill. If the description of the action taken is so sobering that it mutes the desired stimulus effect of the low interest rates, then why would anyone buy anything or invest in producing it if you think the economic outlook is so awful that policymakers dare not raise rates until at least late 2014. Instead, why are we not letting the public know that the FOMC is committed to helping the recovery and won’t risk it to fight less than 2 percent inflation. If households and businesses are rational, forward looking, and obsessed enough with monetary policy to be reading our statements, don’t we want to focus on tuning the policy guidance to emphasize its positive features.  Given the rampant levels of confidence-detracting news and perceptions, ranging from developments in Europe to suspicions that homeowner relief programs are disproportionately helping the banks, it seems prudent to strip the negative connotations from all but our outlook and consider the paragraphs related to policy as a means to influence expectations positively so that we don’t have to declare defeat before the policy has had a chance to be credible. Accordingly, I would like to see us continue to consider a reframing of the forward guidance. I find myself pushing on the communication effects of the forward guidance because I’m not sure this extension of the MEP constitutes new accommodation.  Because the effects of doing nothing in terms of extending it would be contractionary, it may be more of an on-hold strategy.  And again, I wonder whether we intend to be communicating “on hold” now, given the weaker outlook.  When the funds rate was the only policy instrument, the meaning of “on hold” was clear.  When the Fed kept the funds rate constant, the stance of monetary policy was unchanged.  But since late 2008, with the funds rate stuck at the zero lower bound, we have used a variety of unconventional tools to ease policy.  Unlike with changes in the target funds rate, the degree of monetary stimulus from these actions may naturally decline over time.  As a result, we may need to take active steps just to keep the policy stance constant.  That’s what the MEP extension seems to do for the time being.  There are several reasons why inaction today could constitute a passive tightening and why extending the MEP could be viewed as being on hold rather than accommodative. Because markets are forward looking, the impact of the MEP depends not only on the announced stock of asset purchases but also on the entire expected profile of the central bank’s balance sheet over time.  So the effect of an MEP on rates is temporary because we’ve committed to normalizing the balance sheet in the future.  Therefore, as time passes, the expected present discounted value of the excess asset holdings begins to decline as this eventual normalizing of the balance sheet gets closer. Let’s be clearheaded.  We may not be doing much in the face of a weaker outlook, and the public may lose confidence in the institutional ability of our public institutions to do what’s necessary to address this poor outlook and the pressing problems of the economy.  In this regard, I haven’t studied the details of the Bank of England’s Funding for Lending Scheme but am impressed with the spirit and rationale that animate it.  That spirit and rationale can be described in macroeconomic terms as an attempt to steer future expectations toward policy that can enhance future economic growth.  It can be described in public terms as underscoring the view  that we live in an economy where there are solutions to economic problems, not just problems, and that fiscal and monetary institutions can be trusted to be working in a timely way on the creation of those solutions.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support and agreement with alternative B and is suggesting further exploration and consideration of certain policy aspects.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 283.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I’m essentially in agreement with the staff’s forecast, which has us making disappointingly slow progress on output and on unemployment and which sees inflation as subdued, likely coming below our 2 percent target.  So it seems to me that both sides of our mandate point pretty clearly toward a need for further accommodation.  On top of that, there are the potentially severe downside risks associated with the current situation in Europe.  I framed it, Mr. Chairman, as you did, which is, I started by asking myself, if we were away from the zero lower bound, what would we do.  And I clearly say, I think it’s not a close call.  I would be unambiguously in favor of easing. At the same time, I, too, find the analysis to be less straightforward when we have to provide that further accommodation by quantitative means—that is to say, by buying more long-term bonds.  This is both because I think the further stimulative benefits of doing so at this time, while positive, are likely to be quite small and because I feel that there are a variety of potential costs and simply raw uncertainties—and here I would echo what President Pianalto said— associated with the bond purchases that at least I, in my own mind, have not fully come to grips with.  A number of these have already been enumerated, and I won’t go over them again.  I did want to flag one particular cost that I thought was possibly relevant and which looms larger when we’re in the interest rate environment that we’re in.  That is to say, the 10-year Treasury was, as of this morning, I think, about 1.62 and, as Brian described yesterday, term premiums—expected returns on these Treasuries—are near at least recent-history lows and are something like 150 basis points below their norms over the last 15 or so years.  Here’s a very gut-level way to say it: It just feels strange to me to want to be buying an asset—in this case, long-term bonds—when its price is abnormally high relative to its expected cash flows and when, in at least some sense of the word, we would be seeking to push that price further away from fundamental value rather than closer.  And note that this is the opposite of what we did in QE1, when the Fed was effectively acting as a marketmaker of last resort in MBS.  Spreads were abnormally wide, and in some sense, you could say that we were moving prices closer to where they would be in an idealized, frictionless world. Just to push the logic a little bit further, you could imagine a hypothetical situation in which we kept buying MBS to the point where somehow the spread on MBS was negative relative to Treasuries.  Presumably this would have some stimulative effect, but one might at the same time worry that there are some allocative distortions beneath that stimulative effect. Now, this is all, admittedly, very loose.  And let me see if I can be more precise and characterize what I think the nature of the costs might be in this particular case.  One story that has been repeated around this table over the last couple of days for why we have such strongly negative term premiums in long-term Treasuries is that right now, they’re serving as a safe haven for investors who want, in some sense, absolute surety on their investment.  They want to be able to park it in a place where they really don’t have to worry about it.  You might say, in some sense, that these investors are getting a flow of benefits from holding long-term Treasuries—that is, in a way, it’s money-like.  In the same way that you accept a reduced return on currency, you accept a reduced return on long-term Treasuries. So if this interpretation is right—if some of the negative term premium that we see is in some sense a money type of premium—it follows that if by buying in these long-term Treasuries, if you reduce the supply of this valuable money-like   commodity, you’re imposing some kind of a welfare cost.  Now, I don’t want to overstate this.  I’m not prepared to make any kind of quantitative estimate of the magnitude of this welfare cost.  But I think as a conceptual matter, it belongs on the table.  And I would also note that it’s interesting that in other contexts Fed policy has been sensitive to precisely this sort of consideration.  Earlier on—2007, 2008—it was short-term Treasuries that were essentially the scarce money-like commodity.  They were on special, their yields were below zero, and policy responded to that.  I interpret the TSLF as an attempt to lean against this scarcity issue. Having raised these concerns, which I think belong on the table, let me try to keep them in perspective.  As I said, I do believe that there is a cost side associated with further bond purchases, and it’s a somewhat unknowable, at least to me, particularly given where interest rates and term premiums are. This would make me uncomfortable at this point with the more aggressive alternative A.  At the same time, I think the argument that I’ve made is, again, a tentative one, and because I’m not in a position to flesh it out quantitatively, I don’t want to take it too far.  With respect to alternative B, it seems to me that the incremental costs, along these lines, of the maturity extension program are likely to be modest, as are, in my view, the direct stimulative benefits.  And so, as a number of others have mentioned—President Lockhart, I think you made this point—this leaves the indirect signaling effects of alternative B as perhaps its most important element. I do think it is very important that markets understand that the Fed is on the job and stands ready to step up in other ways, perhaps with some of the other tools that we have available, if the situation in Europe deteriorates badly.  To the extent that going with alternative B is helpful in communicating that message might be its biggest virtue at this point in time. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and explains their reasoning, discussing the potential benefits and costs of further accommodation. They also mention the importance of signaling the Fed's readiness to respond to a deteriorating situation in Europe.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude to Governor Powell.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 285.
  MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to support alternative B as well. I have struggled with the nagging thought that there may be a plausible alternative, which is to hold off for now, wait and see how the economy and the situation in Europe evolve, and perhaps keep our remaining powder dry in case there’s a need for coordinated intervention.  I do share many of the concerns raised around the table.  Briefly, to start back at the beginning, I am somebody who does see a substantial output gap, although I’m mindful of the history and of the dangers of relying on contemporaneous estimates of it.  Nonetheless, I believe that the chances are that there’s a substantial output gap now. However, I harbor real doubts about the efficacy of further balance sheet actions to close that.  So the argument is, why not try.  And that leads you straight to the issues that the Chairman raised succinctly at the beginning, which I continue to struggle with, particularly the thought that we’re approaching the limits of asset purchases. I note that there is an article on FT Alphaville this morning talking about illiquidity and that being a bar to the MEP.  I mentioned this to Brian beforehand, and they’re far ahead of Alphaville; I understand that.  But just to echo what President Pianalto and Governor Tarullo said, I’d personally like to understand those limits much better.  To the extent it’s possible to be more precise about what they are, I would love to do that.  But perhaps that’s an argument for using further quantitative easing if we have to, beyond the MEP, as more of a defensive weapon going forward.  As I weigh the arguments against extending the MEP, in the end, I don’t find them carrying the day, mostly because of the presence of significant financial market stress and the very real threat that it could get a lot worse.  This is a particularly bad time to withdraw accommodation.  And I agree with what Governor Stein said—it’s important that the Fed send the signal that we do have additionalammunition and we’re prepared to use it.  I also would say that what is proposed is a relatively small program.  It doesn’t cost us much to extend the program and let events clarify themselves. Finally, it’s hard for me to say whether this action will have much of an effect on longer-term rates or produce the forecasted reduction in unemployment or the slight increase in inflation.  It does seem fairly likely to me, however, that it would produce more-accommodative financial conditions, by which I mean lower risk premiums, increased liquidity, and reduced risk aversion at the margin—in the markets and, perhaps ultimately, in the real economy.  So, on that basis, I find myself in support of alternative B. Finally, I join the chorus of those urging the non-inclusion of paragraph 5.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses agreement with some of the concerns and doubts raised by others, but ultimately supports alternative B. They also mention the need for further understanding of the limits of asset purchases and the potential benefits of using further quantitative easing as a defensive weapon. Overall, there is contention and disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only includes a thank you and a reference to the Vice Chairman without providing any specific information or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think most of us agree that we’re not making adequate progress toward our employment objective—we don’t expect that we will make adequate progress over the next year or two—and that the downside risks to our outlook for economic growth predominate.  All of that implies to me, at least, that there is a good case for moving more forcefully now.  Nevertheless, I support alternative B at this meeting because I think we’ll soon know a lot more about the economy and Europe and because the statement holds out the prospect for further action should some of the downside risks we face begin to be realized. I don’t think the continuation of the maturity extension program would do very much—it’s just not that powerful—and it could actually result in tighter financial conditions if it were viewed as ruling out a further large-scale asset purchase program.  Thus, to me, it’s very important that the statement be written so as not to imply that the MEP extension precludes an additional LSAP—in other words, that we’re somehow out of ammunition.  I think that would be very damaging.  Alternative B, as written, does meet the test. I read it as saying   that we are extending the MEP through year-end and are open to stronger action should the situation continue to deteriorate. The question then is, what would that further action be.  Obviously, that depends on the circumstances. In terms of monetary policy actions, as opposed to special liquidity facilities, if we need to escalate, I’d be most inclined toward another large-scale asset purchase program. I would favor agency MBS over Treasuries, at least at the start, because I think the MBS purchases work on two margins:  first, the level of long-term interest rates; and second, the spread between agency MBS yields and Treasury rates. However, the potential size of an MBS purchase program is constrained by the volume of new agency MBS production, and if we go beyond a certain point, we start to disrupt market functioning.  If you wanted to do something that was larger and more powerful—say, going beyond $500 billion over the next 12 months— that would almost certainly argue that some portion of the purchases would have to be in Treasury securities. I would also strongly consider altering our forward guidance and working to see what could be done in a coordinated way with our foreign colleagues.  I can imagine that a coordinated LSAP program might be well received by markets. I think that seeing what could be done in terms of a long-term discount window lending program is something that we need to consider.  I do think, though, that we have to be very clear in that about what problem are we actually trying to solve with such a program, how operationally feasible it is, and how quickly it could actually be stood up.  I remember that during the crisis, there were a lot of proposals to do things, and then they took so long to come into effect that the programs actually turned out to be very ineffective.  Also, we should recognize that the Bank of England is doing this in conjunction with the U.K. Treasury, and so we also have to be very careful that we don’t step beyond the border and do something that’s actually engaging in fiscal action.  In terms of the statement, I frankly don’t read A(3) as that different than B(3). I read it a couple of times, and I don’t really read it as meaningfully different.  It’s a very subtle distinction, and I think that changing the language would just confuse people:  “Why are you making this change.” Regarding the KPW consortium and B′, I’m certainly open to going down that track in the future, and I encourage them to keep working on it.  I am really torn on paragraph 5.  I think it’s an accurate statement of how we feel.  We should include it if we think it’s reassuring; we should exclude it if we think it’s scary.  And I’ve read it a couple of times, and I can’t decide— which way does it tilt. Is it reassuring, or is it scary.  So I could go either way on that. Finally, let me make one final point about communication.  We have these meetings, and some people don’t always get what they like, and so the policy decisions of the Committee can diverge from what some of us would like to do individually.  It’s very important, when people don’t get their way or when they disagree with the policy choices, that they do not totally trash the policy choices that the Committee has made, because in totally trashing the policy choices that the Committee has made, you’re basically undercutting the efficacy of that policy. For example, I think, President Fisher, using phrases like “road to perdition” just goes too far.  State why you disagree with the policy, state why you think the costs of the policy are greater than the benefits, but I don’t think it’s helpful to then use such inflammatory phrases associated with the policy that we’ve actually decided on, because it damages the Committee and the efficacy of the policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker disagrees with President Fisher's use of the phrase "road to perdition" and thinks it goes too far. They believe that it damages the Committee and the efficacy of the policy.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Thank you, all.  Just to summarize, the outlook has gotten worse, the risks are more severe, and we have a forecast that, frankly, is very hard to defend—one in which unemployment is above everybody’s estimate of the long-run natural rate and is coming down very slowly at the same time that inflation is less than our target.  Again, all of that makes a strong case for action in general.  We are facing a situation where our policy tools are not as simple and not as easy to use as in normal times.  That makes the situation more complex.  Alternative B proposes what, I think, is being viewed as a temporizing move.  It gives us a chance to respond to the evident need for some support for the economy while at the same time giving us a chance to observe further developments, to conserve some firepower if things worsen considerably, and to look at other types of programs, as we’ve been talking about a bit around the table.  Again, I don’t make any strong fundamental case for extending the MEP except that, as I said at the beginning today, I think it makes tactical sense at this juncture and gives us a great deal of flexibility to go forward and to make choices based on how the economy and the outlook evolve.  I would push back just a little on the idea that this is an action that has essentially no consequences.  The standard calculation suggests that this is roughly equivalent to a federal funds rate cut of between 25 and 50 basis points.  Does that sound right, Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is summarizing the current economic outlook and outlining their support for a specific course of action.


Passage number 289.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Yes, that’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English simply agrees with a statement or statement made by someone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 290.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s not trivial.  And even though term premiums are very low and interest rates are very low, this program should work through a variety of channels, including other asset prices and spreads, and should have some beneficial effect on financial conditions.  I have some trouble with the argument that Europe has done the work for us.  It’s true that European stresses have lowered our Treasury yields, but they have, at the same time, lowered stock prices, increased volatility, increased spreads, and strengthened the dollar.  If you put all of that together, you get an overall financial impulse that is a negative rather than a positive for economic growth.  I take many of the useful comments around the room very seriously, and I think we should consider ourselves in a watchful mode, trying to evaluate both the underlying situation in the economy and the global risks that we are currently facing.  With respect to the language—Steve, today has been pretty calm, I think, in Europe.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the argument that Europe has done the work for them, stating that while European stresses have lowered Treasury yields, they have also had negative effects on stock prices, volatility, spreads, and the dollar. This contradicts the idea that Europe's actions have been beneficial.


Passage number 291.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  The sovereign spreads for Italy and Spain, having fallen yesterday, have fallen again today, at least as of this morning.  The Greek government looks as though it’s on the cusp of putting together its coalition government.  So it does seem as though the markets are calm for now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think I would therefore, along with a number of you, strike the bracketed paragraph at the end of the statement.  This is something that we might consider doing, for example, in conjunction with other central banks should the situation arise that stresses intensify. Let me quickly take up a couple of other suggestions.  President Kocherlakota advocated Governor Raskin’s suggestion on substituting A(3).  As I mentioned, I have a bit of concern that this would be interpreted as completely unconditional.  And I wonder if it would be acceptable for us to work on this over the intermeeting period to try to get something with this spirit, but that captures the idea that should conditions change, this would not be an unconditional commitment. Is that all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their opinion and making suggestions, but there is no disagreement or debate mentioned.


Passage number 293.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That sounds very reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That sounds very reasonable" indicates agreement with the previous statement made by someone else.


Passage number 294.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The other suggestion was the one President Williams had on the language in paragraph 2.  Perhaps we could just see if there’s broad interest in this or not.  Just to read it again—you can correct me, President Williams.  This is in alternative B, paragraph 2, second sentence—the one that now begins, “The Committee expects economic growth . . .”  As I have it, the introductory phrase would be, “With somewhat less recent momentum in domestic demand and greater strains in global financial markets, the Committee expectseconomic growth to remain moderate . . .” and I would definitely take out the “downside risks” sentence in that case because it’s purely repetitive on the increased risks. That phrase is more descriptive.  On the other hand, it changes the formula.  We’d have to figure out how to update it next time, et cetera.  Anyone want to speak for or against that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a suggestion made by President Williams regarding the language in paragraph 2. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 295.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You’re taking out the “Furthermore” sentence, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a directive of removing the sentence starting with "Furthermore."


Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Don’t you think, if we’re already saying “greater strains in global financial markets . . .”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement or question asking for someone's opinion.


Passage number 297.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think that’s going to be weird to take it out at this particular meeting, given that the strains have actually intensified since the last meeting. People will have trouble parsing why we’re taking it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents an opinion about a potential action (taking something out at a meeting) and suggests that it might be perceived as strange due to the increased tensions.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 299.
 MR. POWELL.  We just moved it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about an event that occurred.


Passage number 300.
 MS. DUKE.  Moved it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states that someone moved something up without any indication of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 301.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How about, “With somewhat less recent momentum in domestic demand and with global financial markets continuing to pose significant downside risks, . . .”. Would that be okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for approval or agreement on a suggested statement.


Passage number 302.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes. If you phrase it almost the same way, then I think you can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Based on the information provided, there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 303.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Williams, did you hear what I said.  Was that okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply portrays a person asking a question and seeking confirmation.


Passage number 304.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 305.
 WILLIAMS. The point I was trying to make was that the greater strains in global financial markets are part of the outlook in our baseline forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a point the speaker was trying to make.


Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Right" by itself does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 307.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not provided, therefore it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement without any context.


Passage number 308.
 WILLIAMS.  Then, in addition to that there are downside risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage only mentions a potential downside risk, but does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 309.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They are slightly different things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that two things, without specifying what they are, are slightly different from each other. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 310.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, without the actual passage provided, it is not possible to accurately determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 311.
 WILLIAMS.  I see these as being both in play and both important parts of our decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The statement simply observes that both factors are relevant and should be considered in the decision-making process. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 312.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you would keep the second sentence, the “Furthermore” sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "Furthermore" simply adds additional information or supports the previous statement without presenting any conflicting ideas.


Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. At a minimum, can we at least change the phrase “greater strains” so that it’s not identical to the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not expressing any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests making a small modification to avoid repetition without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 314.
 MR. EVANS.  What about “global economic developments in that first part”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. This statement is a question about a specific topic and does not suggest any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 315.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 316.
 WILLIAMS.  Or “tighter financial conditions”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "tighter financial conditions". It is a neutral term that does not express any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 317.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  “Tighter financial conditions” would be appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is stating that "tighter financial conditions" would be appropriate, without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 318.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “With somewhat less recent momentum in domestic demand and tighter conditions in financial markets, . . .”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 319.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just “tighter financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there are "tighter financial conditions."


Passage number 320.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Tighter financial conditions”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "tighter financial conditions" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral description of a situation.


Passage number 321.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 322.
 WILLIAMS.  “Tighter financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that financial conditions are becoming more restrictive.


Passage number 323.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you feel comfortable with that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply asking if the person being addressed feels comfortable with a certain change, without expressing their own opinion or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 324.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Could you repeat that again, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is simply a statement requesting someone to repeat what they said. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “With somewhat less recent momentum in domestic demand and tighter financial conditions, . . .”—and then we would go on—“. . . the Committee expects economic growth,” et cetera. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement does not present conflicting ideas or opinions, it simply states that there has been decreased momentum in domestic demand and tighter financial conditions, which the Committee expects could impact economic growth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 326.
 MR. LOCKHART. Can we really support to the general public that the lower 10-year bond rate, combined with zero-lower-bound interest rates and a fluctuating equity market,  constitutes tighter conditions. I don’t know if that’s going to resonate with everyone out there. We’re really referring to conditions that are related to Europe, it strikes me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses uncertainty and doubt about whether the conditions mentioned can be considered tighter conditions. He questions whether this perspective will resonate with the general public, suggesting a difference of opinion or perspective.


Passage number 327.
 MS. DUKE.  How about “more volatile” or something that gets to the uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for alternative phrases to convey a similar meaning.


Passage number 328.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Their source may be Europe, but the conditions are germane here. What do Brian and Nellie think about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention Brian and Nellie's thoughts or opinions on the topic. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement evident.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 329.
 MR. SACK. Given the movement in equities, other risk prices, and the strengthening of the dollar, it seems that financial conditions broadly are tighter.  Yes, the fall in yields is a partial offset to that, but we think the net effect is clearly tighter financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges that the fall in yields partially offsets the tightening of financial conditions, but ultimately believes that the overall effect is still tighter conditions.


Passage number 330.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I see Nellie nodding in the back as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Nellie is nodding, which suggests agreement or understanding.


Passage number 331.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Was that an authorized nod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 332.
 [Laughter] MS. LIANG.  I agree with what Brian said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker agrees with Brian's statement.


Passage number 333.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. Why don’t we take a straw poll on this particular language—unless there are further suggestions or comments.  [No response]  How many people would like to make the change.  All participants can participate.  Three, four, five, six, seven, eight…  How many are against. Then, it looks as though the change carries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply proposing a straw poll to gauge the participants' agreement or disagreement with making a change. There is no indication of anyone expressing opposition or engaging in a debate or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 334.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  By a nose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "by a nose" indicates a close or narrow victory, suggesting there was a disagreement or competition between two or more participants.


Passage number 335.
 MR. TARULLO. Mr. Chairman, what do you want to do.  Do you have a preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for the chairman's preference without expressing any opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 336.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do I have a preference.  I would have had a preference to have 15 more minutes to think more about the wording.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal preference for having more time to think about the wording, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 337.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We do have 15 more minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The presence of laughter suggests a light, friendly atmosphere, and the statement "We do have 15 more minutes" seems to be a straightforward statement, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 338.
 MR. TARULLO.  We do have time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 339.
 MR. POWELL.  If it’s not a strong preference, we shouldn’t do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Powell is simply stating that if there is not a strong preference for a certain action, it should not be done.


Passage number 340.
  It’s too complicated MR. TARULLO.  We should get comfortable with this, one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 341.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, you have to express it, so what’s your preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Fisher asking the Chairman to express their preference.


Passage number 342.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, you have to explain what it means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement requesting clarification or explanation.


Passage number 343.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, the Tarullo rule would say, no, don’t make the change because it’s such a close call, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, there is a statement about the Tarullo rule and expressing the opinion that it advises against making a change. However, there is no indication of any disagreement or contention in the passage, as it does not present any opposing perspectives or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m really okay with it either way.  Does anyone have any strong objection. [No response] All right. So we keep the first sentence as it stands.  The second sentence begins, “With somewhat less recent momentum in domestic demand and tighter financial conditions, . . .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their neutral stance by stating they are okay with either outcome. They then ask if anyone objects, but there is no response. After that, they proceed to discuss the second sentence without any opposition.


Passage number 345.
” MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a fragment of a sentence and does not provide enough information to determine if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 346.
 WILLIAMS.  “It might be easier to say “some tightening in financial conditions.” It might read better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about how phrasing a certain concept may be easier or read better.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. How about, “and some tightening”—I-N-G—“in financial conditions, the Committee expects economic growth . . .”  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker presents an alternative suggestion or modification to the phrase "tightening in financial conditions" by adding "some" before it. This indicates that the speaker has a different perspective or opinion on the matter.


Passage number 348.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is addressing someone respectfully and there is no conflicting statement or opposing viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I’d make the argument that we seem to be responding to relatively short-term changes. Various elements of what we’re calling tightening, like the dollar, could turn around quickly, and we’re connecting that to a view that economic growth is going to remain moderate over coming quarters.  That’s a long time to pin on this short-term tightening, which could change dramatically depending on circumstances.  Quite frankly, I don’t see that it connects very well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Lockhart expressing his view and argument about the relationship between short-term tightening and economic growth.


Passage number 351.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. How much has the trajectory of financial conditions changed in the Tealbook forecast, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for information about the changes in the trajectory of financial conditions in the Tealbook forecast.


Passage number 352.
MR. WILCOX.  That’s quite a big portion of our adjustment in the economic outlook.  The dollar is worth several tenths on our adjustment to economic growth this year and next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about how the dollar's worth contributes to the adjustment in the economic outlook. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 353.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I thought that Steve Kamin’s view on Europe was that this was going to be a cloud for an extended period of time.  You could be right that conditions could change on a dime, but I think that the baseline view is that this is going to be around for a while. Is that fair, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is asking for clarification from Steve about his view on Europe, but it does not express any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 354.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes, that’s absolutely right.  One issue is that, in some sense, our outlook is predicated not just on financial conditions in Europe being stressed but also on them getting more stressed.  And that is something that would not be communicated by the sentence in the statement, nor would we want it to be communicated in the statement.  Another, minor issue is that if there’s a follow-up question—well, what are these financial conditions that have gotten worse. Then you’d have to cite the higher dollar, and that is a little problematic, too, but it can be dealt with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. 

Explanation: The speaker is simply pointing out a couple of potential issues or challenges with the statement, but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 355.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to accurately determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 356.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone want to change their vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 357.
 MS. DUKE.  Yes.  I was in favor of it, but with this much discomfort with it, I think I’d be more comfortable leaving it alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea being discussed (leaving it alone) after initially stating they were in favor of it.


Passage number 358.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There’s the status quo rule.  All right.  Thank you.  I’m sorry for the diversion.  We gave it a serious look.  So I think we’re ready.  Alternative B, I think, is unchanged as written, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of statements and acknowledgments without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 359.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes. But no paragraph 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement that does not present any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 360.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No paragraph 5—correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, paragraph 5 is not present.


Passage number 361.
  MS. DANKER.  Okay.  This vote is on alternative B—the statement as written, no paragraph 5—and the associated directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states that there is a vote on alternative B without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 362.
 Chairman Bernanke   Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Raskin Yes Governor Stein Yes Governor Tarullo Yes President Williams Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Brian will just say a few words about our operational plans for the MEP.  Very quickly, while he’s distributing the handout, let me just remind you that the next meeting is July 31– August 1.  That’s Tuesday and Wednesday.  There will be a press conference today at 2:15, and the Special Library will have a screen, if you are so inclined.  After we finish today, there is coffee available, and then lunch will be available in half an hour or so.  And let me note that we had earlier on talked about having a special topic on rules-based policy with and without the zero lower bound at this meeting.  That was delayed because the work wasn’t complete, and we will now do that in July.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 363.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to second the comments that I’ve heard around the table about exploration of our remaining tools, their costs and benefits.  Everything I have heard leads me to believe that we’re close to the end of our balance sheet tools.  So I think that communication should be part of that panoply of tools that are under consideration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the comments made by others and suggesting that communication should be considered as one of the tools to explore.


Passage number 364.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will do that.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a simple declaration that something will be done, with no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 365.
 MR. FISHER. First, Mr. Chairman, I want to say to Vice Chairman Dudley that I will never refrain from expressing my views at this table, but I will be very conscious about the honey-fication of my comments in public.  So thank you for your comments.  I wanted to second what Narayana just said, because Vice Chairman Dudley started yesterday on this point about our contingency planning, not just on monetary policy but also on stability measures. I heard Governor Duke, Governor Tarullo, Governor Stein, and others—just now, Narayana—on it.  As you know, I’ve spoken about contingency planning often, and I would like to see us flesh that out as much as possible and focus on the tradeoffs that Governor Tarullo mentioned in terms of the cost–benefit analysis. I think that’s a very high-priority item for us.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement expressing agreement and support for the idea of contingency planning and tradeoff analysis mentioned by Vice Chairman Dudley and Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 366.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We are looking at the discount window option here at the Board.  What that means exactly is not entirely clear, but something along the lines of the Bank of England’s initiative.  The Desk should be able to give us some estimates of how much space there is for other kinds of actions, and we need to address this in the intermeeting period.  Okay.  Anyone else.  [No response]  Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about exploring the discount window option and requesting further information.


Passage number 367.
 MR. SACK.7 Thank you. Following recent practices, the Desk intends to release a statement with operational details on the continuation of the maturity extension program at the same time as the release of the FOMC statement.  You’ve received a copy of a draft of that statement in the “Material for FOMC Presentation: Operational Plan for Maturity Extension and Reinvestment Initiatives.” There are actually a few changes being made based on comments from the communications group, so there will be a few slight differences between this and the actual statement. The continuation of the MEP will entail the purchase of about $267 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 to 30 years, and the sale or redemption of an equal par amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or less. As highlighted in the table contained in the Desk statement, the purchases will be allocated across five sectors with the same weights that have been used in MEP 7 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). purchases to date.  This distribution allocates a large share of the purchases to long-term securities in order to extend the average maturity of the SOMA portfolio. A combination of sales and redemptions of Treasury securities will be conducted to match the amount of purchases over the program.  Sales will take place in securities maturing between January 2013 and January 2016.  This range defines what is meant by “approximately 3 years.”  The maximum maturity to be sold will be 3 years and 1 month at the end of the program.  And over the course of the program, we will add the longest maturities in this range gradually over time, so that the Desk is never selling a security with more than 3¼ years to maturity. On redemptions, securities maturing in the second half of 2012 will be fully redeemed—that is, they will be allowed to mature without reinvestment.  Note that redeeming maturing Treasury securities has a nearly identical effect on the portfolio as selling securities that are approaching maturity. This, operationally, has advantages and has the same effects as sales.  Overall, sales are expected to total about $234 billion, and redemptions will total about $33 billion. The average duration of the securities purchased is expected to be between 10 and 11 years, while the average duration of the securities sold or redeemed is expected to be between 1 and 2 years.  Based on this difference, the average duration of Treasury holdings in the SOMA portfolio is expected to reach 8 years after having increased from 5 to 7 years as a result of the program scheduled through June.  In terms of 10-year equivalents, the amount of duration risk removed by the continuation of the MEP is expected to be just over $250 billion.  When added to the effect of the initial program, the total amount of 10-year equivalents removed by the MEP as a whole is expected to be about $700 billion. The Desk anticipates conducting about 15 purchase operations and 5 sale operations per month on average.  The Desk will continue to release a schedule of operations on the last business day of each month, covering the subsequent calendar month.  The first release is scheduled for next Friday, June 29.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the continuation of the maturity extension program.


