Passage number 1.
   Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on October 23–24, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 23, 2012, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, October 24, 2012, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Elizabeth Duke Jeffrey M. Lacker Dennis P. Lockhart Sandra Pianalto Jerome H. Powell Sarah Bloom Raskin Jeremy C. Stein Daniel K. Tarullo John C. Williams Janet L. Yellen James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, William Nelson, David Reifschneider, Mark S. Sniderman, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley, and Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Helen E. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Jeff Fuhrer and Loretta J. Mester, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Philadelphia, respectively Troy Davig, Spencer Krane, and Kevin Stiroh, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Chicago, and New York, respectively William Gavin, Evan F. Koenig, Lorie K. Logan, and Paolo A. Pesenti, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, New York, and New York, respectively Thomas D. Tallarini, Jr., Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Eric T.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides a list of the individuals who were present at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on October 23-24, 2012.


Passage number 2.
 Swanson, Senior Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on October 23–24, 2012 October 23 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  A couple of people asked me about the leak investigation relating to the Hilsenrath and Medley Global Advisors pieces.  Just to remind you of what I wrote to you, I have asked Scott Alvarez and Bill English to do an initial review, and, based on their findings, we will take further steps as indicated. I also asked Michelle to talk to all of the public affairs officers in the System to try to help them guide their principals and staff in following the rules, and I think that’s already been done.  My own sense is that the leaks were probably unintentional.  We have very good reporters talking to lots and lots of people.  But that said, they are obviously damaging to the reputation and credibility of the Committee, so I urge everybody, please, to be more careful in the future. On a somewhat lighter note, I want to ask President Evans and President Williams if they made the World Series bet yet. Not yet.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is giving an update on a leak investigation and expressing their belief that the leaks were unintentional. They then change the subject to ask about a World Series bet.


Passage number 3.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 4.
 WILLIAMS.  We decided to delegate that to the first vice presidents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, mentions a decision that was made to delegate a task, suggesting a consensus among the individuals involved.


Passage number 5.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS. They’re better at it than we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.  Congratulations, and we’re trying to recover here in Washington. Okay.  The first item on our agenda is “Thresholds.”  This has to do with our forward guidance for the federal funds rate.  As you know, we currently have guidance that suggests the date at which we expect to begin to raise rates.  I think many people around the table agree that that’s not the optimal way to communicate our future policy, and that it would be better if we could do a state-contingent type of policy. But the details matter—in particular, the language we use, the choice of indicators, the values, and so on.  So we have asked the staff to prepare a  background memo, which, I hope you agree, was very good, very informative.  I will ask Eric Engen to make a presentation, we’ll ask some questions, and then we’ll do a go-round and see what the views are on this issue.  So let me turn it over to Eric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that there are differing views on how to communicate future policy and that the details matter. This suggests that there is contention or disagreement among those present.


Passage number 7.
 MR. ENGEN.1  Thank you.  I will be referring to the handout titled “Material for Briefing on Thresholds,” which has been distributed. In a memo circulated to the Committee last week, the staff analyzed the merits of replacing or augmenting the current date-based forward guidance with specific threshold values of inflation and unemployment that would need to be attained before policymakers would consider increasing the federal funds rate target.  As outlined in the top panel of the first exhibit, you may be concerned that the current forward guidance could lead market participants to focus on the expected date of liftoff rather than the conditionality of the outlook for the funds rate target and so leave the impression that the Committee has committed to a specific time-dependent policy.  By contrast, quantitative thresholds could increase the clarity of the Committee’s intentions and improve market participants’ understanding of the monetary policy reaction function.  In particular, thresholds could enable market participants to obtain a better understanding of how the onset of policy firming might shift in response to changes in the economic outlook.  Such guidance may make it more likely that market responses to economic developments would move longer-term interest rates in a direction and by an amount consistent with the Committee’s view regarding the likely future path of short-term rates.  Enhanced clarity about the Committee’s intentions might also reduce uncertainty about the future stance of policy.  In both ways, thresholds could therefore contribute to improved macroeconomic performance. As indicated by the second bullet, the adoption of thresholds could also facilitate the Committee’s deliberations.  With the current date-based forward guidance, the Committee must regularly review the date to verify that it is still appropriate—a review that can be contentious because participants have different views about the economic outlook and about the appropriate date for the onset of policy firming.  In principle, thresholds could allow participants with different outlooks to agree on the statement’s forward guidance and to do so in a way that needs to be reviewed only from time to time. Finally, the announcement of a thresholds strategy might provide additional policy stimulus if it were to materially change market expectations for the future path of the federal funds rate, both with regard to the date when policy would begin to firm and the subsequent pace of tightening. The bottom panels of the exhibit illustrate both the limits and the force of this last point.  The September consensus forecast is plotted as the black lines, and let’s 1 The materials used by Mr. Engen are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). assume that market expectations are currently in line with this baseline forecast.  We then assume that the FOMC credibly promises to keep the funds rate near zero as long as the unemployment rate is above 6½ percent and inflation is projected to remain below 2½ percent, but once either threshold is crossed, it will follow the prescriptions of the outcome-based rule.  As shown by the red lines, because this strategy implies essentially the same path for the funds rate as in the baseline, it has almost no effect on real activity or inflation.  However, if the Committee were to announce the more aggressive threshold strategy, denoted by the green lines, in which the unemployment threshold is 5½ percent and the inflation threshold is 3 percent, then the date when policy firming begins would be postponed by a year, resulting in lower unemployment and higher inflation. The blue lines illustrate a somewhat different point—that forward guidance about the Committee’s strategy for the pace of tightening after liftoff also can have an important effect on the economy.  Here, the Committee announces the same moderate threshold settings of 6½ percent for unemployment and 2½ percent for inflation as were implicit in the red lines, but also credibly promises to tighten more slowly than market participants initially anticipate by following the more gradual prescriptions of an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule.  As can be seen, this strategy does about as well as the more aggressive threshold strategy in providing additional policy stimulus. These simulation results are not general, because they show only the performance of the different threshold settings and policy rules given the underlying economic conditions of the September consensus forecast.  As outlined at the beginning of the top panel in the second exhibit, for this reason we undertook a more comprehensive analysis of threshold settings and policy rules when the economy—as approximated by the FRB/US model—is buffeted by a wide range of shocks. Subject to the usual caveats that necessarily apply to any model-based analysis, two main lessons emerged from this exercise.  First, the model simulations suggest that the Committee could use thresholds to help clarify its communications without compromising macroeconomic performance.  In particular, using projected inflation and unemployment thresholds to guide the return to a “normal” policy setting—as approximated by having the federal funds rate follow the prescriptions of a simple policy rule after either of the thresholds is crossed—would likely perform fairly well under a variety of economic conditions.  Second, the model simulations suggest that the use of thresholds could improve expected macroeconomic performance—subject to the caveat that thresholds can be set too aggressively. I should note that we explored the effects of more threshold combinations than we reported in the memo, and that one of these followed President Kocherlakota’s proposal to set the unemployment threshold at 5½ percent and the inflation threshold at 2½ percent.  Although we found that these settings worked well in many circumstances, we ran into technical obstacles in solving the model with them in our stochastic simulations and so did not include this case in our analysis.   We also investigated some issues that arise when thresholds are defined in terms of the unemployment rate and projected inflation, where two important conclusions emerged. First, because the amount of slack in labor markets is uncertain, reliance on an unemployment threshold creates a risk that the Committee could keep policy persistently easier or tighter than it would choose to if it had full information about the economy.  However, this risk is associated with any policy strategy that uses measures of labor market slack to help guide the setting of the funds rate, and the use of thresholds may not exacerbate it greatly.  Moreover, the consequences of such measurement error would probably be modest provided that inflation expectations remained reasonably well anchored and the Committee corrected its error once it saw inflation rising substantially above its target. Second, because inflation—even projected inflation—is subject to a certain degree of inherent volatility, setting the inflation threshold at a level only modestly above 2 percent would make it highly likely that this threshold would be crossed relatively early despite a still-elevated level of unemployment.  As a result, economic outcomes could be less favorable than those obtained with a somewhat higher inflation threshold. We also considered some of the communications challenges that would likely be associated with using a thresholds strategy in the Committee’s forward guidance.  One challenge is that it’s difficult to formulate a threshold for inflation in terms of the realized headline inflation rate because headline inflation is volatile and often buffeted by significant but transitory shocks, particularly from oil and other commodity prices.  A second challenge is that the effect of monetary policy on current financial and economic conditions depends at least as much on market participants’ expectations for policy after the onset of policy firming as on the expected start date of firming.  A third challenge arises because the thresholds would likely differ from the Committee’s longer-run objectives and market participants may not understand the distinction.  Finally, the use of a threshold strategy would describe monetary policy in terms of two variables, but the Committee draws on a wide range of indicators when setting monetary policy.  Our memo provided possible statement language that would address some of these communications challenges.  That language is reproduced on exhibit 3 of your handout. The last page of the handout provides the questions for discussion that were distributed to you last week, which you may want to refer to in your remarks.  I would now be glad to take any questions that you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and discussing potential benefits and challenges of using thresholds in monetary policy.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for the staff.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude and asks if there are any questions for the staff. The mention of President Bullard does not indicate any disagreement or contention either.


Passage number 9.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  Thanks for the presentation.  I’m looking at the “Federal Funds Rate” picture on exhibit 1.  The green here, the outcome-based rule, has the liftoff date in thesecond quarter of 2016, if I’m reading this correctly.  I think the relevant comparison would be this particular threshold versus the Committee just saying that instead of mid-2015, the date is going to be the second quarter of 2016.  Then would I get the same green lines here that you’re showing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement requesting clarification and confirming understanding.


Passage number 10.
 MR. ENGEN.  In the model, whether it’s an announced date or whether it’s the thresholds, the public takes that as credible and they are following the same rules.  So if you just shifted the date, you would get very similar results.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a hypothetical scenario and suggests that shifting the date would lead to similar results.


Passage number 11.
 MR. BULLARD. We often talk about thresholds as if the state-contingent policy is going to give us something different than the date-contingent policy, but really, in the model, it’s the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining that although thresholds and state-contingent policies may be discussed separately, they are actually the same thing in the model being referred to.


Passage number 12.
 MR. ENGEN.  Well, would those thresholds help clarify that. In the model here, we’re assuming that the public has the same outlook for economic conditions and fully understands what the intent of policy is.  Providing the conditions that we expect to see at the time of liftoff may help clarify for the public exactly what those conditions are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that providing specific conditions may help clarify the intentions of the policy to the public.


Passage number 13.
 MR. WILCOX.  Correct me if I’m wrong, but the date-contingent policy and the thresholds will give exactly the same answer in a nonstochastic environment, correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 14.
 MR. ENGEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The clue is the word "Yes," which suggests a confirmation of contention or disagreement. However, without additional context, it's challenging to determine the specific nature of the disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 15.
 MR. WILCOX.  But if the date-contingent statement is a binding commitment, they’ll give different results in a stochastic simulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is a disagreement about the results that will be obtained in a stochastic simulation.


Passage number 16.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, in a stochastic simulation, the date, for instance, might move earlier because the data come in more positively, but a date-contingent policy would not move.  And according to the model, that would actually be more accommodative than the state-contingent policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 17.
   MR ENGEN.  If you had the dates always moving exactly where the thresholds were and the public understood that, then yes, they would behave the same in the deterministic or the stochastic environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about how people would behave in a certain scenario.


Passage number 18.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing gratitude for something but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention in his statement.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only mentions the topic of "Other questions" without providing any specific information or opinions on the matter.


Passage number 20.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just a technical question.  On the simulations as you do them, the assumption appears to be that once these thresholds are in fact triggered, policy would then revert to the outcome-based rule or something upon the reaching of the threshold.  So the presumption is that the Committee will in fact act when those thresholds are reached.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is asking for clarification on a technical aspect of the simulations being discussed.


Passage number 21.
 MR. ENGEN.  Well, I just want to clarify. It is definitely the case that once one of the thresholds is crossed—or if both of them are crossed simultaneously—policy moves to, say, the outcome-based rule.  That doesn’t necessarily mean that the federal funds rate starts to rise.  And indeed, in some of the simulations that we did, particularly in the stochastic setting, you can see that there’s a much wider range across all of the different policy settings for crossings than there is for actually having the federal funds rate start to rise.  So it’s not the case that, immediately after crossing a threshold, it is assumed that the federal funds rate has to start rising.  If the prescription of the rule is such that it would say, “Still keep the funds rate at approximately zero,” it would stay there until the prescription of the rule had it starting to rise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 22.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply states "Mr. Plosser" followed by "Okay," which does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 23.
 MR. ENGEN.  So it’s not a trigger in the sense of the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is just giving a definition or clarification of what the term "trigger" means in the context of "funds rate". There is no argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 24.
 MR. PLOSSER.  No, I understand.  But you are switching regimes at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply expressing his understanding of a situation.


Passage number 25.
 MR. ENGEN.  It switches from the threshold to a policy rule, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 26.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Seeing no more questions, let’s start with Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement suggesting that the discussion or meeting will begin with Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Lacker.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The given phrase "President Kocherlakota" does not imply any contention or disagreement. It simply states the title and does not provide any context to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 29.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.  I had a question for President Lacker, because I think this issue about labor force participation has come up before when we talked about thresholds.  So I’d be interested in what conditions about labor force participation would lead you to want to raise rates even though the unemployment rate was, say, above 6½ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question.


Passage number 30.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m sorry—above what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is apologizing for not understanding or hearing something and does not indicate any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 31.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Above 6½.  Suppose the threshold was 6½, as Governor Tarullo talked about.  You’re positing that labor force participation is growing rapidly.  What would be the conditions that would lead us to want to raise rates at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing a hypothetical scenario and asking for the conditions that would lead to a specific action.


Passage number 32.
 MR. LACKER. In the staff memo, figure 2 shows the performance of a threshold strategy in the face of unanticipated shocks to aggregate demand.  There’s stronger demand, weaker demand, and the baseline. Real GDP growth varies substantially. The federal funds rate path varies substantially. In the stronger-demand case, it’s 4 percent in late 2015; in the baseline, it begins to rise in 2015; and in the weaker-demand case, it doesn’t rise until the first quarter of 2017. The civilian unemployment rate is very different across the scenarios. Well, what if labor force participation is far more elastic with regard to employment growth than depicted by these simulations.  If that’s true, the unemployment rate might not vary much at all across these scenarios in the limit—it’s conceivable—in which case we’d have different demand conditions but virtually the same unemployment rate, and we might need a 4 percent funds rate in late 2015, or we might need to wait until 2017—we don’t know.  It could be orthogonal.  It could be very independent of what rate we want. That’s the kind of thing I have in mind, President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Lacker is raising a hypothetical scenario and questioning the assumptions made in the simulations. He is not expressing disagreement or contention with anyone else's viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  I guess I still don’t quite understand your objective function.  I’ll have to think about that one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker says they don't understand the objective function and need more time to think about it, indicating a disagreement or lack of clarity in that aspect of the passage.


Passage number 34.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage suggests that Mr. Lacker is apologizing for something or expressing regret, but it does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 35.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I still don’t quite understand your objective function.  You’re defining it somehow in terms of GDP or employment in a way.  You’re not defining it in terms of utilization, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a lack of understanding and clarity regarding the objective function being discussed.


Passage number 36.
 MR. LACKER. This turns on the question of the relationship between labor force participation and capacity.  And you could identify those very closely.  There’s a lot of literature that talks about the permeability of that boundary. I don’t think the standard models on which a New Keynesian Phillips curve is built say much about that margin at all. They talk about output growth and inflation.  They talk about marginal cost, which is going to depend on employment, not on the supply of labor.  So what we know about the interaction of inflation and output growth, and the possibility for nonneutrality in the standard models these days, links it to marginal cost, and that’s going to be linked to real output and growth.  That suggests that the reaction function should depend on what happens to employment growth, not on what happens to unemployment, at least if unemployment can be influenced independently by variation in labor force participation.  You see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Rather, it is a statement of the speaker's understanding and interpretation of economic models and their relationship to labor force participation and inflation.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. On another topic, I would question your statement that this is inconsistent with the consensus statement.  The consensus statement is about long-run monetary neutrality.  It’s not inconsistent to have a Taylor rule, for example, that defines short-run monetary policy as a function of current variables without claiming that you can peg the unemployment rate in the long run.  So I don’t think that’s inconsistent.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining that there is no disagreement or contention regarding the relationship between a Taylor rule and the consensus statement on long-run monetary neutrality. The speaker is clarifying that having a Taylor rule does not contradict the consensus statement.


Passage number 38.
 MR. EVANS. I’m sorry, I’m not sure I followed the interchange here very well, so if I could express it the way that I would think about this.  The concern that I would have thought you were trying to point us toward was, if we find ourselves with a threshold that is inappropriate  so that we find ourselves pushing a ton of accommodation into the economy, then we could get stuck.  Well, the inflation safeguard is there to protect us against that.  So if we’re not generating a lot of inflationary pressures, I’m not quite sure what the risk is that you’re pointing to—as I see you shake your head.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is asking for clarification and expressing confusion about the other person's point.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
 MR. LACKER. I take it that we’re trying to design a policy that doesn’t go off track. It doesn’t require us to “go off the rails” and then “get back on the rails.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "go off the rails" implies a deviation from the desired path, while the phrase "get back on the rails" suggests a return to the correct course. The use of these phrases indicates a potential disagreement about the approach to designing a policy.


Passage number 40.
” MR. EVANS.  Sure.  I thought “off the rails” was inflation in this case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply offering his interpretation of the phrase "off the rails" in the context of inflation.


Passage number 41.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  But you don’t want to drive the car down the highway just counting on bouncing off guardrails to keep you on the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a thought or opinion.


Passage number 42.
 MR. EVANS.  That’s what it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement made by Mr. Evans, without any conflicting or opposing views being expressed.


Passage number 43.
 MR. STEIN. I think this is the center lane.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. STEIN is expressing his opinion about the center lane.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 44.
 MR. LACKER.  This is the broader point we’ve talked about before on this topic, about the role of the inflation escape clause. The policy rules we implement and the models we have possess the property that it’s always the case that inflation is expected to return to the monetary policy authority’s target.  Always.  Probability 1.  Very definitely.  These thresholds sound like, “Well, we’re going to run a policy that might not be consistent with that, and then when inflation goes away from that, we’ll change our mind and come back.” And it means you have to wait and see that happen.  Ideally, you want to run a policy that maintains price stability, not one that lets it drift around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing disagreement with the idea of using thresholds to guide monetary policy, as it suggests a willingness to deviate from the policy rules and models that always expect inflation to return to the target. He argues that a policy should aim to maintain price stability rather than allowing it to drift around.


Passage number 45.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  But 2½ percent is so close to our long-run target, that’s really not much play at all. The issue is not so much what’s in our models.  In this particular case, it strikes me that the safeguard is about not what’s in our models but what’s in the real world.  I go out and talk to businesspeople all the time; I try to convey these types of accommodative policies, andthey leap to 3 percent, 4 percent inflation before anybody is breathing hard. In that world, we’ve got the safeguard.  So, at any rate—that’s my interpretation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans is expressing his own interpretation and perspective, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no passage provided in the prompt.


Passage number 47.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher, I’d just point out that in the language proposed by the staff, it does have the proviso that longer-term inflation expectations be well anchored.  It also has an optional sentence, which says that the Committee will consider “other indicators of economic and financial conditions.” It is possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and stating facts about the proposed language. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 48.
 MR. FISHER.  I like those.  I just wanted to underscore my support for them.  But again, I come back to the numbers, which I’m concerned about.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker expresses support for something (likely a proposal or idea) and also expresses concern about numbers without indicating any disagreement or contention with another party.


Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement mentioning President Bullard.


Passage number 50.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states "Thank you" and then mentions President Rosengren without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 51.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ve been supportive of using numerical economic outcomes to set thresholds rather than continuing to use amounts when discussing asset purchases or dates when discussing the eventual liftoff date. I am well aware that no one variable can proxy for labor market conditions or, for that matter, the underlying rate of inflation. In reality, we look at a broad array of data when evaluating how we are progressing against our dual mandate.  This would be a problem if we were choosing a single variable to trigger action.  However, providing a numerical threshold merely provides guidance on when we will discuss whether the broader array of data is consistent with taking a new action.  Thus, if there are a variety of sometimes conflicting measures of inflation and labor market conditions, that’s not a reason to avoid adopting thresholds. I view numerical thresholds as being useful for two reasons.  First, they provide a simple communication to the public tied to economic outcomes.  We will not take action to reverse ourpolicies until we reach a threshold.  So if there is a negative shock, monetary policy automatically becomes more accommodative as the date for ending asset purchases or reaching liftoff is pushed further in the future.  Second, qualitative measures can be offset by participants’ communications, which, at times, may make our actions less effective.  A quantitative threshold provides a clear indication that there is a consensus among voters that tightening will not begin at least until the threshold is attained.  To be effective, a threshold must be simple to communicate and observable to the public.  Unlike a trigger, it does not need to be precise.  We are committing only to postpone action until the threshold is met and, at that time, to begin a discussion of whether taking action is consistent with the path to achieve our dual mandate within an acceptable time frame. For a proxy of labor market conditions, I would use the unemployment rate.  It is a variable widely understood by the public.  At times, the unemployment rate can fall for reasons other than improvements in labor market conditions, but because we are setting a threshold, not a trigger, I am comfortable with that degree of imprecision. I would use an unemployment rate of 7¼ percent to begin a discussion of whether labor market conditions had improved “substantially,” a term not well defined in qualitative terms for the public or, for that matter, for ourselves.  I would use an unemployment rate of 6½ percent to begin a discussion of a potential liftoff of short-term rates. For inflation, we have a target tied to the PCE inflation rate, so the threshold variable should be the same as our target variable.  If we had a median PCE inflation forecast in the medium term that was publicly available at each meeting, that could be a potential threshold. What we decide about the SEP and consensus forecasts will be discussed later in the meeting. In the absence of a regularly disclosed PCE inflation forecast, I would use the four-quarter moving  average of actual PCE inflation and an inflation threshold of 3 percent.  The four-quarter moving average smooths the series to reflect the supply shocks that have occurred with some regularity, and the 3 percent threshold reflects that even this threshold is crossed in the historical data around times of significant supply shocks. I view the threshold as a commitment to not take action until the threshold is reached.  As a result, in answer to 2.d., I would not tighten before a threshold is crossed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for using numerical economic outcomes as thresholds for action, rather than specific amounts or dates. They explain that using a broad array of data is necessary when evaluating progress against the dual mandate, and that numerical thresholds provide simple communication to the public and help guide monetary policy decisions. The speaker also suggests specific numerical thresholds for the unemployment rate and inflation rate based on their assessment. Overall, the passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 52.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply expressing gratitude to President Lockhart. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 53.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Quite a number of my points have been made already, but I will go through some thoughts anyway.  I haven’t been a great fan of date guidance for a number of reasons.  Date guidance is hard to adjust with changing conditions, and although we went to great pains to describe it as conditional, the date is taken as a commitment or promise by much of the public.  In principle, I think expressing forward guidance in the form of economic conditionality ought to be preferable, but on consideration, I’ve concluded that specific numerical thresholds taken alone might not improve the clarity and effectiveness of our communications.  So I’m going to advocate for thresholds that are pretty substantially qualified, even at the risk of diluting their influence on economic conditions. I’m especially skeptical of a single numerical threshold for the unemployment situation.  In my view, the unemployment rate is not a sufficient statistic for describing the economic conditionality we ought to have in mind.  The Chairman put some emphasis on this point in his last press conference.  In response to a question on the new LSAP, the Chairman emphasized that the decision process for continuing, adjusting, or halting the new LSAP program would be based not on a single market metric, but rather an array of indicators that collectively present a full  picture of labor market conditions and prospects, and that the decision would involve a qualitative judgment in the end.  I don’t want to speak for you, Mr. Chairman, but that’s my interpretation of what you said.  I’m not sure I understand why this holistic approach to the conditionality that will guide our asset purchase decisions should not also guide our policy rate decisions.  If the Committee chooses to adopt a numerical threshold for employment, I think it’s likely that the threshold we introduce would have to be accompanied by substantial qualification to the effect that the unemployment rate is just one of several indicators; that, in practice, the Committee will synthesize a view from an evaluation of a dashboard of relevant data; and, therefore, that the single unemployment rate should not be taken as decisive.  I have similar concerns about the risk of conveying simplistic and potentially misleading specificity around a single inflation metric.  However, I don’t feel so strongly on this side of the threshold question because there’s been a lot of public education explaining that we look at a variety of inflation numbers to discern the trend.  So I do not advocate full substitution of single numerical thresholds for the current practice of date guidance. Now, to answer some of the questions:  “Should the thresholds replace the date-based guidance or be combined with the date-based guidance.”  On balance, I favor a combined approach, repeated routinely for a while, at least until conditions are such that we would want to change the date. The public has become accustomed to the date-based guidance.  Keeping the date-based guidance provides more information, even if it may dilute somewhat the primacy of the thresholds and create a little confusion.  Because the date currently projected is far in the future, it might make sense to use this combined approach for some time and then later drop the date guidance when the economy has evolved further.  “What variables should the thresholds reference.  Regarding inflation, should the thresholds reference actual inflation or a projection.” I think this was said by someone earlier, by President Bullard, but I don’t believe it’s a good idea to specify an unemployment threshold in terms of a realized value while expressing an inflation threshold solely in terms of a projection.  Symmetrical treatment is desirable in order to preserve a sense of a balanced approach.  And I think it’s possible to craft language explaining that the threshold both acknowledges realized values and places weight on the outlook for each threshold indicator.  For example, focusing on inflation, the statement might read something like this:  “. . . provided that realized inflation as indicated by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, taken together with the Committee’s projection of inflation at a one-to two-year horizon, does not deviate by more than ½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent objective and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.”  I realize that that’s a mouthful, but I think it’s possible to combine both backward looking and forward looking in one statement.  I’m comfortable with an unemployment threshold of 6½ percent and a ½ percent tolerance above the inflation objective, if sufficiently qualified as I said earlier. There is a question of, “In what way, if at all, should the language indicate that the Committee may tighten policy before any thresholds are crossed.” I favor explicitly communicating that conditions may develop in which, in the Committee’s judgment, policy would be tightened before a threshold is crossed.  This may have to be repeated ritualistically to ensure that it isn’t lost on the public consciousness.  I think language to this effect could be easily enough included in the statement.  The final question:  Should, and how should, “the Committee provide guidance about the timing of liftoff after a threshold is crossed and the likely course of policy after the initial increase” in the fed funds rate.  The language that the staff members developed in their memo works quite well in that respect.  So I think it’s quite sufficient. To summarize my views, I believe the tests of an approach to thresholds, if adopted, should be as follows: improves clarity of the Committee’s reaction function to the extent possible, and I think there are limits in how far we can achieve that; allows flexibility to deal with various circumstances; recognizes that multiple indicators must be considered, and the Committee will make a judgment call in the end; and does not convey that thresholds have a hard and fast mechanical character.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses skepticism and disagreement with the use of specific numerical thresholds for forward guidance on monetary policy. They argue that thresholds should be qualified and that they should not be the sole determinant for decision-making. They also advocate for a combined approach of using both date-based guidance and thresholds.


Passage number 54.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 55.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need the passage in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage.


Passage number 56.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, appreciate the thought and the effort that went into the staff memo on thresholds.  After listening to the discussion this morning, I’m actually not as critical of a calendar date as I used to be, as I’ll comment on. If feasible, I would like to move away from calendar-date descriptions in our forward guidance and move toward descriptions based more on economic conditions, whether qualitative or quantitative.  I see our September statement as actually a small step in that direction, and I think that’s a good step.  But moving further to explicit thresholds for funds rate liftoff obviously would have two main benefits, as has been discussed already.  With suitably aggressive thresholds, we effectively signal our intention to stay low for longer than we typically would.  Maybe that’s a good thing.  But more important, thresholds cause our forward guidance to adjust to incoming data automatically.  If labor markets improve faster than expected or inflation gets too high, the expected timing of liftoff will move forward, and on the flip side, if the economy slows, theexpected liftoff date endogenously moves out.  So there’s no need for the Committee to deliberate about whether or how much to move the calendar date.  That is, to me, the main benefit. I do think, as others have said, that thresholds bring some new challenges and potential pitfalls, and I’m just going to go through a couple of them.  First—and it’s discussed in the memo, and President Bullard talked about this—it’s absolutely critical to communicate that we’re talking about thresholds here and not triggers.  President Rosengren, you made that point but thought the difference would not be confused. I’m actually more worried that this could be confused by the public, because if it’s interpreted as triggers, that would be a negative thing. Second, as we’ve talked about, focusing on just two variables in describing the conditions for liftoff could be problematic.  Obviously, we look at countless variables.  We look at forecasts, along with the risks to the outlook, in setting policy.  I think that having these unemployment rate and inflation rate thresholds implies too tight of a relationship, and I’m just going to talk about unemployment for now, assuming that the inflation escape clause isn’t hit.  It implies a tighter relationship between unemployment and the date of liftoff than I think is really there.  And this problem is illustrated by the notion of the medium-term natural rate of interest, or r*.  Recall that the medium-term natural rate of interest is the intercept in a Taylor rule.  So, according to the Taylor rule, the unemployment rate at which the funds rate rises above zero depends on one’s estimate of the natural rate of interest. If the natural rate of interest declines, then liftoff would occur at a lower unemployment rate than otherwise.  And that’s just another way of saying that the unemployment rate associated with the liftoff date is not invariant to the estimate that you have of the r* natural rate of interest.  This is not just a theoretical point. It’s actually something that I think has been pretty important over the last couple of years.  As I’vementioned and as the Vice Chairman and Governor Yellen have mentioned, there’s quite a bit of evidence that the natural rate of interest has declined significantly over recent years. Indeed, my own thinking is that the appropriate threshold for the unemployment rate has come down significantly, in part because of mounting evidence of a sizable decline in the natural rate of interest. The current Tealbook also illustrates a related point nicely, since it modified the constant term in the outcome-based rule in a way that’s equivalent to lowering r* and the conditions for liftoff. So, despite these concerns about thresholds, we should strive to find ways to communicate more in terms of economic conditions rather than calendar dates, and I encourage continued efforts in this direction.  Fortunately, our current approach, although far from perfect—and I think we’ve all criticized it in different ways—is not yet a “burning platform,” as we say in the IT world.  So there is time to work out some of these issues that we’ve been discussing.  I would argue that the calendar date right now is actually working better than maybe one would have expected.  Market expectations for liftoff currently align pretty closely with the Committee’s, and when the economic conditions have changed, market expectations for the date of liftoff have changed correspondingly.  That means that markets are not viewing our current policy as an unconditional commitment to a calendar date, and already we’re getting the effects of seeing the expected liftoff date work as an automatic stabilizer, which I think is the main goal of going to thresholds.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any direct disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses appreciation for the staff memo on thresholds and acknowledges that their opinion on calendar dates has changed. They also discuss the benefits and challenges of using explicit thresholds for forward guidance.


Passage number 57.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Evans.


Passage number 58.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply includes a message of gratitude from the writer to President George.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to thank the staff for this thoughtful memo.  It was helpful to me.  Given the communication challenges that the memo highlights, and taking into account the number of changes that we have already introduced into the statement, my support for numerical thresholds is, admittedly, reluctant.  Ideally, I’d prefer to return to more qualitative language in the statement and omit the date. I do view removing the calendar date, though, as potentially positive.  And changes in the date, I understand, are always open to interpretation—either that the Committee’s outlook has changed or that its view onappropriate policy has changed.  In that sense, I think thresholds could allow us to replace the date-based guidance and clarify how the Committee’s view of the appropriate policy path is related to economic conditions.  On the other hand, I would not want to restrict the flexibility of the Committee to respond to unforeseen events, especially if conditions dramatically improve or deteriorate.  So escape clauses along the lines of those in the mockups, I think, are important considerations, including financial conditions as factors in the Committee’s decision on when to tighten policy.  These clauses suggest that the Committee is equally ready both for the possibility of a liftoff before thresholds are crossed and for the possibility of maintaining a fed funds rate close to zero even after thresholds are crossed.  And in that sense, I prefer that the language not emphasize the latter. If thresholds were to be adopted, I would prefer that they replace the date-based guidance.  If the date were retained alongside the thresholds, I would be concerned that the private sector would continue to put too much weight on the date.  In addition, at each meeting, the Committee would have to agree on the date at which one of the thresholds would likely be crossed. Turning to the specific questions, rather than using only the unemployment rate as a measure of broader labor market conditions, I agree with the language in the mockups making clear that the Committee will consider other factors besides the unemployment rate.  While a threshold for unemployment would signal the Committee’s intention of continuing to support the economic recovery, it is also important that the Committee guard against inflationary pressures. A buildup of such pressures is always a concern, whether it is due to misestimating the amount of slack in the economy or to a persistent shift in inflationary expectations. The condition in the mockups that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored is therefore another important escape clause, in my view.To make yet clearer that the Committee is guarding against such unforeseen consequences of its policies, I would also prefer to describe the inflation number in the forward guidance as a trigger rather than a threshold.  Having an inflation trigger ensures that if inflation rises too much, accommodation will be removed.  To capture broad inflationary pressures, I would suggest setting a trigger based on observable inflation rather than simply a forecast of future inflation.  My hesitation to rely on an inflation projection is based on the well-known challenges involved in forecasting inflation.  In particular, I’m concerned that these inflation forecasts may be based on misestimates of the amount of slack in the economy.  In terms of an observable measure of inflation, we might consider the 12-month change in both the headline and the core PCE measures.  Policy action would then be based on observing both inflation measures moving above the designated trigger level. By using these two measures as a joint trigger, if you will, it communicates the importance of headline inflation in the Committee’s mandate while emphasizing that the Committee primarily responds to underlying inflation pressures and not transitory price movements. Finally, at this point, I would not favor providing additional guidance on the fed funds rate path after liftoff, because I would question the value of such a commitment to policy so far in the future.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses reluctance to support numerical thresholds and instead prefers more qualitative language in the statement. They also express concerns about the private sector continuing to put too much weight on a date if it is retained alongside thresholds.


Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Pianalto.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 61.
   MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to thank the staff for the very useful and thorough background memo that was given to the Committee.  When we began to provide forward guidance about the liftoff of the federal funds rate, I preferred specifying economic conditions rather than a date.  After thinking about the issues raised in the staff memo and listening to my colleagues’ comments around the table today, I’ve concluded that agreeing on an effective threshold framework is going to be difficult, and such a framework would entail its own risks. Turning to some of the questions posed to the Committee, I see little value in publishing both dates and thresholds, because publishing both is very likely to confuse the public.  To me, the question is whether we should completely scrap our date-driven language and replace it with thresholds.  While the answer may be yes in principle, in practice the devil is in the details. There are many crucial challenges that we’re going to have to address before we could switch to thresholds.  And my assessment of these challenges leads me to be hesitant about adopting numerical thresholds. In response to the question of what variables to use, I would choose the unemployment rate as the appropriate proxy for our employment threshold.  A more problematic question, though, concerns what inflation measures we should use in our thresholds.  As the memo describes, using projections of inflation minimizes the chances of violating the inflation threshold prematurely.  However, there is a credibility problem that would be associated with the verifiability of our forecast.  And in light of this problem, I would prefer to use backward-looking measures of actual inflation, which have the clear and crucial advantage that they are easily verifiable. To mitigate the chance of prematurely violating the threshold, I would prefer to use core PCE inflation. Still, this is a far from perfect choice. It just seems to be the best among a range of imperfect options. It would seem prudent to set a relatively lower threshold for the unemployment rate, and a relatively higher inflation threshold, so that we’re not led to tighten policy before the thresholds are breached.  But generous thresholds can lead to the problem that unemployment or inflation might not have crossed a threshold when we want to tighten policy.  This problem is endemic toany threshold.  The distinction between thresholds and triggers is therefore important, but conveying this difference to the public may be very difficult.  This is especially the case when a threshold has been breached but there’s no reaction on our part.  How we communicate that thresholds matter, even when they’re not being reacted to, is important. If we’re going to proceed with the adoption of numerical thresholds, to me, a reasonable balance, given our objectives, would be 6½ percent on unemployment and 2½ percent on inflation, using the wording that’s outlined in the memo that keeps the emphasis on our 2 percent longer-term inflation objective.  Regardless of whether we use thresholds or dates, the macroeconomic efficacy of our monetary policy depends critically on what reaction function or rule we use after we begin increasing rates.  The staff memo clarifies that from a pure efficacy-of-policy perspective, the big gains are associated with informing the public of the likely path of the federal funds rate after liftoff.  A rule with inertia provides the strongest policy accommodation, as it promises to keep rates lower for longer.  I personally prefer adopting a guidepost for policy that is similar to the Taylor (1999) rule with inertia.  And I do hope that we can make some progress on this issue.  But after listening to today’s comments, it’s undoubtedly going to require some additional discussions.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses hesitation about adopting numerical thresholds and prefers using backward-looking measures of inflation instead of projections. The speaker also discusses the challenges and possible problems associated with using thresholds and the difficulty of communicating the difference between thresholds and triggers to the public. Additionally, the speaker mentions the need for further discussions on the issue of adopting a guidepost for policy.


Passage number 62.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you, President Kocherlakota" simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 63.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Thank you" is simply expressing gratitude and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 64.
 MR. BULLARD.  I have one question for President Kocherlakota.  Can I interpret what you’re saying as strict inflation targeting. That is, would you expect—really, regardless of what you say about unemployment—that everything is going to show up in inflation anyway, so you   might as well just say, “I’m going to keep inflation within ½ percent of the target,” and not say anything about real variables at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is asking for clarification and interpretation of the President Kocherlakota's stance on inflation targeting.


Passage number 65.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Well, from a logical point of view, having an unemployment threshold is just another restriction on the provision of accommodation.  So having an unemployment threshold, from a strict logical interpretation, is merely one more set of conditions on keeping rates low.  It’s actually a rather hawkish provision to have an unemployment threshold. I’ll let you think about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the logical point of view and interpretation of having an unemployment threshold as a condition for keeping rates low.


Passage number 66.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, it’s true.  As long as you really obey the 2.5 percent, you could make the unemployment trigger zero.  It doesn’t matter.  This is just an extra protection on the inflation side, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and expressing certainty about the effect of obeying the 2.5 percent in relation to the unemployment trigger and inflation protection.


Passage number 67.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage appears to be a simple conversation between two individuals without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the passage is incomplete.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
 MR. LACKER.  But it precludes moving to maintain that and prevent expected inflation from rising above 2½.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
There is contention in the passage as one person is suggesting that moving to maintain a certain level of inflation is necessary, while another person is suggesting that it would prevent expected inflation from rising above a certain level.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, remember—I was thinking of President Kocherlakota’s original proposal with 2¼, which is about as close as our forecast error to the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement reflecting the author's thoughts and a comparison between two things.


Passage number 71.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MR. LACKER is expressing an apology for something. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 72.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota’s proposal at one point was to have an inflation trigger of 2¼, and I’m saying that using projected inflation of 2¼ as your trigger is pretty close to—that’s within our forecast error around the 2 percent target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing President Kocherlakota's proposal and stating their own opinion about it.


Passage number 73.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  But the unemployment condition precludes moving to prevent the forecast of inflation from moving outside that bound. PARTICIPANT.  That’s absolutely correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participant agrees with Mr. Lacker's statement, stating that it is absolutely correct.


Passage number 74.
 MR. LACKER.  That’s the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's the point" simply reinforces or agrees with a previous point or statement.


Passage number 75.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, it doesn’t.  If you project it to be rising to 2¼ or above, then you tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a contrasting opinion without arguing or contradicting any previous information.


Passage number 76.
 MR. LACKER. That’s not the way it’s worded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the wording is not accurate without expressing any disagreement with it.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage merely mentions President Plosser without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 78.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" is simply an expression of gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" indicates a polite expression of gratitude, and "Governor Yellen" is a respectful address.


Passage number 80.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me first thank the staff for the very detailed and informative analysis in the thresholds memo.  I strongly support the use of numerical thresholds to clarify the conditionality of our forward guidance. I’ve been a fan ever since we discussed the idea in connection with the introduction of the calendar date.  When we discussed the use of thresholds around that time, though, several participants argued that we needed to couple them with an explicit statement of our long-run objectives to avoid possible confusion about the difference between the thresholds and our objectives.  With the consensus statement now in place, we should strive to provide greater clarity about our reaction function.  Threshold language is not a complete reaction function, but I do think it’s a meaningful step toward providing more information to the public about the Committee’s likely response to future economic developments, and I fervently hope this step is within our reach. There are two principal advantages, in my view, that thresholds have over our current calendar-date guidance.  First, as a number of you—Presidents Kocherlakota and Williams and Vice Chairman Dudley—have all emphasized, spelling out the conditionality of our forward guidance would serve as a kind of automatic stabilizer.  Second, spelling out explicit thresholds for action is a way for us to communicate a commitment to keep rates lower for longer, and it provides the public with a way to monitor whether or not we’re actually sticking to that commitment as the recovery proceeds and unemployment declines toward more normal levels. I  believe it is quite important under current conditions for us to keep rates low for a longer time than implied by policy rules developed during more normal periods, and I’m pleased that markets seem to have interpreted our mid-2015 date and our September statement as confirming that we do plan to stay lower for longer.  Since March, dealers’ expectations about the likely unemployment rate at liftoff have declined by about ½ point to around 6.8 percent, but it may be difficult for the public over time to discern whether changes we make in the calendar date for liftoff are consistent with their prior expectations about the economic conditions required for liftoff or not.  Beyond that, with thresholds, we won’t have to keep revisiting our decisions about shifting the calendar date. I also think providing explicit economic thresholds, far in advance of the time when we’re approaching them, may help to keep inflation expectations anchored as unemployment declines but we keep our accommodation in place. So I prefer to replace the date-based guidance in the statement with thresholds that direct attention to the economic conditions we’d need to see before contemplating the removal of accommodation.  But I think it would be helpful when the thresholds are first introduced for us to clarify that they are not intended to remove accommodation by stealth.  We could achieve that objective by including in our statement, at least initially, a formulation such as, “The Committee currently expects those economic conditions to prevail through at least” some calendar date. The simulation results in the staff memo do an excellent job of illustrating the consequences of alternative choices of threshold variables and values.  The upshot of the analysis, in my view, is that even without any escape hatches, thresholds would be extremely unlikely to lock us into a path that would lead to bad economic outcomes.  I’ll come back to escape hatches in a second.  But for now, let me just say that I view the unemployment rate as  the best and most appropriate variable for providing a threshold for the employment side of our dual mandate, and concerning inflation, I prefer projected to actual inflation, given the volatility of PCE inflation.  But we would need to find some reasonably straightforward procedure to reach consensus on projected inflation in our deliberations so as not to become completely bogged down on this issue.  A recent Board briefing, actually, by Alan Detmeister showed that current four-quarter core PCE inflation is one of the best predictors for headline PCE inflation over the next two years. I support threshold values of 6½ percent for the unemployment rate and 2½ percent for inflation and agree with Governor Tarullo and with Vice Chairman Dudley that setting tighter thresholds would imply withdrawing accommodation, and that’s something I would certainly oppose.  In the optimal control simulations regularly included in the Tealbook B, liftoff usually occurs when the unemployment rate is slightly below 6 percent and PCE inflation over the next one to two years is projected around 2¼ percent.  I recognize that these results depend on the structure of FRB/US and that optimal control in alternative models can deliver different results. In models with less persistent inflation dynamics, for example, it may be optimal to accept inflation that temporarily runs above 2½ percent.  So I view these threshold values as conservative in the sense of being unlikely to cause harm.  For that reason, I would want the statement to be crystal clear that these are thresholds and not triggers, that they do not force us to remove accommodation once they’re crossed. In light of our imperfect understanding of the economy and the transmission mechanism, we will, of course, always want to consider whatever variables we choose for the thresholds in the broader context of the myriad of indicators that the staff is looking at, and for that reason I   find it sensible to include escape hatches in the statement.  The language suggested in this regard in the final section of the memo strikes me as sensible. Finally, I think we should continue to communicate that we will maintain a highly accommodative stance of policy for a considerable period after the economic recovery strengthens, and I think the language that we have included in the September statement suggests to market participants that we will not be unduly aggressive in tightening after liftoff. I would welcome finding a way to be more specific in the forward guidance pertaining to our policy after liftoff.  I recognize that’s important to our stance of policy, but even so, I think that thresholds are a valuable step without such forward guidance, and I would not wish the perfect to be the enemy of the good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses strong support for the use of numerical thresholds and outlines the advantages of using them over the current calendar-date guidance. The speaker also discusses the importance of clear communication and the need to consider various variables and indicators in making policy decisions.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude and addressing someone as Governor Duke.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 82.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also found the staff memos to be very helpful, especially in understanding the potential outcomes from various thresholds.  And a number of people around the table, at this and previous meetings, have been quite persuasive in their arguments in both directions.  [Laughter] Still, my preference is not to use thresholds.  It’s still not clear to me that the use of thresholds offers significantly better results than more-general communication in indicating that we plan to hold off liftoff until after the recovery has begun to strengthen.  Furthermore, I think it’s easy to underestimate the communication challenges that are posed by thresholds, especially if you consider a wider audience than the dealer community, the narrow academic community, and the financial press, whose feedback we hear most clearly and who may be more inclined to pay attention to the nuances of our language.  And finally, as someone who has spent most of a lifetime reacting to the level of interest rates and the speed of change, I prefer a solution that gets us off the zero bound earlier and that has a gentler slope afterliftoff.  Thus, looking at the simulated outcomes under alternative policies in the Tealbook, I prefer the inertial Taylor (1999) strategy as having nearly the same outcome as the extended baseline but with a gentler slope.  Having said all of that, my preference is a preference rather than a strong objection.  And the memo did help me clarify my thoughts about thresholds should they be implemented. Taking the questions in turn, if thresholds are implemented—2.a.—I think they should replace the date-based guidance, even in their first use. On 2.b., of the alternatives tested in the memo, my preference would be to use thresholds of 6½ percent unemployment and 2½ percent projected inflation one to two years out.  On 2.c., I will admit that I lean more toward the forecast than the commitment side of the date guidance, and I think the date gives us room to consider a range of factors.  But much as I yearn for every degree of flexibility possible, including too many escape clauses negates the benefits of the policy that we’re trying to implement, especially when combined with all of the exit ramps we had to provide to reach agreement on LSAPs.  So if we do adopt thresholds, I don’t think I would indicate that the Committee might tighten policy before the thresholds are crossed.  Rather, I would view any such decision as something to be explained if and when it happened, or language that could be added if the possibility became more likely. For 2.d., along the same lines, I think too much discussion about the likely actions after the thresholds are reached would have many of the same difficulties, not the least of which would be agreement as to what those actions might be and how to articulate them.  Combining my responses to 2.c. and 2.d., I find it hard to see how our “kinda/sorta/maybe” approach, such as articulating thresholds but modifying them to say that we might act before they’re reached or that we might not act after they’re reached, depending on other measures that aren’t specified in the threshold—how is that preferable to date guidance thatwe might or might not move in response to incoming data, and that might be a forecast or might be a commitment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the use of thresholds and preference for a different approach. They also express concerns about communication challenges and the potential difficulties of implementing thresholds.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 84.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude directed towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 85.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by adding my thanks to the authors of the memo on this topic, which I thought was really very insightful; it helped me a lot.  My bottom line is, I continue to see the intellectual appeal of numerical thresholds, and I still have an open mind about them.  But I will say that between the memo and conversations with various people, I think I’m starting to better appreciate some of the limitations as well.  Also, and importantly, I feel as though we succeeded beyond at least my own expectations with our reformulation of the guidance at the last meeting in that we were able to quite effectively communicate a shift in our reaction function without relying on numerical thresholds.  So I guess that takes away some of the urgency that I might have otherwise felt. On the assumption that we do go forward with trying to think about design, the first fork in the road I came to was the question of, are we trying to develop a commitment technology or a communication strategy. If you read much of the academic literature, you find that the payoff is very much about commitment.  The payoff comes from being able to essentially bind yourself to something that you would be tempted to renege on ex post.  Or a weaker version of that would be, you can’t literally bind yourself perfectly, but you can set up costs in terms of loss of reputation if you go back on your commitment.  Now, I think if this is your framework, if you’re going for commitment of this sort, I think you’re naturally going to be drawn to relatively sharp, verifiable formulations—go easy on the escape hatches. For example, observed inflation, as a number of people have pointed out, is better than our own forecast of inflation because it’s a verifiable item and you can see when we’ve reneged in some sense.  So the principle here is, if you’re going for commitment, you can’t “tie yourself to the mast” with the kinds of “loose ropes” that leave you a lot of wiggle room. Now, of course, I think commitment has its downsides, as the memo points out, in the sense that you lose the ability to adjust to a variety of omitted contingencies, if you will. I agree with others who’ve pointed out that, “I don’t find these errors around the structural rate of unemployment to be a super-compelling worry, because that’s exactly what the inflation threshold is there for.”  On the other hand, there’s other stuff not in the model.  In my mind, the financial stability issues are important.  We don’t really understand them all that well, and we’re talking about a pretty long horizon, so I’m concerned. I agree with President Kocherlakota that monetary policy would be a blunt tool, but it needs to be compared with the other tools in our toolbox, some of which may be blunt or untested or otherwise not up to the job.  So I guess I prefer the idea of keeping a little bit of an open mind.  Moreover, I think one can take only so much comfort from what a model can tell us about what we give up with commitment, because what you give up is the ability to react to unforeseen contingencies, and that’s the stuff that’s left out of the model almost by definition.  So there’s a little bit of a bias that one wants to be wary of there. An alternative view—and I think this is the view that Vice Chairman Dudley was expressing—is that we’re not really going for commitment, but rather, we have a time-consistent reaction function, and we’re just trying to communicate aspects of this reaction function as clearly and credibly as possible.  So I’m more comfortable with this formulation.  Now, in this case, I think numbers can be helpful.  At the same time, they don’t strike me as necessarily indispensable.  If you do use them, it would make sense to use them in a somewhat looser way.  I don’t think that the imperative to use verifiable constructs is as strong, so you could, for  example, think about inflation forecasts as opposed to inflation.  And I think it’s interesting— again, my views on this have been strongly colored by how the market reacted to our September statement—that with regard to open-ended QE, where we’re using effectively a qualitative reaction function, it was apparently extremely credible—at least directionally credible, maybe not the subtleties of it.  It was quite credible in a verbal sense.  So that’s just worth bearing in mind.  Again, I’m still open to the idea, although with a little bit of skepticism. In designing it, I do want to be wary of a situation where we use numbers in a way that doesn’t really add much to where we are now already—which is, we’ve made considerable progress in terms of how we communicate—and, at the same time, set ourselves up to bear costs in terms of lack of flexibility.  So I think it’s important to strike that balance. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 86.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Powell.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Well, thank you for this discussion.  At least we agreed it was a good memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no indication of any contention or disagreement. Both parties express appreciation and agreement regarding the quality of a memo.


Passage number 88.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.  Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The word "Governor" alone does not provide enough context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 90.
 MR. TARULLO.  If I can enter Arrow theorem country just for a minute here, I heard several of our colleagues express a preference for qualitative thresholds, but I want to be sure I understood their position.  Is your position that, given that the effective choice may be or already is between the date and moving toward quantitative thresholds, you would prefer to stick with the date.  I think I heard Jeff, Charlie, Jim, and Richard for qualitative thresholds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states the positions of different individuals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 91.
 MR. LACKER.  How about neither.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker suggests an alternative option by saying "How about neither" without expressing disagreement or contention towards any previous statements or propositions.


Passage number 92.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You’ve got to pick something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement or command without any indication of controversy or disagreement.


Passage number 93.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes, if you’ve got a choice of two things—that’s why I said it’s Arrow theorem country in a way; we’ve got the date, and if we’re not going to change from the date,  we’re going to stay with the date.  I think I heard all four of you saying implicitly you prefer staying with the date rather than going to quantitative thresholds, but I wanted to be sure I understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo is summarizing the viewpoints of the four individuals and noting that they all prefer staying with the date rather than going to quantitative thresholds.


Passage number 94.
 MR. LACKER. I’m less averse to the date than I am to thresholds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their preference for the date over thresholds without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas provided.


Passage number 95.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes, that’s what I thought.  Okay.  And that’s true for all four of you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that what they thought is true for all four individuals being referred to.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes, and I’ll just add one thing, which didn’t really come out around the table here:  On the quantitative easing side, we already have the language that I would prefer to have also for the interest rate.  So I would say that you could align the two and then have it be the same way. I think that’s something that didn’t come up a lot here, only a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard disagrees with the fact that the language used for quantitative easing is not being applied to the discussion on interest rates. He believes that the two should be aligned and treated in the same way.


Passage number 97.
 MR. PLOSSER.  To put in my two cents’ worth, I would rather have us move toward the qualitative nature describing our reaction function, keep the date for now, and gradually transition to the point where we could substitute the qualitative reaction function and get rid of the date. That may take some time, but I think that’s where we ought to be trying to get to, not to thresholds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. While Mr. Plosser expresses his preference for gradually transitioning away from relying on specific dates and towards a more qualitative approach to describing their reaction function, there is no mention of any opposing views or disagreement from others.


Passage number 98.
 MR. FISHER.  I think, Danny, since you mentioned me as well, that the Chairman did a pretty good job in the press conference. He said we know we’re not there yet, but he didn’t lay out a number, and to me that’s a qualification.  It’s a qualitative way to express ourselves.  I want to refine that somewhat.  We’re trapped with the date, and then we keep having to move it out.  Or we’re going to try to move it in, and it sends a signal.  Everybody has talked about that.  I just don’t think that having these specific numbers is a better outcome than what we already have. I don’t like what we already have, but I don’t think it’s a better outcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and offering a different perspective on the matter, but there is no direct disagreement with any other person or statement mentioned.


Passage number 99.
 MR. TARULLO.  That’s what I was trying to discern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It appears to be a statement expressing a desire to understand or clarify something.


Passage number 100.
MR. FISHER.  And I want to ask about the time line here, Mr. Chairman, but I would urge us to go very slowly, as many people have said at this table.  In contemplating this thing, I don’t rule it out, but in the meantime, what you said in the last press conference was pretty good at giving a sense that we’re not there—we’re thinking about the unemployment issue.  But that’s as far as I would wish to go right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the chairman's comments in the last press conference and their hesitation to make any further decisions at the moment.


Passage number 101.
  MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo is thanking the chairman, which suggests a respectful and cooperative tone.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to accurately determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
 MR. EVANS.  Sensing the warm feeling for qualitative state contingency in the language in our current statement about substantial improvement in labor markets, I feel similarly about that, but I want to point out that I would guess most people’s expectations were that we would stop asset purchases before we got to the point where we’d want the funds rate to lift off.  So we need a second qualitative description of “substantial” substantial improvement in labor markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the statement "I would guess most people’s expectations were that we would stop asset purchases before we got to the point where we’d want the funds rate to lift off." This suggests that the speaker has a different perspective or expectation from what most people believed.


Passage number 104.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I think most people agree that in principle, the state-contingent approach is better.  What I heard was a continuum:  people who want a qualitative approach to those who would prefer the quantitative approach.  Interestingly, regarding those who wanted the quantitative approach, the one thing that I thought there might be a lot of debate about—the numbers—actually, most people were okay with those particular numbers.  I understand there’s now a wide range of views.  I think what we ought to do is huddle again with the staff and see if there are ways to provide the qualifications; the additional information; and the other kind of material that can satisfy some of you who are concerned about the rigidity, the lack of clarity, whatever, associated with this kind of approach.  I think the best way to do it is to try to write something down and then see how people react to it, but we’ll try to do that in the intermeeting period.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different approaches and opinions, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention mentioned.


Passage number 105.
   MR. FISHER.  May I ask, Mr. Chairman—in terms of your own concept of the time line of conducting and maybe completing this discussion, what do you have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 106.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It depends on what the reaction is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This statement is presenting a conditional scenario and does not explicitly indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the outcome or judgment will vary depending on the reaction being referred to.


Passage number 107.
 MR. FISHER.  So that would be the next step, and then we’d see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Fisher regarding the next step in a process.


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  That would be the next step, but we’ll try to do that well in advance of the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the importance of taking the next step and expressing a commitment to completing it before the next meeting.


Passage number 109.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "Thank you" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we take a break and come back at four o’clock.  Coffee is available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests taking a break and informs that coffee is available.


Passage number 111.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I hope everybody is refreshed.  Financial developments—let me turn to Simon Potter.  Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is simply transitioning to a new topic.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply consists of an expression of gratitude followed by a request for questions directed towards Simon, possibly in a public setting where Governor Duke might be present.


Passage number 113.
 MS. DUKE.  Simon, I’m looking at panel 13, the projections of MBS issuance.  In talking to a number of the originators, I learned that they expect this refi wave to peter out toward June.  What are your expectations in terms of refinance volume and new purchase volume, and how do you see that unfolding. What would that mean for our purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Duke is seeking information and asking for Simon's expectations and insights regarding refinance volume and new purchase volume.


Passage number 114.
 MR. POTTER. Our expectations are shown here in 13.  That’s based on Tealbook assumptions of where interest rates will be, so that might differ a little bit from what some people in the market expect.  We’re reasonably confident three to six months ahead in what the issuance will be, and then issuance starts to decline. We looked at this quite a lot in the intermeeting period.  We were surprised in September about how much reinvestment we had, and that was because refis were a little bit stronger. I would imagine that we’ll know more early in the year. It partly depends on how much traction the policy will have and what happens in the housing market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and sharing their observations without any conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided is incomplete. Please provide the complete passage so that I can accurately determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 116.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Simon, in chart 4, on inflation expectations, I have a question that I could have asked years ago.  I’m never quite sure what the answer is.  How does the five-year, five-year-forward breakeven inflation rate compare with our long-run inflation objective of 2 percent on headline PCE. I ask in part because I’ve read commentaries of various people who try to relate the two, and wonder how it’s calibrated. I’m going to guess that one answer is, it’s the CPI, not the PCE.  Then the other is, it’s inflation compensation versus inflation expectations, I think, in spite of the heading on this chart.  Any information you could provide on that would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification on how the five-year, five-year-forward breakeven inflation rate compares to the long-run inflation objective.


Passage number 117.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, thank you for that.  The heading of the chart should have said “Inflation Compensation.”  It is a CPI-linked instrument that we use.  So you could think of the inflation objective mapping from the 2 percent PCE to somewhere between 2.3 and 2.5 percent.  Inflation compensation means that this is not just inflation expectations; it includes an inflation risk premium.  How you look at that inflation risk premium is important to understand.  For the history, we excluded the period during the financial crisis because we felt that was biased downward a little bit.  So the five-year, five-year forward got reasonably high but then came back down, and the 2.81 is not unusual if you plotted the time series.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and explaining the concept of inflation compensation.


Passage number 118.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 119.
  So for the translation, you’d back off at least—MR. POTTER. Put 2.3 to 2.5, and then you have to decide what the inflation risk premium would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions the need to decide on the inflation risk premium, suggesting that there may be potential disagreement or differing opinions on what that premium should be.


Passage number 120.
 MR. EVANS.  Any thoughts on the order of magnitude or the time variation of the risk premium.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 121.
 MR. POTTER.  I think the Board staff and staff in New York have models where they try to estimate the inflation risk premium.  I believe what we found is most of this movement is in the inflation risk premium.  I’m not sure what the Board staff found.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply discusses the different models and findings regarding the estimation of the inflation risk premium without any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 122.
 MR. WILCOX.  And important movements on liquidity risk premiums, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 123.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Yes" indicates agreement, not contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 124.
 MR. EVANS.  Did I miss a magnitude.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The presence of the word "miss" suggests that there was an expectation or a standard that was not met, indicating some disagreement or contention.


Passage number 125.
  Did you mention— MR. POTTER. There’s a liquidity aspect to this.  You might expect non-Treasuries to move more quickly than index-linked ones, and that’s something that can exaggerate movements on the day of the FOMC announcement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 126.
  So the magnitude— MR. EVANS. A couple of tenths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact about the magnitude, followed by a continuation of the speaker's thought.


Passage number 127.
 MR. POTTER. The presentation I saw had expected inflation about 1.9 percent on the CPI basis.  The liquidity premium could be larger than that.  I would go for more like 30 or 40 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different viewpoints or potential estimates without any explicit disagreement.


Passage number 128.
 MR. WILCOX.  In terms of recent data, if you happen to have your handy Tealbook data sheets in front of you, the TIPS-based measures are shown on page 26 in the rose-colored segment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the location of the TIPS-based measures data on page 26 in the rose-colored segment of the Tealbook.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 130.
 MR. FISHER.  Simon, you mentioned, in reference to number six on exhibit 1, a limited amount of pass-through in terms of the primary mortgage rate.  I suppose the question is, would   you expect this to increase as we pass through time.  You mentioned some of the offsets, which we discussed at the past meetings, the increase in the fees and so on.  After all, this is our objective.  We’re obviously not working for Wells Fargo or J.P. Morgan and have 40 percent of the market.  We’re working for the American people, and the objective in terms of efficacy is what happens to people actually taking out mortgages.  So I would expect the MBS pricing to, over time, work its way into the mortgage market.  I’m just curious from your standpoint as a market operator how you view this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the opinion of the person being addressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 131.
 MR. POTTER.  The models that we have, which try to look at the recent relationship between the secondary rate and primary rate, would suggest we’ve seen most of the pass-through.  However, some of the structural features that you pointed out and other people have pointed out might suggest that we could see more competition in the market.  I think Governor Duke pointed that out, that this is one area where the banks are actually making money.  That would then disturb the relationship we’ve estimated over the past few years.  You might see more pass-through, but on the models we have right now over the past two years, most of the pass-through is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that the models suggest most of the pass-through has been seen, while also acknowledging that certain structural features and competition in the market could disrupt the estimated relationship. This indicates conflicting viewpoints regarding the extent of pass-through.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
 MR. FISHER.  Maybe, Mr. Chairman, we could just monitor that as we go through time in terms of the efficacy of the program. Then regarding your chart 8 and your comment that net issuance is expected to be negative:  One of the things I’m a little bit concerned about in terms of composition is that you have private sector issuance being positive, and unless you correct me, I think it’s correct that we’ve had a significant uptick in junk issuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "unless you correct me" suggests that Mr. Fisher is questioning or challenging the accuracy of the information presented in the chart.


Passage number 133.
 MR. POTTER.  High yield, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only states that the speaker agrees with the statement "high yield." There is no mention of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 134.
 MR. FISHER.  I mean really significant, CCC-rated and worse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Fisher, stating his intention to discuss significant issues related to CCC-rated or worse subjects. There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 135.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A lot of refinancing though of existing obligations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about refinancing existing obligations, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 136.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, and then, of course, the ABS market has become pretty attractive. Yesterday I saw for the first time asset-backed securities secured by sales of ATVs, or all-terrain vehicles, these little four-wheel gizmos that people like to drive around a ranch in; and then Target just sold off their credit card business.  There are two ways to look at this.  One is that this is helping.  The other is, as a market operator, at least from my background, that these are signs of concern.  We may be getting a little bit of froth.  My question is:  Might we be seeing a little froth in certain markets and maybe, again, could we track this over time from the standpoint of financial red lights or financial stability issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It presents two ways of looking at a situation without any conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 137.
 MR. POTTER. That’s clearly a concern we’ve heard from some market participants— that we would see more reaching for yield that could produce some distortions.  So far it seems to be in pretty small segments of the market, so I don’t think it’s something we should worry about.  We should monitor it quite carefully.  In terms of the ABS you pointed out, I think most of us would think that’s a reasonably good sign if we’re getting more securitized loans out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter acknowledges that some market participants have expressed concern about reaching for yield and potential distortions in the market, but he personally does not think it's something to worry about. He also agrees that increased securitized loans can be seen as a positive sign.


Passage number 138.
 MR. FISHER.  The hottest market right now is, of course, the auto market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a straightforward statement indicating that the auto market is currently the hottest market.


Passage number 139.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The given passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply states "Mr. Potter" without any further information or dialogue.


Passage number 140.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, anyway, if you would be kind enough maybe next time to give us a little presentation with some breakdown I would be grateful.  I think it would be helpful.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply expressing gratitude and stating that a presentation with a breakdown would be helpful.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Seeing no further questions I need a vote to ratify domestic market operations.  No objections. [No response]  Okay.  Thank you.  Let’s turn to item 3, and I’ll call on David Wilcox to introduce the economic and financial situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker asks for a vote and there are no objections or responses. The passage ends with a thank you and a transition to the next item.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage consists of a simple statement (thank you) followed by a request for questions and mentioning President Lockhart. It does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 143.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  David, while we were going over the Tealbook, we were trying to understand the staff’s assumption of the duration of the MBS purchases and your assumption related to any continuation of Treasury purchases after the expiry of the MEP, and how that connects to your estimate of 2013 employment gains.  I wonder if you could just clarify that.  That’s in the context of how we assess as a Committee substantial improvement or the lack thereof in the outlook for employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and understanding about certain assumptions and their connection to employment gains. There is no strong disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 144.
 MR. WILCOX.  We engaged in a fair amount of scriptural analysis, I think, just like outside people did by trying to discern exactly what it was that you meant by substantial improvement in labor market outlook. We interpreted “outlook” as having a concordance to “forecast,” and then we projected forward.  Now, the truth of the matter is we had a pretty flat likelihood function, having gone through that sort of textual analysis.  I think there’s a plausible case to be made that by the middle of next year, the Committee might be prepared to declare itself as seeing a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook as distinct from measures of employment conditions on the ground prevailing at that time.  The way that I would build the case for that is that by the middle of next year, if there’s any mercy in the world, the fiscal cliff should be at that point substantially in the rear view mirror.  The uncertainty related to that should be lifting.  By that point on our baseline narrative, European policymakers should have begun to more assertively put in place the kinds of policy steps that will definitively put that crisis in the healing process. And so although it’s still the case that the more substantial acceleration in GDP would remain a forecast at that point, I think it’s consistent with the Committee’s language, as we imagined it, to believe that those conditions—the elimination of some of the downside tail risks,   and the pulling forward by nine months of that period of more substantial acceleration in activity—would provide the basis for the Committee at that point to declare a cessation of purchases, and that the conditions had been met.  That said, it was a tough call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their interpretation of certain terms and conditions, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 145.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I don’t hear you pointing to real evidence in the employment markets per se in the first half, which, if I read the Tealbook correctly, continued at a fairly muted level of job creation, basically similar to the fourth quarter of this year; is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Lockhart is simply seeking clarification or confirmation of a fact from the speaker regarding the employment markets. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 146.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes, that’s right.  Bill, do you want to add anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox is asking Bill if he wants to add anything, which indicates a collaborative and non-confrontational tone.


Passage number 147.
 MR. WASCHER. To put some numbers on it, as David mentioned, we think the underlying pace of private payroll growth is going to be about 130,000 in the fourth quarter, and we’re expecting that to continue with that same pace in the first quarter and then gradually pick up. In the second quarter, we have about 160,000 and then moving up to about 200,000 by the end of the year. At that point, we decided that the outlook will have improved enough for asset purchases to end.  The employment numbers are starting to pick up to above 150,000 and move up over the course of the second half to about 200,000.  Given that outlook we made the decision in the forecast to assume that asset purchases would end at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing their own forecast and assumptions about the pace of private payroll growth and the ending of asset purchases.


Passage number 148.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about a disagreement or contention. It simply indicates gratitude towards someone named Mr. Lockhart.


Passage number 149.
 MR. ENGLISH.  In terms of what’s built into the forecast, we’re assuming that the purchases of Treasuries under the MEP are continued after the end of the MEP at the end of the year, and the MBS purchases continue all through June of next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining what is assumed in the forecast.


Passage number 150.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 152.
  MR. FISHER.  Steve, you may remember some time ago that WikiLeaks had this release of a cable and a conversation with now Vice Premier Li when he was chairman of the Communist Party of Liaoning, which is a northeastern province in China, and they were asking how he and the Politburo got the best measurement of economic growth; he referred to rail shipments and electricity consumption as well as lending activity. We’ve been tracking this.  I’m sure you have as well, but I have a question at the end of making a few data points.  One is that electricity consumption, at least in the series that we’ve been able to construct, is expanding at about 2 percent—not a very robust number.  If you look at freight in terms of train shipments, it’s down 7 percent, and that’s the lowest we can construct going all the way back to 2003.  And last, intercoastal shipping activity has dropped 34 percent, year to date.  So I’m wondering if we are able to parse from that how much is related to fallow export activity—you mentioned Europe, which is certainly hurting, and the slowdown elsewhere—or what it might tell us about their own domestic activity and how weak things really are.  Because if you look at the indicators that I just mentioned, the growth rate, which I’ve always found suspect, would seem to be much less than what they’re reporting.  I wonder what your take is on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is presenting data points that suggest a weaker economic growth in China than what is being reported. He questions the accuracy of the reported growth rate and raises concerns about both export activity and domestic activity in China. This is in disagreement with the official narrative of strong growth.


Passage number 153.
 MR. KAMIN.  Sure.  First of all, we’ve been very alert to two issues that are related. One of them is whether the official GDP data understate the true growth of the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has been aware of two related issues.


Passage number 154.
 MR. FISHER.  Overstate or understate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The excerpt only includes the statement "Overstate or understate" which is not enough to determine if there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 155.
 MR. KAMIN. Oh, I’m sorry.  Overstate.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is apologizing for a mistake and expressing gratitude.


Passage number 156.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 157.
MR. KAMIN.  And second, as a related matter, has the slowdown in China been steeper than the official data would suggest.  We actually developed these issues, and we have a box in the Tealbook that addresses them, and I’ll just mention some of the issues. First of all, electricity production, indeed, has tailed down over time, but it is reasonably well correlated with the ups and downs of official Chinese GDP growth.  In fact, in the third quarter, at least by our seasonal adjustment estimates, it seems to have popped up a little bit.  By that metric, the movements in the official data don’t seem broadly out of line, although we haven’t looked at your freight cars or some of the other issues.  Actually, since a particular weak spot for the Chinese economy has been exports, I could easily imagine that some indicators that are most correlated with export activity could show steeper declines than GDP growth generally, so that’s one area of investigation we’ve pursued. Another focus of our analysis has been to note that we’ve used a short-term forecasting model that relates GDP growth to three indicators:  retail sales, import growth, and industrial production.  Over time, that has tracked official GDP growth pretty well in terms of its ups and downs.  If the Chinese authorities were fudging the data to an exceptional degree lately, they’d have to be doing it not only with GDP growth, but also to these other indicators, which I won’t rule out as impossible, but that seems less likely. One final point is, as I mentioned, since the Tealbook was put to bed, the Chinese released new data for GDP in the third quarter, which looked stronger.  That was, indeed, consistent with the stronger tone of retail sales and IP data that they released at the same time. By our model, we actually would be looking at quarter-to-quarter annual rate GDP growth of like 8½ percent, but the actual data suggest 8 percent, and we’re going with that. So long story short, for obvious reasons we’re not 100 percent confident about the official data that the Chinese have released, but we haven’t been able to find any smoking guns, as it were, that the data are basically distorting in a significant way our view as to what’s happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their analysis of Chinese economic data and expressing some uncertainty about its accuracy, but there is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 158.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" is a polite response and does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The term "Vice Chairman" does not imply any contention or disagreement. It is simply a title or position within a company or organization.


Passage number 160.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. One other point on the whole electricity–GDP conundrum in China.  There is some evidence that the industrial sector is a really big user of electricity relative to the overall economy, and so to the extent that the manufacturing sector is hit by the slowdown in Europe, for example, you’re going to see a disproportionate decline in electricity relative to overall GDP.  What seems to be happening in China is that manufacturing activity is under some pressure, but if you look at the household sector, consumption seems to be doing quite well.  So if you break the electricity consumption down by sectors, you can reconcile the weak electricity consumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The author simply presents information and observations about the electricity usage in the industrial and household sectors in China.


Passage number 161.
 MR. FISHER.  But the answer to my question is that it’s export-related more than it is domestic growth–related.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 162.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, it’s industrial-related.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 163.
 MR. KAMIN.  But even without going to that degree of decomposition, it’s not obvious just from the electricity numbers alone, just in aggregate, that they’re indicating a much more rapidly slowing economy than we’ve seen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or observation about the electricity numbers and implying that they suggest a slowing economy.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  If everyone is willing, maybe we could get to our economic go-round.  It would be terrific if we could do that all today.  I ask everyone, to the  extent you can, to keep your interjections crisp and concise.  And with that I will start with a recognized expert in the field of crisp and concise interjections, President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage suggests a desire for everyone to participate in an economic discussion and encourages concise contributions. The mention of President Rosengren as a recognized expert implies his expertise will be valued in the discussion.


Passage number 165.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would just start with a parenthetical comment.  Not to relitigate our previous discussion, but it’s notable that if staff who sits in on the meeting have trouble interpreting qualitative guidance and people that are very informed investors, as Simon highlighted, have a very different interpretation of qualitative guidance, it does highlight the challenges in communication of relying solely on qualitative guidance. In terms of the economic outlook, I agree with Governor Stein’s comments in that I was somewhat surprised by how much our actions at the previous meeting affected financial markets. While the policy affected asset prices in a way similar to conventional policies—lowering mortgage and bond rates, weakening the dollar, and increasing stock prices—the big surprise was how much the mortgage rate declined and how little the Treasury rate responded.  My interpretation of this is that markets had expected us to do more with Treasury purchases, but that our anticipated mortgage purchase program was more substantial than anticipated.  While it is too soon to know the broader economic impact, the initial response has been quite encouraging. Qualitatively, discussions with community bankers since our action have highlighted that in New England, refinance activity has been energized, and most banks are also seeing a higher volume of purchase activity, presumably, in part, as a result of our action. They have also noted that they are now funding more construction loans with financially strong builders, and that those builders seem to have no difficulty selling new homes.  Given that most New England states have unemployment rates below the national average and are seeing home price increases in many markets, this is exactly what I would have hoped from our policy actions.  We are   providing significant support to a nascent housing market recovery.  The Mortgage Bankers Association data on refinance and purchase loans nationally seem broadly consistent with what I am hearing more qualitatively from contacts. In discussions with college presidents, I’m hearing an increased willingness to start building projects.  Some colleges report endowments at or above 2006 levels, and with the very low interest rates, they are beginning to start building projects in part because of the low cost of funds and cost of construction, along with more faith in the recovery.  That some colleges are using debt finance rather than waiting for capital campaigns reflects a response to our actions of pushing long rates down. A third area that has been positively affected by low rates is car sales. Banks report that they have lowered auto rates, and consumers do seem to be responding.  Similarly, auto dealers I’ve spoken to believe that low auto loan rates are having a positive effect on auto sales.  Thus, more stimulative, unconventional policy is having an effect, and the supposition that further unconventional policies would not influence economic growth does not seem consistent with what we have seen to date. Another benefit of our open-ended action is that there seems to be more confidence that tail risks will be mitigated by our open-ended monetary policy tied to economic outcomes.  Consumer and housing activity appear to be picking up, and while there are many factors that influence household expectations, I do think our action is playing an important role.  The early October rise in the Michigan consumer sentiment index, especially the rebound in the expectations component, seems consistent with diminishing uncertainty on the part of consumers. However, firms seem more influenced by the continuing uncertainty surrounding the U.S. fiscal situation and international economic problems in Europe and China.  Thus, unlike the earlier stages of the recovery, firms are lagging while households are leading the recovery. If some of the uncertainty is removed at the end of this year, I can imagine getting a stronger and more sustained recovery in 2013.  However, both our policy action and this improved sentiment can easily be swamped by fiscal policy mistakes either here or abroad. Because our actions are having the anticipated positive effect, I have, as a result, raised my own forecast for economic activity.  However, it will still be many years before we are back to full employment.  To avoid further labor market scarring, I believe it is appropriate for us to continue to take strong action that will reduce the time it takes to more fully utilize resources in the economy.  That action should continue into next year, it seems to me, but we will turn to that topic tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their interpretation of recent actions and their positive effects on the economy.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a polite expression of gratitude from President Lockhart.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 167.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Most of our contacts in the Sixth District continue with their wait-and-see approach tied to broader concerns about well-recognized uncertainties.  A few more of our directors said they anticipate some greater deceleration in the short term than they expressed at the time of the previous FOMC meeting. For example, a director from the country’s second-largest retailer, a national home improvement chain, said that despite the fact they had experienced better-than-expected sales recently, they are budgeting a slowdown in 2013 tied directly to fiscal cliff effects. In our board meetings and advisory councils, we continue to hear reports of deferred projects across several sectors.  While this does not bode well for demand in the short term, it   suggests there may well be a significant level of pent-up investment activity that will take shape quickly once greater clarity regarding the near- to medium-term outlook is established. Regarding the national outlook, my GDP growth projection aligns pretty closely with the Tealbook over the next few quarters, but I’m more cautious about an acceleration in growth materializing in the medium term.  The reason I asked the questions earlier of David Wilcox is I note that the Tealbook sees an acceleration beginning mid-2013, and it appears this acceleration triggers the staff’s assumed cessation of the LSAP3 after eight months.  Because my forecast has lower GDP growth toward the back end of the forecast horizon, I don’t have the same confidence that policy will have done its work by mid-2013. My outlook for inflation runs a little higher than the Tealbook, holding at the Committee’s longer-term objective, and my outlook for 2013 and 2014 year-end unemployment is essentially the same as the Tealbook, but the quarterly jobs growth stories differ enough to mention.  My projections assume relatively even jobs growth across the quarters, while the Tealbook shows a pretty steep acceleration starting in the back half of 2013, following on weaker numbers in the first half. I mention this because it raises in my mind—and again, was the reason for the question earlier—the basis for the Tealbook’s assumption of the LSAP stopping at midyear. I’d like to comment in this round on two questions related to the performance and outlook of the economy that I expect the Committee will confront in coming meetings.  In the intermeeting period we engaged a number of contacts across the Southeast to gather anecdotal observations on these questions.  The first question was about the housing sector and any perceived impediments to effective transmission of MBS-related monetary actions through the mortgage credit channel to the real economy.  Improvement in the housing market is gaining traction in my part of the country.  Builders and realtors report a bounce in construction and sales activity.  There was widespread agreement among bankers that HARP2 is making headway in addressing underwater mortgages for those that were current on their payments.  That said, the banking and real estate contacts report that several obstacles to stronger mortgage activity exist, including impaired credit quality of potential borrowers, conservative loan underwriting, and administrative backlogs. Regarding the transmission process through mortgage credit originators, my contacts indicate that a capacity problem does indeed exist.  The larger mortgage players have not committed sufficient resources to expand refi capacity because the refi business is not viewed as sustainable once rates begin to rise. It’s worth mentioning that a member of President Rosengren’s staff provided my staff with a preliminary analysis of pass-through from the secondary MBS markets to primary markets, and the work suggests—or at least our interpretation is—that there has been substantial but not complete pass-through from secondary to primary mortgage markets.  I think more analysis needs to be done to map pass-through from rates all the way to originations, closings, and upward pressure on house prices. The second question is related to labor market conditions in general, with a particular focus on elements that might be relevant to the Committee’s future assessment of sustainable improvement in the outlook for employment.  In the near future, the Committee is going to have to evaluate the outlook for employment looking at a range of data inputs, of course, but perhaps some attention to anecdotal information.  My comment is anecdotal, of course, but we continue to hear that some industries, notably the retail sector, are planning to increase the relative size of their part-time workforce in order to minimize the cost associated with mandated health care coverage.  One of my directors, the CEO of a multi-format national restaurant firm, recently made news by announcing his company’s intention to move to an increasing use of part-time employees in anticipation of implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Our home-improvement chain director has said the same thing.  This bears watching, I think, as we interpret the data on employment and labor markets, particularly as an alteration of the recent LSAP3 policy is considered.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. One director from a national home improvement chain anticipates a slowdown in 2013 due to fiscal cliff effects, while other directors have a more optimistic outlook. Additionally, there is disagreement between the speaker and the Tealbook on the timing of an acceleration in growth and the assumption of the LSAP stopping at midyear. The speaker also raises concerns about the impediments to effective transmission of MBS-related monetary actions through the mortgage credit channel and the potential impact of the Affordable Care Act on labor markets.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a polite statement expressing gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I look at the Ninth District, I think that the economic tale is an unusually tangled one.  There are definitely positive signs.  In the Minnesota labor market, the number of job vacancies and the job vacancy rate recovered to their pre-recession levels.  At the same time, Minnesota’s unemployment rate was 5.6 percent in the second quarter of 2012, only about a percentage point higher than in the second quarter of 2007. There are also positive signs in the housing market.  According to the Case-Shiller index, housing prices in Minneapolis–St. Paul were about 6 percent higher in June than the year before.  But there are also reasons for concern.  Our business contacts report that their desire to engage in either cap-ex or hiring has declined significantly since the beginning of the year.  As you can probably guess, the one-word explanation for their caution is uncertainty, primarily about international demand and United States fiscal policy. This mixed picture is true at the national level as well.  In housing, the recent surge in housing starts is a positive element.  More important, at least from my point of view, housing prices seem to have begun to rise from what we hope is the bottom.  In the labor market we see signs of improvement, such as household employment having grown at about 180,000 per month over the past three months.  Measures of financial market uncertainty, such as the VIX and VVIX, remain low by post-2007 standards.  This month’s Michigan survey of consumersentiment jumped to levels not seen since the beginning of the recession.  That’s all on the positive side. On the negative side, manufacturing has slowed.  The Tealbook reports that nonresidential investment is likely to be slow in the near term, and the NFIB survey of small business attitudes toward hiring has really a near-recessionary feel to it. Financial markets continue to exhibit levels of risk aversion that I would have to say are extraordinarily high.  The 20-year real TIPS yield is essentially zero.  This means that on the margin, investors do not see any investments better than giving up a unit of purchasing power today for a unit of purchasing power 20 years in the future.  Now, as somebody who has spent much of my life teaching about the time–value of money, I find this quite disheartening.  [Laughter]  Even though some observers view equity prices as being inexplicably high, the Tealbook documents that the equity risk premium is actually higher now than at any point in the past 20 years. My outlook for the national economy is reflective of this mixed picture.  My benchmark outlook is about the same as the Tealbook’s, albeit with slightly less economic growth and slightly more inflation in 2014, somewhat similar to what President Lockhart was saying. But I would say that the uncertainties of my benchmark outlook are much more important in my policy thinking than the outlook itself.  On the one hand, slowing international demand or a trip over the fiscal cliff would lead to downward pressure on both employment and prices in our own country. On the other hand, it is also possible that we could see a protracted increase in housing prices.  Such an increase would generate a welcome boost to median household net worth, there would be an increased demand for goods and services, and this would push upward on employment and prices.  So in my outlook I see a great deal of uncertainty about our rate of progress to our dual mandate objectives.  We need a way to communicate to the financial markets and to the public that we stand ready to be appropriately supportive in case of an adverse shock to employment and prices, while remaining appropriately vigilant against unduly high inflation.  In the next go-round I will discuss how, not surprisingly, a threshold policy would provide exactly that kind of communication.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker presents a mixed picture of the economy, highlighting both positive and negative signs. They also express uncertainty about the outlook for the economy and the potential risks it faces.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses thanks to President Williams.


Passage number 171.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 173.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data that we received since our previous meeting have led me to make only slight changes to my projection for current-year GDP growth.  The incoming data were somewhat mixed, but most signs still point to very moderate growth. Many manufacturing contacts in my District are concerned about a slowing in their activity levels.  Notably, several large manufacturers of capital goods have been surprised by sharply lower orders in the past few weeks.  Some of them cite political and economic uncertainty as a contributor, but they are unable to offer clear explanations on how and why these uncertainties are suddenly a bigger problem.  Many, as others have reported, also report a considerable deceleration in emerging market economies as a critical factor in the slowdown. And it is not clear how this issue is going to develop over the remainder of the year.  In contrast, the producers in the more consumer-focused automobile sector are seeing growth, and they are also expecting that growth to continue.  Nationally, this relative strength in the outlook for auto demand was a part of a broader pattern of further improvement in the household sector, which was evident in the pickup in retail sales and some of the housing indicators.  Consumer-focused markets appear to be offsetting some of the weakness in business investment.  Still, pulling together the divergent incoming data and the anecdotal reports that I have received, I continue to anticipate very moderate GDP growth, just under 2 percent, as the most likely outcome through the end of the year.  Looking further out, I’m still anticipating a gradual pickup and expect to see a GDP growth rate of a little more than 2½ percent in 2013 and slightly over 3 percent in 2014. Importantly, my outlook for GDP growth incorporates some abatement in today’s high uncertainty levels and a return to more normal consumption patterns as house prices continue to stabilize. In addition, I am also expecting that the fiscal cliff will be at least partially resolved later this year, although subdued federal spending remains a headwind going forward in my outlook.  Finally, it seems likely that any resolution of the fiscal cliff will not come until nearly the last moment, and that clearly implies a lot of risk to my GDP growth outlook until the end of the year. My take on the latest employment report is that it made the scenario that was looming over the summer of a labor market entirely stuck in the mud less likely. Instead, the latest report supported continued slow progress in labor markets.  The month-to-month swing in the household survey can make the unemployment rate volatile, but the evidence of improvement in labor markets was supported by household employment growth in most of the demographic groups.  There were significant upward revisions to the establishment data and some increases in average hours worked.  Hopefully, we will see these improvements continue. Regarding inflation, the Cleveland Fed measures of underlying inflation have been running closer to our inflation objective than the CPI ex food and energy.  For example, the median CPI has increased at an annualized rate of 2.6 percent over the past three months, and it is up 2.3 percent over the past year.  This level of CPI inflation is just about right on target for a PCE objective of 2 percent, given my staff’s current estimate of the difference between CPI and PCE inflation. I am still expecting inflation to be at or below our inflation objective over the forecast horizon.  And it appears that financial markets are also anticipating subdued inflation rates. In the Cleveland inflation expectations model, which adjusts for the inflation risk premium, expectations are anchored below 2 percent, even beyond 20 years.  The policy-relevant forward rate of three years, two years forward has remained below 1½ percent. Other inflation expectation measures are also showing few signs of heightened inflation concerns. The risks to my outlook for GDP growth are primarily to the downside.  Until we get past the fiscal cliff, I don’t see the balance of risks becoming more favorable.  Also, despite the recent progress on unemployment, those gains could prove temporary, particularly with economic growth continuing to be very moderate.  On inflation, I see the risks as balanced because of the stability that we have been seeing in inflation expectations, despite the growth in our balance sheet.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing information and analysis based on the data and reports they have received. They discuss both positive and negative factors affecting GDP growth, labor markets, and inflation, but there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a polite statement ("Thank you") followed by the title of a person ("President Fisher").


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 175.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like President Pianalto, our own trimmed-mean work at the Dallas Fed indicates that inflation is well contained and is running at roughly a little bit below our 2 percent longer-term target; so inflation isn’t the issue.   I noted President Williams’s comments, and I listened to them very carefully.  I agree with him fully that China and Europe are a deep concern to at least those that operate globally.  I would add that for the first time, Steve Kamin, I am actually hearing of slow pays in China and lagging receivables. For example, in the case of Foxconn, which has 1 million employees—the way the semiconductor companies work with them is through a collection agency.  That collection agency is reporting slow pays from Foxconn.  You are seeing other similar signs of lagging in payments and cash flow issues.  There may be more there.  We just need to watch it.  But it adds to the angst in the business community.  Europe is already full of angst as you mentioned, and I am not going to comment further on that. Unlike President Williams, my corporate contacts continue to talk about the fiscal cliff, and the differentiation is as follows. It is one thing if measures are taken, particularly temporary measures, to avoid the fiscal cliff.  We all know that it would have at least a stay on the gross GDP impact.  The real issue is employment and how you plan and budget for employment.  And, again, citing the people that I speak to—which is a pretty good survey I think, including not just my directors, but a broader group—they continue to worry about whether or not they will be able to have specifics around which to plan not only expansion of cap-ex but also expansion of head count. President Kocherlakota mentioned the NFIB survey.  I have talked quite a bit about that publicly.  It is not very encouraging.  As one small business leader told me, it is very hard to build a railroad when you don’t know where you are going to be able to lay the tracks.  I think that still remains a problem.  And drilling down on this issue in terms of how corporations actually budget, in terms of payroll and the larger corporations’ job enhancing cap-ex, temporary solutions to the fiscal cliff do nothing but push out their budgeting cycle.  It is pretty clear, citing a direct quote from one of my most reliable corporate contacts, a large national operator, that already “strategic positioning steps for the second half of 2013, fourth quarter 2013, are being shelved.” My principal concern is employment.  It has been for a very long time.  I think that when you mentioned uncertainty, President Kocherlakota, that is still the operative word in the private sector.  And I don’t think we can take any relief from whether or not there is a short-term solution to the fiscal cliff.  What I care about is employment.  So we may not have the dent to GDP that we might fear.  But I do not think it is going to lead to more robust employment activity if we have temporary measures, which is what I expect. I would like to conclude, Mr. Chairman, with a comment that President Lockhart made because it’s not unimportant.  The restaurant industry claims that they have 1 out of 10 workers in the workforce.  I don’t know if that’s correct or not.  But the Affordable Care Act is not extended to people that work 30 hours or less.  What is interesting about that industry is the average restaurant worker works 48 hours.  Most of the restaurateurs and—I love this term—the casual dining establishments are actually taking steps to move their workers to less than 30 hours or to make them, in one way or another, temporary employees. This may screw around with the employment data for a while, which is why I mention it. I think President Lockhart is correct: We ought to pay attention to it.  It is not unimportant, if it is, indeed, that significant a portion of the workforce.  The Act may have an effect that is counter to what was originally planned by the authorities that framed it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with President Williams on the concern of China and Europe, but disagrees with him on the fiscal cliff and the impact it will have on employment. The speaker also mentions that their corporate contacts continue to worry about employment and how to plan for it, whereas President Kocherlakota mentioned the NFIB survey which is not encouraging. The speaker is also concerned about the Affordable Care Act and its potential impact on employment. These points of disagreement show that there is contention in the passage.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Evans.


Passage number 177.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to lodge a protest against the banning of electronic devices in this room.  I have only a very faint memory of Tigers games when they have won the World Series, and I have no access to an electronic device.  [Laughter] However, I do remember that they won in 1968 and sometime in the early 1980s, which I suspect is not helpful for this Committee. But if I could interrogate President Williams, maybe I could get him to reveal that much of his statistics on San Francisco are due to New York.  [Laughter] That clouds the statistics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a light-hearted remark with some humor inserted.


Passage number 178.
 MR. LACKER.  The New York Giants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any information that indicates contention or disagreement. It simply states the name of a sports team, the New York Giants.


Passage number 179.
 MR. EVANS.  At any rate, my outlook is not appreciably different from our September meeting.  At that time, I had already assumed the kind of additional policy accommodation that led the Tealbook to strengthen its forecast for medium-term GDP growth this round, and nothing in the recent data has caused me to change my basic views on the contours for growth or inflation over the medium term.  As President Williams and President Rosengren mentioned, I have also heard comments about how helpful our monetary policy actions in general have been for stimulating durable goods consumption growth and housing in general. As I talked with my business contacts this round, all of the commentary was very similar to September.  Several CEOs mentioned that business activity continues to be somewhat soft, but no one reported that a big drop-off was imminent.  In describing this slowness, several directors and CEOs made it a point to say that the current slowing is nothing like 2008 and 2009.  Thank goodness for easy comparisons.  For example, a large equipment manufacturer said that the near-term outlook was weak, as if air is coming out of the balloon.  But he expects a pickup in activity after the New Year. They were similarly concerned and hopeful about global prospects.  Growth is slowing now, but expectations are for a firmer recovery in 2013.  Several of my contacts noted that the slowdown in China appeared to be bottoming out and that the Chinese economy may be on the verge of a turnaround.  For example, Caterpillar reported receiving more requests for price quotes from Chinese customers, which is often a precursor to an increase in actual orders. With respect to the fiscal cliff risks in the United States, here, too, there was little new to report.  I had been expecting to hear a growing crescendo of concern running all the way to the end of the year.  But now I get the impression that businesses have already loaded up as much as possible on uncertainty and caution.  This fall, businesses have avoided making forward-looking commitments as much as is practical, as we have heard from others around the table.  Another heavy equipment manufacturer told me they put on hold any new spending in November and December.  They have plans in place to muddle through the rest of 2012, and then we will see where things stand in January.  After all, with demand so sluggish, the opportunity cost for waiting is about zero at the moment.  These kinds of comments suggest that we won’t be seeing any significant cap-ex or labor expansions in the fourth quarter. Similarly, our financial market contacts reported that many investors and nonfinancial businesses are accumulating cash.  Some of them are thinking, well, if we go over the cliff, then the cash can be used to buy a lot of distressed assets at bargain prices.  Alternatively, if the cliff is avoided, then the ensuing economic growth should present numerous investment opportunities. To sum up, I was glad to hear this round that businesses were not turning up the dial with regard to risk and uncertainty.  However, at the same time, it seems very unlikely that we will see any meaningful pickup in activity before the first quarter of 2013.  I hope we will have relatively favorable resolutions of the uncertainties here and abroad, and economic growth will accelerate, but the jury is still out.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their outlook and discussing their conversations with business contacts without expressing any contrary opinions or arguments.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage is a simple expression of gratitude and a closing salutation from President Lacker. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 181.
   MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since our previous meeting, the data have been mixed—some information suggesting improvement, some suggesting a bit of weakness.  Overall, I think the picture remains consistent with the sense I had at the previous meeting:  GDP growth is fluctuating around a modestly paced trend. Indicators from the Fifth District have been somewhat softer than incoming information on the national economy.  Our manufacturing index, which first turned negative in June, came up for air in September but turned negative again in October.  Our services index has done basically the same thing, although it remains slightly above water now.  At the national level, revisions contained in the September employment report leave us with a somewhat brighter picture of the labor market than just a month or two ago.  The pace of total payroll employment in the third quarter is roughly the same as the average for this recovery.  And so now, in hindsight, the second quarter looks much more like a temporary dip below trend, perhaps payback for the exceptionally strong first quarter. Another notable feature of the evolving outlook is the emergence of some strength in consumer spending.  This is quite encouraging, of course, because any sustained increase in economic growth is going to require that consumers be a little less cautious than they have been. The sentiment readings have been on the upswing, but it is hard to put your finger on just what is driving household confidence right now, and that makes it hard to assess the likely persistence of the recent improvement. It is possible that confidence has been boosted by improving balance sheets and employment.  It is possible the deleveraging cycle is coming to an end.  It is also possible consumers are getting very excited about the impending relief from political campaigning.  In any event, consumers have been the bright spot in recent weeks.   While the household picture has brightened, business spending has been in the doldrums lately.  A wide range of our business contacts say that investment and hiring commitments are being held back by uncertainty about policy.  In addition, some mentioned a softening of export demand.  A South Carolina turbine producer, for example, cited the mess in Europe as cutting into shipments, but also cited unrest in North Africa and the Middle East, which I hadn’t heard before. However, there are pockets of reported improvement.  West Virginia spark plug manufacturers report expanding capacity, and a Maryland manufacturer of ultraviolet curing systems reports significant shipments to China, just to name a few. Overall, we get a mixed picture from our contacts, it’s fair to say. So it is clear that it is hard to get excited about GDP growth in the neighborhood of 2 percent per year and employment growth in the neighborhood of 150,000 per month.  But it is also, for me, hard to see how to improve on these trends with monetary policy.  At our previous meeting, I cited work by Howard, Martin, and Wilson that shows this pace is about on par with recovery in other advanced economies from housing-related recessions.  I will mention that several of our contacts have told me that, among people they talked to, there are few who think that monetary policy is going to have any effect.  I wasn’t going to mention that, but I have heard a couple of other reports here.  I have a feeling that if there were contacts in my District that would have reported to me what they reported to Presidents Rosengren and Evans, they probably wouldn’t have volunteered it to me.  I suspect the opposite is true.  What this reminds me of more than anything is a line in David Brooks’s column today, “We are living in the golden age for confirmation bias.”  So take that for what it’s worth. Inflation has been running close to 2 percent.  I notice the Tealbook is now forecasting inflation close to 2 percent over the second half of this year and is forecasting a decline next year.  I think that is kind of an underestimate for 2013.  I think we will come in at more like 2, and our asset purchase program tilts the risk to the upside on inflation.  That concludes my report.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a summary of the current economic situation and their own perspective on it. They mention both positive and negative indicators but do not express any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 183.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic growth in my District has slowed since the previous meeting.  Notably, District activity in the private sector related to federal spending has dropped, especially in New Mexico.  Expectations for retail sales and tourism in coming months have edged lower, with contacts expecting weaker gains in holiday sales compared with last year.  And activity in the energy sector has moderated as the drilling rig count for both natural gas and oil dropped in October and expectations weakened.  In manufacturing, the Bank’s October survey, which will be released later this week, showed a sharp decline in orders, and it was the lowest reading for its composite index since 2009.  Many survey participants noted that customers have put orders on hold until uncertainties are resolved.  Even so, expectations for hiring and capital spending over the next six months remained slightly positive. In the ag sector, estimates of crop inventory drawdowns over the next year increased further as drought lingered.  But livestock slaughter, somewhat surprisingly, remained modest despite reports of herd liquidations.  Combined with weakening Asian demand, herd liquidations could keep a damper on meat price increases. Housing activity showed strong gains since the previous meeting.  Auto sales were also solid and expected to rise further through the end of the year.  And our high-tech sector contacts generally anticipate gains going forward. District employment also continued to grow modestly in September.  On net, the national outlook is little changed from the previous meeting with recent negative news on business spending roughly offsetting positive news in other sectors.  On the downside, our contacts repeatedly cite uncertainty about the election, fiscal policy, regulation, and Europe as holding back investment decisions.  As a result, business spending has continued to be weaker than anticipated.  On the upside, consumers appear to be unfazed thus far by the impending fiscal cliff, with both sentiment and light vehicle purchases at multiyear highs.  In addition, the housing market has shown signs of strengthening.  Risks to the outlook are largely unchanged. In particular, the fiscal cliff remains a serious threat, especially when coupled with slowing global growth.  However, should the fiscal outlook become clear, I would expect we would see activity strengthen and build on the improvements in the housing market. Finally, while food inflation has remained tame thus far, I continue to expect a moderate increase over the next few quarters as a result of the drought.  Even though core inflation readings have been soft, longer-term inflation expectations, based on the TIPS market, have moved higher.  With an improving economy and our expanding balance sheet, I expect both headline and core inflation will likely remain near 2 percent over the forecast horizon, with the risk that they could move higher if inflation expectations rise further.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply provides an overview of economic activity in their district and discusses potential risks and uncertainties.


Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 185.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Broadly speaking, the Eighth District economy appeared to experience relatively strong growth of real personal income and consumption expenditures over the first half of 2012, compared with the growth seen during 2011. Since then, however, the District economy may have lost some momentum, as growth measured by state-coincident indicators has begun to slow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents both positive and negative information about the Eighth District economy. It mentions strong growth in real personal income and consumption expenditures in the first half of 2012, but also suggests that the economy may have lost momentum since then. This indicates some disagreement or contention regarding the current state of the economy.


Passage number 186.
   Employment growth in the District’s 18 MSAs has recently lagged employment growth in the nation as a whole.  A few areas of the District seem to be doing relatively well, however.  Employment growth and housing activity have been brisk in the Louisville area, for example, and employment growth in Memphis has been on par with the nation. Anecdotal information from transportation firms in the District seems to provide some cause for concern.  The pace of activity in this industry seems to be slowing both globally and in the U.S.  These firms are growing cautious concerning the economic outlook.  The upcoming holiday season does not look particularly bright, according to these contacts. Nationally, I have been more optimistic concerning the second half of 2012 than the Tealbook.  Thanks to the spurt of relatively optimistic data, the Tealbook’s second-half assessment has now moved closer to my own, about 2 percent growth for the period. My concerns about a global slowdown remain prominent in my assessment of the U.S. economy.  However, I have become slightly more optimistic concerning the near-term outlook for Europe.  I think the next steps in the EMU drama have a reasonable chance of going smoothly, which may then push the current period of relative calm in global financial markets through the winter.  While I had been expecting a period of financial volatility during the September–October time frame, that volatility did not materialize.  This has given us a welcome respite from the European sovereign debt crisis, even if the core problems there remain unresolved.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is providing information and personal opinions about the employment growth and economic outlook in different areas.


Passage number 187.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude, there is no contention or disagreement being conveyed.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. Governor Yellen" is a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The information that has rolled in over the past few weeks has been puzzling.  To my mind, the jury is still out when it comes to judging its implications for the economic outlook. On the positive side, data pertaining to the household sector have generally been heartening.  Spending has picked up noticeably.  And according to the preliminary October Michigan survey, consumer attitudes turned decidedly rosier.  A sizable fraction of consumers now judge their financial situation more favorably, and they seem blithely unperturbed by the impending fiscal cliff. More households expect good economic conditions over the next year and the next five years, and more anticipate that the national unemployment rate will move down.  The same improvement in confidence since mid-September is evident in the daily Gallup poll, although, interestingly, it is confined to Democrats and Independents.  Incoming data on housing has also been upbeat.  In contrast to this encouraging news, data pertaining to the business sector reveals disconcerting trends.  We have seen a worrisome decline in core capital goods orders and sluggishness in manufacturing output.  Moreover, surveys suggest that confidence among businesses is weak.  They seem preoccupied with the fiscal cliff and their prospects for earnings and sales, and these concerns are impeding hiring and investment.  As Narayana and Richard noted, in the NFIB, for example, small business hiring plans recently plunged.  The latest Conference Board measure of CEO confidence reveals greater pessimism about both current conditions and the short-term outlook. The latest employment report contains similarly conflicting signals.  On the one hand, the unemployment rate declined notably, which is a welcome and favorable development.  Some of the decline may conceivably reflect statistical noise, but the fact that the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate in the Gallup poll also declined by a similar amount between mid-September and mid-October supports the view that there is signal in this decline.  The Gallup poll is a completely independent survey that reaches around 30,000 households over a 30-day period.  In contrast, private nonfarm payroll gains were lackluster.  The magnitude of job gains in the household survey was eye-popping, but as Glenn Follette discussed yesterday at our pre-FOMC briefing, when adjustments are made to put the household survey measure on the same conceptual basis as the payroll survey, the two figures come into close alignment at around 100,000. In sum, more-recent data point to some improvement.  I don’t think we have yet seen anything that qualifies as a substantial improvement in current labor market conditions or in the outlook going forward.  I, therefore, think that at our December meeting, we must be prepared to continue our MBS program and undertake additional longer-term asset purchases to replace those now associated with our maturity extension program. We reaffirmed in September that we would monitor both the efficacy and costs of our asset purchase program.  In this regard, it appears that our September announcements were successful in meaningfully shifting market expectations and yields.  Simon summarized some of the effects we have seen.  At this point, the modal date for the end of our flow-based purchase program is early 2014.  And as he noted, a number of dealers interpret conditions that would constitute a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook as a decline in the unemployment rate to around 7 percent, coupled with a sustained period of above-trend growth in payroll employment.Our September announcement was followed by noticeable declines in MBS yields.  Stock prices rose and the exchange rate declined following the announcement by amounts that roughly accord with the staff’s earlier expectations. Nominal Treasury yields, in contrast, did not fall following our announcement, but I do not necessarily interpret this as a negative signal.  First of all, the roughly 10 basis point increase in measures of breakeven inflation over the next week reversed only part of their precipitous decline in the summer of 2011.  That decline was certainly unwelcome, most likely reflecting flight to safety and heightened concerns about negative tail risks. Furthermore, to the extent that the recent increase in breakeven inflation reflects greater confidence in the durability of the recovery and lower odds that we will undershoot our inflation target, I would interpret the response of nominal Treasury yields as fully consistent with the intent of our statement, provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at levels consistent with our price-stability objective. And I interpret the evidence from both TIPS and recent surveys as indicating, indeed, continued confidence in our price-stability commitment. In this case, modestly higher inflation expectations actually facilitate the attainment of our employment goal.  After all, in modern macroeconomic models, inflation expectations are a key channel through which monetary accommodation stimulates growth.  Higher inflation expectations lower real interest rates, thereby boosting spending.  Indeed, TIPS yields at both the five-year and five-year-forward horizons declined during the day and week following our announcement. Overall, then, I am very pleased with how markets have interpreted our actions in September and responded to them.  I will discuss the policy implications during our go-round tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains both positive and negative information, indicating a disagreement or contention between the two perspectives. The positive information suggests that the household sector is doing well, with increased spending and consumer confidence. However, the negative information indicates concerns in the business sector, with declining capital goods orders and weak confidence among businesses. This disagreement or contention is further illustrated by the mention of conflicting signals in the latest employment report.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude toward Governor Duke.


Passage number 192.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  That was very high value.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and praising Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 193.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have four points to make in this soon-to-be-enforced two minutes.  [Laughter]  My first point relates to the basic picture.  The economy is still slogging along, which is to say going forward but without a whole lot of traction.  This is really just a variation on the basic metaphor, which is that I’ve noticed that each time we have a little burst of data that looks good we get a little bit of growth in the economy.  Then, the next quarter it’s a different data stream that looks good.  Instead of one area that gets some traction and then allows other areas to build off of it, we seem still to be bouncing around a little bit in the economy, which I think is why in the end we still have these disappointing growth rates. My second point is on housing, which is an area that does seem to be getting traction, as several of you have mentioned, and I just note that there is still an awful lot of regional variation   in both sales and pricing. I think the situation was well put by the chief economist for Zillow this morning when it released its latest housing price index.  He said, “The housing market is on the mend, but the housing bottom will be a protracted one.” My third point relates to risks.  I think, as I think most of you do, that downside risks still outweigh upside risks by a substantial margin, but I guess I do think that the downside risks have actually receded a bit since the September meeting, particularly on the foreign side. It seems to me—at least in the near term with respect to both geopolitical and economic risks—things are a little less dark than they were six or seven weeks ago, although there’s no guarantee that three or three-and-a-half or four months from now they will not darken again.  Obviously, there’s been no change on the fiscal situation domestically. Fourth and finally, with respect to the labor market and, specifically, how to judge improvement in the outlook for the labor market, I would make a pitch now for an emphasis on what I would term “indicators of dynamism” in the labor market.  It does seem to me as though the monthly job creation numbers are probably the single best—though by no means the only good—indicator for us to be looking at.  The unemployment rate, as mentioned in the earlier go-round, can vary some even as things are improving.  If job creation pulls people in from the nonparticipating group into the participating group, the unemployment rate may not go down much even though there actually is a good deal of dynamism in the labor market. I like the JOLTS report as well because it gives a sense a dynamism, looking at hiring, openings, and separations together, but I think it’s a little harder to rest a lot on JOLTS because each of those factors individually can vary a good bit for idiosyncratic reasons from month to month.  So I would put the most emphasis on the net job creation numbers, and it’s worth noting in this regard   that only one out of the past seven months has had what could fairly be characterized as a good job creation report, and even that one—which was the 180,000 in July—was hardly spectacular. I would hope that between now and December when we have to make an evaluation, we can be bouncing these potential criteria back and forth off one another—virtually, if not in person.  But as I said, I would like to put in a pitch for the sustained increases in job creation, which, to me at least, would have to be significantly north of 150,000.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any overt contention or disagreement. It is a speech by Mr. Tarullo presenting his views on various economic points.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Raskin.


Passage number 195.
 MS. RASKIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the constraints of time I’ll focus my comments on the household sector only.  Like many of you, I’m encouraged by some of the good news that we’re seeing there.  The fact that households spent readily in September seems like a positive signal.  Of course, we’ve seen strong spending months before in this recovery, as recently as earlier this year as a matter of fact, and those weren’t a sign that consumer spending was turning up substantially.  But maybe the rise in spending seems more sustainable this time. Why might this be. For one thing, as noted by President Kocherlakota, consumer sentiment has improved markedly.  The jump in sentiment has lasted two months now, and it seems to be pretty broad based.  Sentiment about current conditions has improved.  Concerns about unemployment have lessened, and confidence about future conditions has picked up.  Indeed, even consumers’ expectations about their income in the coming year, a measure that had stayed stubbornly low throughout this recovery, has moved up noticeably. While I’d like to think that this upturn in confidence is a result of the September policy statement, the timing of the September jump might throw a little warm water on that notion.  However, the overall improvement in some of the more Main Street measures that monetary policy does tend to affect, like equity prices and home prices, does enter into households’ assessments of conditions. The more-positive readings on the stock market and the housing market suggest that the upward movements in confidence may have some staying power.  Interestingly, to the extent that we cannot explain the rise in confidence, that might be even better news.  Until recently, sentiment had been surprisingly weak, according to the Board staff, a factor that likely has contributed to the sluggish pace of spending.  But in October for the first time in about a year, sentiment has become surprisingly strong.  This seems like just the kind of news we would need to start seeing if things were really going to turn more decidedly positive. Another area of encouragement I’d like to mention is the rise in home values.  As homeowners see their net wealth and thus their lifetime resources increasing, this is likely to support their spending, at least a little bit.  And as I mentioned, rising home values are likely improving households’ economic outlooks and their expectations for the future.  In addition, of course, once potential homeowners stop fearing that they might buy in a falling market, home purchases become a better bet. But I think there’s yet another way that the rise in house prices could be helping the recovery.  Since the start of the year, 1.3 million borrowers moved from having negative equity in their homes to having positive equity.  At the end of the second quarter of 2012, underwater and almost underwater mortgages accounted for 27 percent of all residential properties with a mortgage, down from close to 30 percent at the end of last year.  While this is still a very high number, it represents a nontrivial number of households who, if they can access the ability to refinance, could take advantage of the current low mortgage rates to create lower monthlypayments.  The potential savings are not huge yet, but this is another area where things are starting to move in the right direction.  Of course, as President Lockhart and others have noted, tapping into low mortgage rates demands a strong analysis of various credit constraints and consensus on how such credit constraints could be alleviated. In these observations I’ve mainly been focused on the changes I perceive in economic conditions in the household sector, but we shouldn’t lose sight of the fact that the level of economic activity is still really lousy. It’s easy to get excited that conditions may be finally starting to improve, but we still have a long, long way to go before we can have any sense of satisfaction with the economy.  Nonetheless, it’s nice for once to be able to see some signs of encouragement in the household sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is mainly discussing positive developments and signs of encouragement in the household sector.


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 197.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In thinking about the outlook, I’ve also taken note of some of the same emerging bright spots that others have:  retail sales, consumer confidence, and housing starts.  I’ve been wondering how our policy actions from the previous meeting, particularly the MBS purchase component, might affect things in these areas going forward. Like President Rosengren, I was very struck by the market response to our September 13 announcement and, in particular, how much MBS rates moved relative to Treasuries. There are different measures of it, but one number that I remember was something like 40-plus basis points on the option-adjusted spread of mortgages to Treasuries in the first week after the announcement.  That’s a big, big number. To caricature what has happened—you could have had two theories going in.  One theory is that all that really matters is how much duration you’re taking out of the market and whether you do it by buying Treasuries or MBS is to some extent, secondary.  That’s how the FRB/US   and other models that we’ve used to think about it have approached it.  The other extreme, and of course, I’m just caricaturing, is you have a very highly segmented market, and there’s essentially a flypaper effect:  Where you touch it is where it’s going to stick.  And it seems like the data— when there’s this kind of outlier in the picture—have been trying to speak in favor of segmented markets, not as a general statement about the world, but at least in this particular case at this particular point in time. This leads to the question as to whether this market segmentation is something we should think is a good feature or is something that we didn’t really expect, and it means that things are not working out the way we intended and maybe we should think about tilting our mix back toward Treasuries because it’s somehow not working the way we expected.  You could argue it either way. My guess is if you’re a FRB/US literalist, you might say this is not the best thing in the world because of the lower elasticity of substitution—sure, I’m moving MBS rates by more, but that has to come at the expense of moving other rates by less, and housing is only a small sector of the economy, and maybe you’d rather have 10 or 15 basis points on the Treasury than 40 basis points on MBS.  You just don’t get enough if you think about the 40 basis points of MBS in a model.  However, if you adopt the view that I’ll associate with President Fisher, which is that the nonfinancial corporate world is probably pretty insensitive to further movements in the rates that they face, then market segmentation is in some sense your friend because it’s allowing you to focus your ammunition on a part of the world that is arguably more sensitive to financial conditions.  Even with the partial pass-through from the secondary to the primary, we have gotten a significant move, and as Governor Duke suggests, we may, with sustained pressure, hope to see more.  And even if those things don’t feel like a big thing in the model, I’m a little bit with Eric in thinking that right now the timing is such that a push in the right direction on housing might have a bigger effect than it otherwise might in other circumstances.  My general inclination is to think that we’ve actually gotten a little bit lucky with MBS purchases in the way that they’ve played out, and as a result, I’m a little more optimistic about the outlook in general and especially about those components of the outlook that are most closely connected to lower mortgage rates. Now, of course, this is all contingent on two things, and two things that are a little hard to know.  One is you have to believe that this effect on MBS spreads will be durable, and when you start thinking about very low elasticities of substitution, it may be that that elasticity is low in the short run.  But of course, in the long run, if there are these big movements in spreads, people are going to start hunting for yield elsewhere, and things may look different at a one-month horizon than they do at a one-week horizon.  We have seen some retracing of the effects. I don’t know how to quite think about this, but this a very important thing for us to think about in terms of the efficacy of the policies: Where is it going to stick at a more intermediate horizon.  And then, of course, second, there’s the whole issue of pass-through to the primary rate.  But I think if we do okay on both of these dimensions, and we push on this for a while, I can imagine that we would see some further positive momentum on consumer spending and housing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different theories and possibilities regarding the effect of policy actions on the market, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict between viewpoints.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks. Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The sentence "Thanks. Governor Powell" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 199.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While I see some improvement at the margin, it still feels to me like a world with 2 percent inflation and 2 percent economic growth, which is obviously not strong enough to reduce unemployment.  Like others, I found a dichotomy between the household sector, where there’s been a fairly strong run of data, being to some extent canceled out by the weakness of the business sector. It has been well covered by many around the table, so I’ll skip to the punch line on that dichotomy to say that it’s not easy to   generate a story that accounts for both the strength in households and the weakness and uncertainty in business.  I think the hope has to be that a good part of the business weakness comes from the decline in global trade, as President Plosser suggested, and that does seem to be part of the story—the overall weakness in Europe and Asia and the decline in global trade— rather than activity here at home. Or it could be that businesses are seeing weakness that the households haven’t seen yet but soon will or vice versa.  I guess time will tell. I will just mention a couple things that I thought were interesting in my conversations with investors.  First, a number of hedge fund managers that I talked to are now saying that thanks to the ECB, sentiment has turned markedly more positive regarding Europe after the events culminating in the OMTs at the end of the summer.  For example, the founder of a large multi-strategy hedge fund told me that it had gone heavily to cash at the time of the Greek elections in June, and his firm now believes that post-OMT the bad outcome is really off the table for now and it’s safe to invest and it’s safe to stay invested, despite expectations of bumps in the road.  That’s a big change in risk sentiment in the past 60 days, and it’s much broader than just the handful of firms that are buying peripheral sovereign debt, the courageous few.  So I think it’s really a central bank stepping in and cutting off tail risk. In that light, the second thing I would share is that a number of investors said to me in the past few weeks the same phrase, which is, “Well, your policy is working,” but what they meant in context was, “Well, you want people to take some risk, and they are.” And one place that is showing up big time is in lower-quality fixed income.  There was not a lot of pass-through in our September announcement to Treasuries or to super high-grade corporates, but the pass-through to BBBs and to high yield was very strong, and it does speak of a reach for a yield.  Investors are clamoring for leveraged loans and high-yield bonds, anything with a decent yield. So that part of it is working.  In fact, a number of investors—this is a bit of a cautionary note, more than a bit—say that deals are being done in the high-yield market on terms that are very similar to the bubble terms of 2005 to 2007.  You’ve got the return of dividend deals, and in a dividend deal, ownership doesn’t change hands, but fixed-income investors fund a large one-time dividend to private equity investors, and it typically involves structural subordination, peak leverage levels, payment-in-kind bonds, and no covenants.  So this is a very peaky, bubbly structure, and we’re seeing more and more of those. In the new deal market, there’s a large industrial deal that I’m pretty familiar with that is being done at 6¼ times leverage in the next few weeks. It’s rated CCC by both Moody’s and S&P.  In most ordinary markets there is no CCC market for paper, and this is being done at 6¼ times leverage with a weighted average cost of capital of under 6 percent.  So private equity firms are more focused on the level than they are the spread, and under 6 percent for that kind of paper is an all-time record, again, very reminiscent of a bubble period. So demand for leveraged loans and high-yield bonds is far in excess of supply.  This can be expected to continue.  On the bright side, you do not yet see the return of that leveraged mark-to-market structure that was so unstable in the crash, and you also don’t see very large deals getting done yet.  There’s sort of a cap around $5 billion, and you don’t see dealers committing their balance sheets. I think all three of these things are positives for holding down the systemic risk aspects of this emerging bubble, if you will.  But we’ve seen the competitive dynamic develop into a race to the bottom before, and so these markets are definitely worth keeping a close eye on.  I pass that along.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker discusses a dichotomy between the strength in households and the weakness in the business sector, and mentions that it is not easy to generate a story that accounts for both. This suggests that there is disagreement or uncertainty about the factors contributing to the different trends in these sectors. Additionally, the speaker notes that some investors believe the policy is working and people are taking risks, while also mentioning concerns about the terms of deals in the high-yield market being reminiscent of a bubble period. This indicates differing perspectives on the effectiveness and potential risks of current economic policies.


Passage number 200.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for Bill.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there are questions for Bill, and thanks President Evans.


Passage number 201.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, I’m a little surprised by the interpretation of the size of the asset purchases in the dealer survey.  Looking at your chart, the dealer survey seems to be suggesting asset purchases on the order of alternative A. I think this is in line with the question that President Lockhart was asking yesterday.  This is leading me to be comfortable interpreting substantial improvement in line with alternative A.  If someone was of the opinion that we were expecting something like an alternative A, the substantial improvement language isn’t sufficient for that. Should we convey preferences for a different alternative.  I’m not quite sure how to make these judgments about alternative B versus alternative A since alternative B looked like pretty comfortable language in line with the dealer survey, but if I have to say I prefer alternative A, well, that’s what I would do. Thoughts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Evans expressing his interpretation and preference regarding the size of asset purchases. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 202.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I’m not sure if there was a question there or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English simply expresses uncertainty about whether a question was asked or not.


Passage number 203.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  Well, I’m surprised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of laughter indicates a light-hearted and positive tone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I wanted to present this information precisely because I thought the expectations in markets for the total amount of purchases are different than what we’ve written down in alternative B. I mean, we had to write down our alternatives before we had the dealer survey in hand.  The dealers’ expectations moved from immediately after the September meeting, when the Desk did kind of a flash survey, to the final dealer survey for this meeting.  So we ended up in a place where we were writing down balance sheet sizes that were, to us, reasonable—as we discussed yesterday—but are not that well aligned with what’s in markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. English, is stating that the expectations in markets for the total amount of purchases are different than what they have written down in alternative B. This implies that there is a discrepancy between the expectations of the market and the writer's own analysis.


Passage number 205.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  This seems like a normal type of adjustment that we were likely to get with qualitative types of guidance, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their assumption about the adjustment.


Passage number 206.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that’s right.  I think it’s a communications issue that would have to be addressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English simply states his opinion and agrees with the need for addressing a communications issue.


Passage number 207.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement regarding Governor Raskin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 209.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you.  Bill, I noticed that in all three alternatives, in the first paragraph in terms of our statement of current conditions we’re mentioning higher energy prices.  I’m wondering if you could elaborate a little bit on that decision, especially given the fact that in the go-round we actually heard very little about higher energy prices.  If, in fact, we were to make a change in this direction, I wonder whether we’d be maybe signaling more than we’re actually seeing. I just wanted to hear your thoughts on including energy prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Raskin expresses her disagreement by questioning the decision to mention higher energy prices in the statement of current conditions, given that they heard very little about it during the discussion. She also suggests that this decision may signal more than they are actually seeing.


Passage number 210.
MR. ENGLISH.  The past couple of CPI releases, for example, have had pretty high headline numbers, and the reason underlying that is basically energy prices, and so it seemed to us that paragraph 1 is kind of a backward-looking statement of what have we seen over the intermeeting period, and it seemed appropriate to say something like this.  It was a little uncomfortable to stick with the language we had about inflation having been subdued because the headline numbers really weren’t that subdued over the past couple of months.  They were kind of to the high side, but they were to the high side for a very identifiable reason that we don’t think will persist.  So it seemed worth spelling out that we’ve seen some higher inflation, but it was due to energy prices, and this is not something people should be concerned about as an underlying trend in inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and explaining their reasoning for making a statement about inflation.


Passage number 211.
 MS. RASKIN.  But, I mean, our current view may be that energy prices are not going to be higher going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their current view or opinion, which implies agreement with the idea that energy prices are not expected to be higher in the future.


Passage number 212.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right, but again, paragraph 1 is kind of describing the information that came in over the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that paragraph 1 describes the information that came in over the intermeeting period.


Passage number 213.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes, Bill has got it exactly right. The past couple of CPI readings were pretty high.  For what it’s worth, we’ve got retail energy prices in the PCE price index increasing 10 percent at an annual rate in the third quarter and 11½ percent in the fourth quarter, and then we have that unwinding going forward from there.  Notwithstanding those pretty big energy prices numbers, we have top-line PCE inflation at 1¾ percent in the third quarter and just a shade over 2 percent in the fourth quarter.  So we think core inflation is going to be very moderate over the second half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and stating their own perspective on the matter.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentions Governor Duke, but it does not provide any information or context that suggests there is contention or disagreement surrounding him.


Passage number 215.
MS. DUKE.  Thank you. Actually I had a little bit of the same question about the difference between alternative B and alternative A.  Particularly when we get to the next meeting, we will be looking at exactly this decision:  Do we continue on with the Treasury purchases. I’m not sure I see in alternative A the indicator that goes from $750 billion to $1.2 trillion or whatever that magnitude of a jump is.  I think some discussion at least internally of how we’re thinking about what the total purchases would be or the stopping rules are would be important next time. But my big question has to do oddly with exit.  As our balance sheet gets bigger and bigger, we’re still assuming the same five-year time period for selling off the securities that are on the balance sheet.  So I’m beginning to wonder how feasible that is, particularly as our holdings of mortgage-backed securities get larger, and with us in the market buying, the market for mortgage-backed securities begins to shrink.  I don’t expect that you’re ready to talk about that today, but I’d be really interested in your thoughts about how continuing to build the balance sheet impacts the time period of exit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 216.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Simon, do you want to say anything about the pace of sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for input.


Passage number 217.
 MR. POTTER. The Tealbook talks through this for you under alternative B.  What I have here would be for normalizing, I think.  We would sell, under alternative B, at about an $18 billion per month pace, the average sales pace.  And then, under alternative A, about $22 billion per month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting two alternative options and their respective sales paces.


Passage number 218.
 MS. DUKE.  Really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 219.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 220.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing gratitude, not engaging in any sort of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 221.
MR. ENGLISH.  I think one issue that comes up, if the balance sheet gets bigger by more than roughly $750 billion, is that the exit principles say sales will take place over three to five years.  The staff has generally assumed five.  And normalization of the size of the balance sheet will take place over two to three years. If the sales take place over five years and the balance sheet gets more than about $750 billion larger, the normalization will take longer than three years.  So as you go from alternative B to alternative A, the normalization would take longer than the three years that we have written down in the exit principles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. English, is suggesting that if the balance sheet gets larger by more than $750 billion, the normalization process will take longer than the three years stated in the exit principles. This implies a difference of opinion or contention regarding the projected timeline for normalization.


Passage number 222.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows a statement of gratitude from someone named Ms. Duke.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 224.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Bill, this is a great chart, and it is a perfect lead-in to the communication discussion that we are going to have afterwards.  If you were to do this chart during conventional periods, where we are talking about a fed funds rate going up by 25 basis points, down 25 basis points, or staying the same, my guess is that we would see a lot of clumping around no change or 25 basis points either up or down depending on the circumstances. When I take the period of unconventional policy and multiply to convert the amounts to a fed funds rate, it seems like we are getting a huge spread on what people’s anticipations of monetary policy will be as a result of our qualitative guidance. I would be interested in two things.  One, is this chart an outlier relative to history. If we look at other periods where people are trying to make a guess about what our actions are, would we normally be this far away from expectations of what are probably the most informed people in the market.  Then, second, am I right in making my mental calculation that if I were trying to put this in terms of a fed funds rate up or down, this distribution is substantially wider than what we would see under conventional policy.  I mean, I should be happy, because this is implying   the market expects much more easing.  And given that that would be my bias, I might be happy that the market is willing to ease much more than it looks like at least the staff thinks our intentions are.  But it does raise some concern about if we are creating a lot of variance in our policy through our current communication strategy.  Any comments you have on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Rosengren is expressing curiosity and seeking clarification on certain aspects of the chart and its implications. He is interested in understanding if the chart is an outlier compared to historical periods and if the distribution of expectations is wider under unconventional policy. He also raises a concern about the potential variance in policy resulting from the current communication strategy. However, there is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 225.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I haven’t done the work, but I think if you converted this to fed funds equivalents using various staff rules of thumb, you would indeed find a fair difference in the amount of easing the different broker–dealer firms are expecting over the next couple of years. And as to how unusual that is, I guess I am not sure.  I think even if we were in a world of conventional policy, and the market participants were looking at some trajectory for the rate— they thought there was going to be a tightening cycle or an easing cycle—there would probably be a fair amount of difference about the views of how large that tightening cycle would need to be or how large that easing cycle would have to be.  So I am not positive that this would be that unusual, but, nonetheless, we are in a situation where some participants see an expectation that there will be quite a lot of easing, and some not very much.  That range is indeed pretty large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there may be different expectations among broker-dealer firms about the amount of easing that will occur in the future. They acknowledge that even in a world of conventional policy, there would likely be differing views on the size of tightening or easing cycles. The range of expectations is described as large, but there is no direct disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 226.
 MR. POTTER. I’d say that three meetings ahead it is really close. Most dealers assume that the Treasury purchases will continue at $45 billion and the MBS at $40 billion.  That’s very similar to the normal state of the world where the expectations of the fed funds rate over the next few meetings are very close to what we see in the Tealbook.  And then there’s this issue, as Bill pointed out, that as you go further out, there are different views on the reaction function, which is reflected here, and also on what the economic situation might look like that gives the dispersion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the current expectations and views of dealers regarding Treasury purchases and the MBS. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 228.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes. I was just going to weigh in on this issue a little bit.  This is just that the staff forecast is based on an assumption of a little less accommodation than the market thinks.  If you wanted to incorporate that in, then you would have a little more aggressive forecast I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is simply offering his perspective on the staff forecast and suggesting that incorporating the market's assumption of more accommodation would result in a more aggressive forecast.


Passage number 229.
 MR. ENGLISH.  It would be the forecast under alternative A, roughly, on my second exhibit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a potential forecast.


Passage number 230.
 MR. BULLARD.  As you say, you didn’t get the dealer survey until later in the process.  I think in the future, then, that would be probably incorporated into the main baseline of the Tealbook.  That’s how I would read this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply suggesting a possible improvement for future reference without opposing or contradicting any previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 231.
 MR. ENGLISH. I think in the past we have been hesitant to just use whatever the market’s forecast is for policy in the staff forecast because we don’t necessarily agree with the market’s assessment of the outlook or your likely reaction function.  I wouldn’t want to say that no matter what, we are going to be writing down the market participants’ expectations for policy in the staff forecast.  We are going to have to make judgments about the outlook and about the likely policy response to that outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with using the market's forecast for policy in the staff forecast and suggests the need for judgments about the outlook and policy response.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 232.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Well, another way to look at it is the market is expecting more accommodation, but they don’t really have an appreciably different forecast from what we do.  They think it is going to be less effective than we do.  That’s why they think we are going to have to do more than what we think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard mentions that the market is expecting more accommodation, implying that they believe more action is needed. However, he also states that the market doesn't have a significantly different forecast from their own. The disagreement lies in the effectiveness of the expected actions, with the market believing it will be less effective than what they think.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 233.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I guess I would want to look more carefully at the dealer survey to see whether that is the right way to interpret this, or whether the right way is that they have a different reaction function built in than we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The phrase "I guess I would want to look more carefully at the dealer survey to see whether that is the right way to interpret this" indicates that Mr. English is unsure about the interpretation, suggesting a disagreement or contention of ideas.


Passage number 234.
 MR. POTTER.  They moved up their forecast for GDP and lowered the unemployment rate this time relative to September. They seem to think that the easing was effective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  These priors look like they are pretty loosely held.  I think that if we choose to communicate differently, we can do that.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the priors (assumptions or beliefs) appear to be loosely held and suggests that communication can be done differently. The mention of President Kocherlakota does not imply any disagreement, but rather introduces a new point or topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a few things to say.  One is to second what you just said.  If we want to communicate that our anticipation about the future path of policy is close to what the staff’s forecast is, well, we should figure out ways to do that. If we are happy with what the market participants currently expect, then I guess we should take that on board in the way we think about the future path of policy. I have a separate question, though.  At the end of paragraph 2 of alternative B, there is a line that says, “The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely would run at or below its 2 percent objective.”  This sentence made more sense to me at the previous meeting, as it referred to what would happen if we did not take action.  Now that we’ve taken action, it makes less sense to me.  I think it would be read, perhaps sloppily by people reading the statement, as saying that the Committee anticipates that under its current policy choice that inflation over the medium term likely would run at or below its 2 percent objective.  I guess my question is, what is the staff trying to communicate by including this sentence at the end of paragraph 2 of alternative B. Is it about the path of inflation without sufficient policy accommodation, or is it about the path of inflation under the path of policy described in alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota disagrees with the inclusion of a sentence in alternative B and questions the staff's intention behind it. He states that the sentence made more sense at the previous meeting but now, with the recent action taken, it appears to make less sense. He is unsure whether the sentence is referring to the path of inflation without sufficient policy accommodation or the path of inflation under the described policy in alternative B.


Passage number 237.
 MR. ENGLISH. It probably should be understood as the inflation outlook with sufficient policy accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker is stating a possibility or suggestion, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 238.
 MR. LACKER.  With.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Mr. Lacker. With all due respect, I must disagree with your proposal to increase taxes.


Passage number 239.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  With.  Okay.  That’s fine.  Yes, I’m not sure it’s as clear as it could be on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses uncertainty about the clarity of something.


Passage number 240.
  MR. LACKER.  And why is it “would”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or opposing arguments. It seems to be a straightforward question and the response does not dispute or challenge that question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 241.
 It “would” be— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, I disagree with that.  It says, “without sufficient policy accommodation,” “might not,” and “would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Yes, I disagree with that" indicates that the speaker disagrees with the statement being made in the passage.


Passage number 242.
” MR. LACKER.  Those are conditional.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing statements. It simply states that "those are conditional," indicating that some conditions or requirements need to be met. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  They’re counterfactual.  They suggest that without the accommodation, you would get insufficient growth and inflation below target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a view or observation about counterfactuals and their implication on growth and inflation.


Passage number 244.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  So we are not describing what we think the path of inflation will be, given that we have provided sufficient accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not discussing any disagreement or contention. The speaker is explaining that they are not describing their expectations for the path of inflation.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, the statement "That's right" does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply confirms or agrees with a previous statement or assertion.


Passage number 246.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Are we comfortable with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Insufficient information is provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 247.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we can discuss that in the go-round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "we can discuss that in the go-round" suggests a willingness to discuss and an open attitude towards finding a solution or resolution. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 248.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay. That’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Kocherlakota expresses agreement or acceptance of something, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else.  [No response]  All right.  Why don’t we go, then, to the go-round, and President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 250.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was happy to hear you refer to The New York Times this morning because that article confirms what many people at this table have been saying meeting after meeting. (Although in the upper right-hand side of that newspaper, it has always been proud to say, “All the News That’s Fit to Print,” there are cynics who would say, “All the News That’s Fit to Tint.”) I’m not quite sure if that is an affirmation or something that I should be worried about, having made the points that are made in that article, many of them this morning.  The underlying point is that, again, the macroeconomic effects of short-term solutions to the fiscal cliff may be one thing, but how it affects businesses’ confidence is another.  I’m glad you made that point.   I listened very carefully to the conversation around the table yesterday, and I want to make a couple of quick points because I went early and then actually listened to what other people were saying.  [Laughter]  Governor Tarullo made the point some time ago that we shouldn’t be reading statements, we should actually be having a dialogue.  I want to respond a little bit. We have to be very careful. I sensed—let me try to state this politely—a little bit of self-congratulation that QE3 had had such a great impact on the market.  Of course it has had a great effect on the fixed-income market.  This is a principle of hydrodynamics.  It’s Bernoulli’s principle.  If you shove a lot of volume through a narrow space, you’re going to get a faster flow. Simon gave a brilliant report yesterday—as he always does—and we saw the reaction in terms of the spreads and what has happened with MBS, and we had some conversations.  Governor Powell and I pointed out certain activity, at least in the CCC and lesser category—the junk bond sector—and some of the activities being seen were fully expected.  What I didn’t hear was that the stock market is actually down since we previously met by 3.2 percent.  It rallied the day after.  It’s off 3.6 percent since then. The real issue was raised by Betsy’s intervention, in my view.  I simply want to make the point that I have questions about the wealth effect, and I would like to see further studies on that.  You mentioned that, Mr. Chairman, in your brilliant summary.  Stock prices are questionable.  How much does it really affect, at least in a reasonable time frame, the median household.  And then, Betsy’s point, as I interpreted it, was a key point.  And that is, the transmission between MBS prices and what actually happens to the average household—and we think it will take time. I am always thinking at this table: I don’t work for the big banks; I don’t work for the dealers; I work for the average American household, and that is our job.  And the question is  efficacy. I think it is a little bit too early to judge an effect. Besides that, as we know, despite contradictory data that Governor Yellen presented from Zillow, and so on, the housing market actually took off before we launched QE3.  We were not quite sure, but that has been confirmed by the data now.  We have to be very careful and take our time to understand what the real effect of what we have done is, in addition to what we see in terms of immediate financial indexes.  That is my point. With regard to the options that have been presented to us, although I was not supportive of QE3—and I still think it is to be determined whether it is successful—I would support alternative B. I appreciate some of the language tweaking that took place in the first paragraph to indicate a little peppier consumer behavior.  I had suggested that in a memo. I’m grateful that you took it, and I consider it certainly less worse than alternative A.  And because we are already going down that path, it is the most likely option to adopt, and, even though my heart tells me that alternative C is closer to my thinking, I would support alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses skepticism and doubt about the effectiveness of QE3 and raises questions about its impact on the average American household. The speaker also expresses a preference for alternative C but acknowledges that alternative B is the most likely option to be adopted.


Passage number 251.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage only contains a thank you statement from President Rosengren without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 252.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support option B.  Minimizing changes to the statement until we get more visibility into fiscal policy and the effect of our earlier actions seems appropriate. At our next meeting, I would ideally like to adopt thresholds for actions based on economic outcomes and to build a consensus around beginning Treasury purchases when the MEP ends.  Reducing our gross purchases at the start of 2013 risks a noticeable reversal in the configuration of asset prices that our initial announcement set in train.  To me, that seems   premature and would further risk an undesirable return to the weak recovery that we have experienced to date. The Tealbook assumes that we will stop purchases next June with the unemployment rate at 7.9 percent, nonfarm payroll growing in the first half of 2013 at the same pace as the second half of this year, and the PCE inflation rate below 2 percent.  The optics, if not the economics, of stopping under such circumstances seems troublesome.  Our statement is clear in suggesting we will continue purchases until we see substantial improvement in labor markets.  I do not view substantial improvement as consistent with an unemployment rate 0.1 percentage point higher than it was in September. My own threshold for discussing the end of an $85 billion purchase program for Treasury and MBS securities would be 7¼ percent, assuming that inflation and inflation expectations remained well behaved. At that point, the discussion should center on whether overall labor market conditions were consistent with substantial improvement.  For example, whether the lower unemployment rate reflected job creation rather than reductions in the labor force; whether we had seen sustained, robust payroll employment growth; and whether we envision continued substantial improvement in labor markets for some quarters to come.  Under those conditions, I would stop asset purchases and stop reinvesting. My threshold for beginning the discussion about raising the federal funds rate would be an unemployment rate of 6½ percent—again, assuming that inflation and inflation expectations remain well behaved.  Whether the threshold became a trigger would, again, be determined by whether the lower unemployment rate reflected a real improvement in labor markets and the likelihood that it would continue on.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker supports option B and disagrees with reducing gross purchases at the start of 2013. They believe it is premature and would risk a return to a weak recovery. They also disagree with stopping purchases at an unemployment rate of 7.9% and have their own thresholds for discussing the end of the purchase program and raising the federal funds rate.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 254.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Governors may not have been fully briefed on the Conference of Presidents meeting we had in Los Angeles, where we had a presentation on the American Western.  I am going to channel my inner Gary Cooper this morning.  [Laughter] I support alternative B. Actually, just one comment on the language.  In paragraph 1, I would be happy with just saying, “Conditions in the housing sector have continued to improve,” dropping the phrase “albeit from a depressed level.” I think the housing sector conditions have evolved enough over the recent months to break with the earlier qualifying statement. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses his support for alternative B and suggests a minor change to the language in paragraph 1. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks, Jimmy.  [Laughter] President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. The phrase "Thanks, Jimmy" is a simple expression of gratitude, and the laughter that follows is likely a response to something humorous, but it does not suggest disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
 MR. LACKER.  I will spare you my John Wayne.  [Laughter] I cannot support additional asset purchases at this time.  Further stimulus, I think, is unlikely to result in a discernible improvement in economic growth.  And I think if it does, it will cause an unwanted increase in inflation. Economic activity has been growing at a modest pace on average. Inflation has been fluctuating around 2 percent.  Unemployment does remain high by historical standards, but the improvement in the labor market appears to have been held back by real impediments beyond the capacity of monetary policy to offset.  In such circumstances, I think further monetary stimulus runs the risk of raising inflation and destabilizing inflation expectations.  Moreover, I think further expansion of our balance sheet would make our exit strategy riskier and more challenging. The proposed statement says, “The Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens.”  I read this as saying that we will keep the funds rate near zero for a considerable time after we see a marked increase in the growth of employment and output.  I don’t think a policy conforming to this characterization would be appropriate because it implies providing too much stimulus, beyond the point at which I think we are going to need to begin raising rates. Finally, I remain opposed to purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities.  Because we’re doing imitations, I am tempted to channel the “Most Interesting Man in the World” and say I don’t often support purchasing assets, but when I do, I prefer purchasing Treasuries.  [Laughter] As we discussed last time, and as the staff analysis documented, purchasing MBS can be expected to reduce borrowing rates for conforming mortgages by more than it reduces borrowing rates for nonconforming mortgages or for other borrowing sectors, such as small business, autos, or unsecured consumer loans. I haven’t seen any convincing analysis of why such a credit reallocation would be preferable, relative to our objectives.  Moreover, deliberately tilting the flow of credit to one particular economic sector is, in my view, an inappropriate role for the Federal Reserve.  And I will, again, cite the joint statement of the Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve on March 23, 2009, which says, “Government decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of the fiscal authorities.”  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident when Mr. Lacker states that he cannot support additional asset purchases at this time and believes that further stimulus is unlikely to result in economic growth and may increase inflation. He also disagrees with the proposal to keep a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens. Additionally, he expresses opposition to purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities and argues that deliberately tilting the flow of credit to one economic sector is inappropriate for the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 257.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a simply expressed gratitude from the speaker (President Williams) to someone named "Thank you."


Passage number 258.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as there is no contextual information provided to analyze any disagreement.


Passage number 259.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Despite the recent uptick in the data, the pace of economic recovery remains modest.  Inflation continues to be subdued, and inflation expectations are well anchored.  The current stance of policy is providing essential stimulus and remains entirely appropriate.  That said, to continue the comments that President Rosengren made, I expect it will be some time before the outlook for the labor market improves substantially.  Therefore, we will need to continue our purchases of longer-term Treasury securities well past the end of the year, and longer-term MBS purchases as well.  So at our next meeting, we’ll need to signal this expectation along the lines of alternative A, although when I look at alternative A, I favor continuing with something like the substantial improvement in labor market language. And finally, there was some comment earlier about our needing to improve our communication, and my own reading of the market view on what our purchases will be is entirely consistent with our policy statement.  So I think it’s actually the staff reading of what our statement said that was probably more conservative in terms of alternative B. I don’t think the communication toward the public was at fault there.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any elements of contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and providing an explanation for their stance. They also mention the need to continue purchases of longer-term Treasury securities and longer-term MBS purchases. There is no indication of disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or viewpoints. It is a brief expression of gratitude from someone named President Evans.


Passage number 261.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You know, someday I think people are going to go through the transcript and have a case study on the effectiveness of advertising, because it’s interesting that President Lacker can make an allusion to a product and nobody would ask what that product was.  That’s effective advertising, I guess.  [Laughter] At any rate, I support alternative B.  I support continuing our $85 billion per month of purchases of long-duration assets. Yesterday we seemed to agree that state-contingent policies are appropriate.  We disagreed over whether they should be qualitative or quantitative.  So because our statement undertakes qualitative guidance, let me offer my own interpretation of what alternative B is saying.  Apparently that is different from the assumption of the staff analysis.  I think the staff does as well as they can with the modest direction that the Committee gives them, so there’s no fault intended there.I think substantial improvement in the labor market outlook ought to be associated with growth in payroll employment on the order of 200,000 per month for a period of, say, four to six months, some substantial period.  I think it should be associated with GDP growth above trend for almost two quarters, to align with the fact that economic growth is supporting that substantial improvement in the labor market, so that it’s not just a head fake.  I think we would see clear downward momentum in the unemployment rate if we were seeing that type of substantial improvement, and I think that all the other associated labor market indicators ought to show similar improvement. I don’t have any disagreements with the way President Rosengren described that we should be seeing the unemployment rate perhaps down as low as 7¼ percent to make a decision on ending purchases and a lower unemployment rate for liftoff. I think that’s more like the dealer survey results as I saw them.  So I agree with President Williams.  I think we’re doing a pretty good job with communicating there, and I think that some additional commentary from you, Mr. Chairman, will help there. Now, “in a context of price stability,” is an important thing to also offer clarity on.  Here, given that it’s a qualitative type of description, I would say that must be associated with something like underlying inflation that remains below an acceptable upper tolerance with respect to our longer-run inflation objective, which I would take to be about ½ percentage point above 2 percent.  So my preference is to educate the public regarding our intention of what we mean by substantial improvement.  I think thresholds would be a lot cleaner and easier to describe, but that seems to be where we are.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is expressing support for alternative B and offering their own interpretation of what it means. They also agree with President Rosengren and President Williams and believe that additional clarity from the Chairman would be helpful.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 263.
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support alternative B for today, and I have one suggestion for a change in the language based on President Kocherlakota’s earlier comment concerning the last sentence of paragraph 2, which reads, “The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely would run at or below its 2 percent objective.” I see that, based on his comment, as a little bit inconsistent with what we think now, because we did take the aggressive easing action at the last meeting, and we do think that that’s supposed to keep inflation a little bit higher.  So maybe instead of “at or below,” how about “near”—“would run near its 2 percent objective”.  And that would suggest that the Committee feels like it has responded to this as opposed to just saying that we’re going to accept the lower inflation that would otherwise be projected.  So instead of “at or below” it would be “near.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard disagrees with the language in the passage, specifically the phrase "at or below its 2 percent objective" in relation to inflation. He suggests changing the phrase to "near its 2 percent objective" to indicate that the Committee has responded to the inflation issue rather than accepting lower inflation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 264.
” MR. ENGLISH.  Sorry, could I just make a comment. I think the Chairman was correct earlier, that that sentence was intended to be conditional on “without sufficient policy accommodation.”  So the earlier sentence on economic growth and labor market conditions said “without sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate,” and then the last sentence says, “The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely would run at or below its 2 percent objective,” again, if there were not sufficient policy accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. English is disagreeing with the Chairman and stating that the sentence in question is conditional on "without sufficient policy accommodation."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 265.
 MR. BULLARD.  But we do have sufficient accommodation, or we think we do.  We’re trying to adopt a policy that’s addressing this.  So I just think it’s confusing.  I took it that the first part was to say, well, if we hadn’t taken action, we’d be in trouble, but now that we have taken action, we’re getting close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, expresses confusion about the policy being discussed and remarks that he thinks the situation is confusing. This suggests a disagreement or lack of agreement among the participants regarding the effectiveness or clarity of the policy.


Passage number 266.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think the “sufficient” is supposed to pick up how long do the purchases continue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English is simply seeking clarification and asking for the intended time frame for the purchases.


Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We have, in effect, not made any commitments beyond December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement indicates that no commitments have been made after December, suggesting agreement or lack of contention on the matter.


Passage number 268.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, that’s my suggestion, “near.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating his suggestion.


Passage number 269.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude and agreement. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 270.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full passage or context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the given information.


Passage number 272.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  I appreciate that very careful exposition of this issue and identifying it as connected with this phrase in the statement about “considerable time” afterward.  My understanding of the effectiveness of the Woodford period is that it depends critically on the elevation of expected inflation above what your rule would normally have been committing you to.  So you have to temporarily raise expected inflation for a time in order for that Woodford period to have some effectiveness on real activity. I just want to confirm that understanding and then make a comment about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is just describing Mr. Lacker's understanding of the effectiveness of the Woodford period. There is no explicit disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 273.
 MR. BULLARD.  That’s definitely my understanding.  What I would like is to get some clarity—maybe in my own head and, to some extent, maybe around the table—about what we’re trying to do.  And then you can argue about other things:  Whether, for instance, you really are constrained in the first part, because you’ve got QE—that’s my position—or about the price level path.  So the kinds of things that are talked about in Woodford haven’t really materialized.  The theory could be wrong for many other reasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their understanding and desire for clarity, and mentioning that there could be arguments or discussions about other aspects related to the topic, such as QE and the price level path. However, they do not express any disagreement or contention with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 274.
  But if that’s what we’re trying to do, I just wanted to get the— MR. LACKER.  Right.  I just wanted to follow up.  We had a long discussion a year or so ago and had a lot of staff analysis about the prospect of deliberately raising expected inflation; we decided not to go down that path.  I’d also point out, Mr. Chairman, that my understanding of your communications after the meeting is that you’ve been clear that we don’t intend to raise inflation above 2 percent.  So there’s a tension in our communications between interpreting this as kind of a Woodfordian extension of our zero-lower-bound period and the notion that we’re not admitting that we want to raise inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are expressing agreement in their decision not to deliberately raise expected inflation and their understanding that the intention is not to raise inflation above 2 percent. They are discussing the potential tension in their communications regarding the interpretation of their intentions.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, I don’t think there’s any meaningful contradiction.  The way I interpret what we’re trying to do is that in the Tealbook, there’s an optimal control path for the federal funds rate, which is the path you would take if you could perfectly commit today all the way out to the future. I think what we’re trying to do is, in some sense, convince the public we’re going to take that optimal control path. It’s a time-inconsistent path, mildly, because it does go a little bit further out than the estimated reaction function goes, but (a) it’s not working through a deliberate increase in expected inflation, and (b) as it happens, the projected inflation under that path is like .2 percent.  So there is no meaningful increase in inflation under that path because the Phillips curve is so flat. Now, as a matter of principle, it is saying that we are taking a balanced approach.  We’re not trying to change our target and we’re not trying to change inflation expectations in the long term.  But a small amount of inflation—2.2 percent—is a side effect of getting better overall results and is within the range of the optimal control path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their interpretation of the situation and their approach to achieving optimal results. There is no contradiction or opposition presented.


Passage number 276.
 MR. BULLARD.  So, Mr. Chairman, I just want to follow up on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is indicating that he wants to add on or further discuss a previous point made by the Chairman, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without seeing the actual passage. Please provide the passage in question.


Passage number 278.
 MR. BULLARD. I agree, of course you’d like to get to the optimal control path, but I don’t think commitment is going to be very effective just with words.  What I’m trying to point out is that as your favorite policy rule starts to project liftoff and you stay at zero, that’s a period where you actually can start to gain credibility and perhaps get closer to that optimal path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard agrees with the idea of wanting to get to the optimal control path but questions the effectiveness of commitment through words alone. He suggests that staying at zero during a period of projected liftoff could help gain credibility and get closer to the optimal path.


Passage number 279.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right, but that will help us in 2020.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is positive and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 280.
  It won’t help us in this— MR. BULLARD.  It depends on when you think you’re entering the Woodford period.  That’s the period when you should be able to start to gain some credibility, in my view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is clarifying that the ability to gain credibility depends on the timing of entering the Woodford period, suggesting a difference in opinion or perspective rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 282.
 MR. EVANS.  If I could just add to what you said, Mr. Chairman, in our Chicago DSGE model and in our Brookings paper, the funds rate continues to be zero for a very long period of time.  But it’s not necessarily the fact that inflation goes up; it’s really moving down the IS curve in our model.  So it’s going to depend on details of the economic situation. It does not have to lead to higher inflation, or certainly nothing very much in the period that could be referred to as the Woodford period.  It could be referred to as the Williams period, I’m told, as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Evans adding his perspective and clarifying a point.


Passage number 283.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The abbreviation "MR" alone does not provide any information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It could stand for various things such as "Mister" or "Medical Records," without indicating any disagreement.


Passage number 284.
 WILLIAMS.  Reifschneider–Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 285.
 MR. EVANS.  Reifschneider–Williams, my apologies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply apologizing to someone named Reifschneider-Williams.


Passage number 286.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the actual passage you're referring to, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in it. Please provide the passage you would like me to evaluate.


Passage number 287.
 WILLIAMS.  We have our lawyers, who will contact your lawyers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact that Williams has lawyers who will contact someone else's lawyers. There is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 288.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  This preceded Professor Woodford by how many years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The presence of laughter in response to Mr. Evans' statement suggests that there is disagreement or a difference of opinion.


Passage number 289.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 290.
 WILLIAMS.  We’ll let the lawyers work that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that lawyers will handle a certain situation.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will have the precedence discussions later.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is about having a discussion or addressing a topic later, specifically "precedence discussions." The mention of President Kocherlakota does not indicate any conflict or disagreement either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 292.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would refer both Presidents Bullard and Lacker to Iván Werning’s paper, in which something like a Woodford period is an extremely effective part of monetary policy without any boost in inflation because prices are fixed. I agree that our September actions, Mr. Chairman, have proven more successful than I, for one, expected.  And I think the shift to the more forward-looking policy approach in the statement language was critical in achieving the success that we have seen so far. With that in mind, I am willing to support alternative B at this meeting. But I think I detected—as President Fisher referred to—a note of complacency in our discussion of our September actions yesterday.  And I think as we look forward to December’s meeting, I would caution against that complacency. Yesterday in her remarks, Governor Raskin made her bid to add to the relentless Fed drive for acronyms with what she referred to as MMP:  muddled messaging possibilities.  And I think we can maybe avoid MMP by following what I am going to call ROMP, R-O-M-P: results-oriented monetary policy.  ROMP means judging our level of accommodation not by historical standards but by how we are doing in terms of our dual mandate objectives.  Now here,   I fear the news continues to be challenging.  The outlook for the labor market, however one chooses to measure it, is hard to describe as being consistent with the dual mandate.  In terms of inflation, suppose you just want to think about price stability.  The Tealbook forecasts for inflation remain below 2 percent for five years.  This is after the policy accommodation we adopted in September.  And this is consistent with the projections of those who voted for the statement last time, who have inflation running below 2 percent through the forecast period. This path for inflation, and the associated path of labor market conditions, I think, is hard to think about as being consistent with the relentless pursuit of our dual mandate objectives that we have been given from the Congress.  And, again, I would say that even if you were just purely a price stability person and all you cared about was inflation targeting—say, you worked at the Bank of Canada, and that’s your job—this path would not be seen as being a success on the part of your operation. So we follow results-oriented monetary policy and we should be doing something more.  That raises the question of how we should be doing more.  And there is probably something that can be done on the asset purchase front.  I’m just not going to talk about that, though; I’m going to focus more on forward guidance.  We could extend the date from mid-2015 to mid-2016, mid-2017. I think, as President Bullard alluded to, and we have talked about—and changed the statement language, in fact, because of this—extending the date is just problematic.  The signaling component is very challenging for households and firms to extract and could just be perceived as our saying that the economy is going to be lousy for two more years.  I think what is better would be to communicate that our reaction function is different from what is currently expected by market participants.  The staff memo gives great guidance on this, and I was disappointed we didn’t really dig into the details of the staff memo as much as I was hoping we would yesterday.  I thought the staff showed, in the context of FRB/US, that the thresholds of 2½ percent inflation and 6 percent unemployment worked extremely well. I would encourage them to go further, to explore 2½ percent inflation and 5½ percent unemployment, because I feel confident that that would actually work even better because it is more tailored to our dual mandate objectives.  Why do these thresholds work well. We have talked about that yesterday.  Part of it is delivering more accommodation, because you are surprising markets with your willingness to be more accommodative than they think.  But a lot of it also has to do with this automatic stabilizer effect that I have been emphasizing.  And for those who are worried about inflation risks, being as explicit as we are talking about being through thresholds is a great way for us to be vigilant against upside inflation risks. The problem I heard yesterday about thresholds is the Committee wants to retain full optionality at all times, and I understand that. I think you can sit here in October of 2012, and you do not know what is going to happen in 2013, 2014, 2015, and that is fair enough.  I think that the solution to this is to adopt strong, but not ironclad, language.  I would be stronger than what the Vice Chairman suggested yesterday.  I think “currently anticipates” is a little too weak for my taste.  But I would say something along the lines of, “The Committee’s current assessment is that as long as long-term inflation expectations remain anchored, it is unlikely”—I would prefer “highly unlikely”—but “it is unlikely to raise the federal funds rate until the unemployment rate has fallen below 6 percent or the inflation outlook has risen above 2½ percent.”  This is a way to try to get some of the optionality that people wanted around the table, while still conveying a sense that it would take something unusual for you to change these numbers.  Where are the benefits of this.  It means that the market expectations of when we’re going to raise the fed funds rate will change in terms of the conditions that prevail when we’re about to do that.  All of this is obviously forward-looking toward December, but I hope to reengage in this conversation at that time, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The author, Mr. Kocherlakota, disagrees with the complacent attitude towards the September actions and believes that more should be done to achieve the dual mandate objectives. He also disagrees with extending the date of forward guidance and suggests that the Committee's reaction function should be different from what is expected by market participants.


Passage number 293.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 294.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The intermeeting period has provided us with a mixed bag of information about the economy and financial market conditions.  As you pointed out earlier, Mr. Chairman, several of us mentioned yesterday that the industrial and household sectors appear to be out of sync with one another.  I hope that the period between now and our December meeting will shed more light on this dichotomy.  I would like to see whether the housing sector continues to exhibit the gains it has displayed during the past two quarters, and whether holiday shopping turns out to be as robust as early signs suggest that it might be. Of course, I would also like to see whether any momentum appears to be building in the labor market.  In September, we told the public that more policy accommodation would likely be forthcoming if we did not see substantial improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions in coming months, and that we will continue asset purchases until such improvement is achieved.  However, we have yet to define more precisely what substantial improvement means. In a vacuum, the public will fill that void, and I don’t think that it is constructive for them to be hearing multiple and diverse interpretations from the Committee participants.  So, clearly, we have some unfinished business.  I do like the way that the Board staff has handled this issue in the baseline forecast.  The asset purchase program stops when the outlook for the labor market improves rather than actually having to experience a long period of stronger job gains. One additional point I would like to make is that if the Committee does conclude in coming months that more policy accommodation is appropriate, we should be open to   considering more options than just alternative A in the current Tealbook.  That is, it should not be a foregone conclusion that the next policy step is to augment our MBS purchases with Treasury purchases in the amount of $45 billion per month. I think that our most recent action to acquire more MBS was successful in further reducing home mortgage rates, but I am skeptical about the likely benefits of additional Treasury purchases.  We could, of course, add to the pace of MBS purchases, but it is not clear how much more room there is to do so without adversely affecting market functioning. These are issues that I am sure we are going to be discussing at our December meeting, but I remain concerned that a decision to go beyond the scale of asset purchases we initiated last month, regardless of which kind of assets are purchased, could complicate our exit strategy, as Governor Duke mentioned earlier, and could present financial stability risks. I understand that the risks and costs are difficult to estimate, but that doesn’t mean that they should be discounted so much that we are minimizing their importance.  Personally, I remain committed to evaluating the benefits and the risks associated with a larger, more open-ended LSAP program.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a polite expression of gratitude to President George.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the pace of the recovery, the elevated unemployment rate, and the current level of inflation, I expect monetary policy accommodation may need to remain in place for some time to provide continued support to this recovery. That said, I remain concerned about the open-ended approach to expanding our balance sheet and the current rate guidance indicating that we expect that low rates “will remain appropriate for a considerable period of time after the economic recovery strengthens.” My   concern rests with how a prolonged period of highly accommodative policy could risk higher inflation and financial instability, in addition to complicating our exit. I remain concerned that the ongoing expansion of our balance sheet poses upside risk to market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations.  Breakeven measures have a tendency to exhibit volatility, but the recent rise in response to our September actions is a reminder of the risk that further balance sheet expansion, as proposed in alternative A, could push longer-term expected inflation still higher, and potentially create some tension between what markets expect and our stated 2 percent inflation goal.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

The passage contains contention or disagreement because the speaker, Ms. George, expresses concerns about the open-ended approach to expanding the balance sheet and the current rate guidance. She believes that a prolonged period of highly accommodative policy could risk higher inflation and financial instability. This view contrasts with the potential benefits of continued monetary policy accommodation mentioned earlier in the passage.


Passage number 297.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 298.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was opposed to the new round of asset purchases we undertook last time.  My view on that really hasn’t changed.  I see the costs of the program as exceeding the benefits.  I think the nature of the program makes it particularly important that we think hard about our stopping rule for our open-ended purchases. I appreciate President Rosengren’s comments about how if we go to a threshold system about the funds rate, we have to be very careful not to necessarily have people infer that what we mean by substantial improvement in labor markets isn’t what we just told them in the thresholds. Distinguishing between what is the stopping rule for asset purchases as opposed to the funds rate guidance is going to be an important part of that communication, if we go with thresholds.  I think there is a lot that we need to talk about in terms of that, and I am worried that if we don’t get that communication right, we could have some very confused markets and bad outcomes. Part of the reason I have been concerned about the nature of forward guidance and the challenges we face is I am not convinced, as some people are, about the quantitative effectiveness of this forward guidance.  People seem to attribute movements in asset prices to be driving all of that, but I’m not sure that in terms of the real economy and the unemployment rate we have seen much benefit from that.  So I am concerned about the effectiveness of our forward-guidance tools.  Relying so much on that and relying on managing expectations, I think, is a very tricky game. Trying to signal, through a commitment that we may or may not be able to reach, that we are going to maintain low rates longer continues to make me concerned about the consequences that happen at the exit. I am very concerned that the built-up effects of keeping interest rates too low, too long, so to speak, could actually cause long-term rates to rise very rapidly at the point when the markets begin to get a whiff of the idea that it is time to change policies.  And we will have a long way to go to catch up to where, perhaps, standard policy might say it needs to be.  And if that happens—interest rate risks, the effects on bank balance sheets, the effects in the market, the difficulties of interest rate risk on our own portfolio, and our ability to raise rates fast enough without losses and turmoil in the marketplace—that could be quite traumatic and quite challenging for us and for the economy.  I hope not. So, given that I don’t think the effectiveness of that forward guidance is quantitatively as important as we seem to think it is, the risks on the upside are quite troubling to me.  And we are taking potentially very large risks to achieve what I think are dubious and meager gains on our dual mandate, if you will. I think it is very important at our next meeting, as we continue to discuss the threshold argument, to combine that with how we are going to think about stopping rules for asset purchases and how those are going to relate to one another. Okay.  I do have one comment.  I can live with alternative B, but I do want to go back to paragraph 2, because I think it is kind of confusing.  President Kocherlakota focused on the last sentence on inflation.  I actually think the confusing part of paragraph 2 is the second sentence:“The Committee remains concerned that, without sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions.” It seems to me we put that statement in last time to signal something about what the action was we were taking.  At this meeting, we are not taking an action.  I am concerned a bit that this sentence actually could be very much misinterpreted as saying that we don’t think we have sufficient accommodation in place at this time or won’t in the future.  Is the interpretation going to be that this is signaling that we will continue to do more accommodation come January, when we really haven’t made that decision yet. So I am a bit worried about that sentence.  I think it would be more straightforward to go back to a sentence that says something like, “The Committee outlook is for gradual improvement in labor market conditions.” I think tying it in this paragraph to policy is what makes this paragraph confusing.  The second paragraph, typically in the past, I think, has been a paragraph about our outlook for the key variables.  And this is sort of saying something about policy—we make the statement later on, I think it’s in paragraph 4, that we are prepared to take further action if we view our employment and price objectives at risk. So I think putting this statement in the second paragraph is actually the source of confusion here.  So my own modest suggestion is that we just change that second sentence, and then I think the paragraph hangs together better, and we still have the indication of policy in paragraph 4.  So that is my suggestion, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. Mr. Plosser expresses disagreement with the effectiveness of forward guidance and the risks associated with maintaining low interest rates for too long. He also suggests changing a sentence in the second paragraph to make it less confusing.


Passage number 299.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What would you change it to, President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question asking for a suggestion or opinion on what changes should be made, specifically directed towards President Plosser.


Passage number 300.
 MR. PLOSSER. Because this is mostly about outlooks in paragraph 2, I think you could just change the second sentence to say, just like we’ve said before, “The Committee’s outlook is   for gradual improvement in labor market conditions.”  And not make some reference to whether the level of policy accommodation is sufficient or not sufficient at this point.  You make that reference down later when we talk about policy actions and the prospects for future policy.  That’s just my suggestion. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Plosser is making a suggestion regarding the wording of a statement. There is no indication of disagreement or contention between Mr. Plosser and the Chairman.


Passage number 301.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a polite acknowledgment of Governor Yellen, indicating gratitude.


Passage number 302.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I take President Fisher’s point that we should not prematurely pat ourselves on the back, but overall I think our actions did elicit the financial market responses we expected, and that does serve to raise my confidence that our asset program will be efficacious over time, especially in providing support to the housing market.  For today, I am happy with the statement language as it stands. As I discussed during the economic go-round, despite some encouraging signals from the household sector and the recent decline in the unemployment rate, I have seen no evidence of any substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market or any fundamental strengthening in economic conditions.  And I would agree with Presidents Williams, Evans, and Rosengren on what substantial improvement in the outlook means.  It seems to me that the dealers’ expectations, their interpretation that we see in the dealer survey of what that means is quite reasonable and coincides with my own. With a step-up in fiscal restraint expected at the beginning of next year, uncertainty about the resolution of the fiscal cliff and debt ceiling likely to escalate as we approach year-end, and the European debt crisis continuing to weigh on the economy, I would be surprised to see much, if any, further improvement in the labor market over the next few months.  So I expect that at our December meeting, it will prove appropriate to extend our longer-term Treasury purchases  beyond the completion of the MEP, and this expectation is now obviously prevalent in the markets. I think that the changes we have made to our forward guidance have been quite well received.  Market participants now expect the first tightening to occur in the second half of 2015, only after the unemployment rate has declined to around 6.8 percent.  This is a downward shift of almost half a percentage point since March in market expectations concerning the likely unemployment rate at liftoff, and I think these expectations do reflect some element of understanding in the market that we do intend to be lower for longer or to provide somewhat more accommodation than a typical policy rule would call for. Given the close alignment between market and Committee expectations concerning liftoff, the adoption of thresholds, as we have discussed yesterday and today, probably would not entail meaningful additional accommodation.  But even so, I really think that adopting quantitative thresholds to further clarify our forward guidance would enhance its effectiveness, not just right now but particularly over the next several years, as the recovery proceeds and attention in the markets begins to focus more intensively on the likely timing of tightening. For all the reasons we discussed yesterday, and that President Kocherlakota has emphasized this morning, I think it is a good idea to include quantitative threshold language in our December statement.  And I think President Kocherlakota this morning made some very constructive suggestions about how we might craft language to go about doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, expresses her support for alternative B and agrees with the statements made by Presidents Fisher, Williams, Evans, Rosengren, and Kocherlakota. She also discusses her expectations for the labor market and the effectiveness of the Committee's actions.


Passage number 303.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of appreciation.


Passage number 304.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, and the notes I brought into the meeting say that I said pretty much everything I had to say in the earlier round and have nothing further to add.  But that’s not strictly true.  [Laughter] I am going to stay out of the discussions of the Woodford period, or, given my loyalties, the Williams–Reifschneider period, and focus on the condition that I think is most important in the statement, which is in the last sentence of paragraph 4, and that is efficacy. In judging the efficacy of policy, I will be watching the primary mortgage rate and its effect on home purchases and home prices.  And my point yesterday was that I think we are going to need to be patient in making that judgment.  President Fisher pointed out that house prices actually took off before QE3, but that is exactly my point.  I think that was the first result of earlier reductions in the mortgage rate, and it was watching those initial signs work their way through to actual increases in house prices and, I think, consumer confidence, that leads me to believe that we are going to, again, have to be really patient and watch this.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Ms. Duke, states her support for alternative B and then goes on to discuss her opinion on the importance of efficacy in monetary policy. She mentions a point made by President Fisher, but does not express any disagreement or contention with him.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 306.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This morning has a bit of the feel of the NFL preseason, where some teams try out the whole playbook to see how the defense is going to react, and others are a little bit more cautious, and still others are trying to figure out what kind of offense they can run with the personnel they’ve got on the field.  Being a fan of the New England Patriots, I am going to take the Bill Belichick approach.  So let me say I support alternative B, and we will see you on opening day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker simply states their support for alternative B without any opposing views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 307.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided passage does not contain any content or information that can be subject to contention or disagreement. It simply includes the mentioned phrase "[Laughter]" and "Governor Raskin."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 308.
 MS. RASKIN.  I support alternative B.  The additional accommodation that we put in place last month still seems appropriate to me.  The recent improvements in the household sector notwithstanding, we are a long way from maximum employment.  Payrolls continue to rise onlygradually, and I think it will be some time before we see considerable momentum in the labor market. At the same time, inflation appears to be well contained.  Core inflation, which seems the most relevant measure right now as food and energy prices swing, looks like it is about 1¼ percent in the second half of this year.  So, if anything, inflation may be on the low side.  And survey measures of inflation expectations have ticked down.  In addition, in my view, the primary risks to the outlook are still large and to the downside.  For all of these reasons, I support keeping in place the accommodation that we agreed on in September. In particular, our new “lower for longer” language begins to clarify for economic agents our commitment to better outcomes, more in line with our mandate.  With this forward guidance, the lower tail of possibilities that households and businesses might worry about gets cut off.  For instance, the odds that this Committee begins to tighten at the first sign of good labor market news and prematurely slows the economy now seem reduced.  Similarly, the chance that this Committee will greet worsening economic data with a shrug and a “we’ve done all we can” probably seems less likely to economic participants. In September, we not only changed our forward-guidance language, we also backed up that strong language with flow-based large-scale asset purchases.  In my view, this combination of clearer forward guidance and asset purchases may currently be having a beneficial effect, not only on interest rates but also on public expectations of where the economy is headed.  I continue to believe that there is a strong argument to be made for being even more explicit with our forward guidance. In particular, I think now would be an excellent time to introduce quantitative thresholds in the context of qualitative guardrails, as a refinement of the work that we did in the September meeting. We have taken the first step in clarifying our policy, and market participants seem to have understood it pretty well.  However, the longer we wait to adopt explicit thresholds, the higher the likelihood that our message will become muddled. If we decline to clarify our thresholds, markets and the public will be confused about what they are, and speculation likely will fill that vacuum.  Bloggers and editorial writers, and maybe even individuals at this table making speeches, will likely start to offer opinions about what those thresholds are and should be.  It seems to me that by allowing others, rather than the Committee as a collective whole, to frame that discussion, we are shirking our responsibility to communicate clearly and to help shape expectations. As argued so well this morning by President Kocherlakota, confusion about our thresholds could also affect inflation expectations.  If outsiders begin to believe that we have a lower inflation threshold than we do, when inflation moves above that level, there might be some concern that we have lost our resolve or our ability to keep inflation in check, thereby raising inflation expectations. Thus I am ready to implement thresholds because I think they will enhance the clarity of the policy moves we made last time. I also think that as we continue to wrestle with the effectiveness of large-scale asset purchases, the need to focus on refining our forward guidance becomes increasingly more pressing.  That said, I am content to support alternative B at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Raskin supports alternative B and believes that the current accommodation measures should be kept in place, while also arguing for the adoption of explicit thresholds in forward guidance. She believes that clarifying the thresholds is necessary to avoid confusion and speculation, and that it would enhance the clarity of the policy moves.


Passage number 309.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. Governor Stein" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 310.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So we have heard from Gary Cooper and Bill Belichick. I guess it is to me to play the role of Woody Allen and go on at some length about my personal neuroses.  [Laughter]   I support alternative B, but I do want to say a few words in looking forward to December about alternative A because, obviously, we are going to have to start thinking about pace, composition, and duration of asset purchases.  So I am not going to try and advocate anything at this point, but I do want to lay out a few of the issues.  One way to frame the problem that we face is that as long as we are falling short on the employment leg of our mandate, and as long as inflation is contained, we want to maximize the stimulus we can provide, but subject to two constraints.  One is not overly degrading market functioning in either the Treasury or the MBS market, and the other is some kind of limit on total balance sheet size to the extent that we think that a larger balance sheet is associated with some form of cost, be it in the form of either expected losses on our positions, strains in money markets, or a more challenging exit. To make an example, you might say, “Well, we’re willing to do something like $500 billion more in total,” and then the problem becomes one of, do we want to do it at an $80 billion pace for 6 months or at a slower pace, say, $40 billion for as long as 12 months. If you pose the problem this way, would there ever be a reason not to go out of the gate fast.  That is to say, would there ever be a reason to not go out at the $85 billion pace, understanding that all else equal, there is a shadow cost of the balance sheet that would constrain you to do things for a shorter period of time. So my thinking is that, in a world where Treasury and MBS purchases are relatively close substitutes, and where all that really matters is the amount of duration that you are taking out of the market, the two options should be roughly similar.  And I would think, in fact, there is a small presumption in favor of the higher initial flow rate because, all else equal, you are getting the purchases done sooner, so the total amount of stimulus is a bit greater.  That feels to me like the classical argument that you would make here.   I think if you want to take the other side, a necessary condition is you are going to have to argue that Treasury and MBS purchases are not perfect substitutes.  And we have heard a little bit about that in the last couple of days.  So, for example, if you think that MBS purchases are more helpful to the economy because there is more potential to stimulate stuff related to housing, then in the presence of some kind of shadow balance sheet constraint, you might have an argument to go slower because, all else equal, if you go slower you can continue the MBS purchase piece of it longer.  You will have more head room to do the MBS purchase piece.  So I suspect there is a case to be made here, and I have alluded to it, others have alluded to it.  I don’t want to say it is an empirically validated case, but I think it is something worth trying to get a more precise handle on. Another dimension on which Treasuries and MBS differ is exit, and this has also been alluded to; Governor Duke mentioned this.  If we are getting into a zone where we think the sheer size of the balance sheet may complicate the process of exit, I suppose you could argue that that is an advantage of MBS, to the extent that they have a shorter duration and tend to run off on their own without having to be sold.  On the other hand, if we’re determined, as in the exit principles, to actually get rid of the MBS before they run off by selling, I think that complicates things, because I think it is quite possible that liquidity in the MBS market will have been compromised by the fact that we will have occupied such a large space in this market. A final point, just to flag, is that in December—this has come up before—we are going to have to really wrestle with the potential divergence that has been pointed out between market expectations for the path of policy and our own admittedly heterogeneous views about the cost of expanding the balance sheet.  As has been noted, the market very clearly expects us to come out of the gate at an $85 billion flow, so I think there is going to be a natural temptation to want to   deliver that so as to not disappoint the market.  But, of course, the market also expects—and I think it is an expectation that is a reasonable one, given what we have said—this program to go on until early 2014, which implies a balance sheet somewhere north of $4 trillion. So if there are broadly felt misgivings about that prospect, I do think it is important that we confront them in December as opposed to kind of just going with the flow and dealing with that problem later.  And this is very inherently a dynamic problem.  If there are constraints of this sort, I think they have to be factored into the whole path of the policy rather than pushed off into the future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their thoughts and ideas on the topic of asset purchases without directly opposing or contradicting any other viewpoints.


Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Powell.


Passage number 312.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So we have had Gary Cooper, the Most Interesting Man in the World, Bill Belichick, Woody Allen, and now Hamlet.  [Laughter] I support alternative B, to relieve the suspense.  And as far as what is to be decided at the next meeting, it seems to me we should let it be decided at the next meeting.  But I will say that if we have another good run of data, I think there would be a strong case to defer action.  And I don’t see us as committed to act unless conditions warrant. I have concerns about more purchases.  As others have pointed out, the dealer community is now assuming close to a $4 trillion balance sheet and purchases through the first quarter of 2014. I admit that is a much stronger reaction than I anticipated, and I am uncomfortable with it for a couple of reasons. First, the question, why stop at $4 trillion.  The market in most cases will cheer us for doing more.  It will never be enough for the market.  Our models will always tell us that we are helping the economy, and I will probably always feel that those benefits are overestimated.  And we will be able to tell ourselves that market function is not impaired and that inflationexpectations are under control.  What is to stop us, other than much faster economic growth, which it is probably not in our power to produce. Second, I think we are actually at a point of encouraging risk-taking, and that should give us pause.  Investors really do understand now that we will be there to prevent serious losses.  It is not that it is easy for them to make money but that they have every incentive to take more risk, and they are doing so.  Meanwhile, we look like we are blowing a fixed-income duration bubble right across the credit spectrum that will result in big losses when rates come up down the road.  You can almost say that that is our strategy. My third concern—and others have touched on it as well—is the problems of exiting from a near $4 trillion balance sheet.  We’ve got a set of principles from June 2011 and have done some work since then, but it just seems to me that we seem to be way too confident that exit can be managed smoothly.  Markets can be much more dynamic than we appear to think. Take selling—we are talking about selling all of these mortgage-backed securities.  Right now, we are buying the market, effectively, and private capital will begin to leave that activity and find something else to do.  So when it is time for us to sell, or even to stop buying, the response could be quite strong; there is every reason to expect a strong response.  So there are a couple of ways to look at it.  It is about $1.2 trillion in sales; you take 60 months, you get about $20 billion a month.  That is a very doable thing, it sounds like, in a market where the norm by the middle of next year is $80 billion a month.  Another way to look at it, though, is that it’s not so much the sale, the duration; it’s also unloading our short volatility position.  When you turn and say to the market, “I’ve got $1.2 trillion of these things,” it’s not just $20 billion a month— it’s the sight of the whole thing coming.  And I think there is a pretty good chance that you could   have quite a dynamic response in the market.  And I would just say I want to understand that a lot better in the intermeeting period and leave it at that.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is the speaker expressing their concerns and thoughts about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information or statements that could lead to contention or disagreement. The phrase "Thank you" and "Vice Chairman" are simply polite expressions.


Passage number 314.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think I will just be myself.  [Laughter] I support alternative B as written.  I think what we did at the last meeting was successful in a number of respects, but, obviously, things are still very tentative. First, we showed a high-level commitment to persist with an accommodative monetary policy regime. I think this did have a beneficial impact on confidence.  The fact is that if households and businesses anticipate that there will be a sustained economic recovery, then that makes the recovery more likely.  So I think how we present ourselves, in terms of our determination to achieve that outcome, is important. Second, the mortgage-backed securities purchases did have a large effect on the spread between agency MBS yields and Treasuries. In fact, the impact was somewhat larger than I would have anticipated. Third, it was well understood by market participants and the press why the additional QE took place in the agency MBS market.  Providing support for housing is viewed as a credible means of supporting economic activity more generally. Fourth, the effect on inflation expectations was relatively muted and mostly short-lived.  It is true that five-year, five-year forward rates are slightly higher now than before the last meeting, but the increase does not appear to be outsized.  Some increase was to be expected, given that we are essentially removing some of the downside tail risk through our actions.  Importantly, we still remain firmly within the range of recent years.  Moreover, there is no evidence that our actions caused inflation expectations elsewhere to become unmoored.  If you look at the University of Michigan’s most recent result, five-year forward expectations actually declined in the mid-October report from the September reading.  And, similarly, as Simon noted in his briefing, the primary dealer survey showed no rise in dealers’ probability assessment about whether inflation would be 3 percent or higher over the longer term. And then, finally, the outcry about QE, I think, both in the political realm here and internationally was more muted than I would have anticipated.  So the costs in terms of the noise around our policy decisions were lower than I would have anticipated. Thus, given this and uncertainties and downside risks to the forecast, I think it is very important that we not be seen as walking any of this back, just because some people might view the recent data as a little bit better than we had thought.  As I noted in a speech last week, there are reasons to conclude that monetary policy has not been sufficiently accommodative in recent years to generate the progress to full employment that we had hoped to achieve by now.  We had been persistently disappointed about the economic growth outcomes, and I agree that we can put some of this on shocks and other factors, such as Europe.  I do think that some of it is on us.  So I look at last month’s actions as a remedy to the fact that we were falling short before that point. With respect to the statement, I favor very much a minimalist approach at this meeting. I don’t want to make significant changes to our assessment of economic conditions because that might imply that we are taking considerable signal from recent developments.  As I said earlier, I think the signal is very weak, and we shouldn’t overstate what we have seen.  I know, for one, that the recent data have not caused me to alter my outlook in a meaningful way, especially with the fiscal cliff and euro zone risk still looming. Finally, with respect to the issue of the Tealbook assumption about asset purchases and the dealers’ expectations, I find myself somewhere in between. It seems that, with the unemployment rate at 7.9 percent, the Tealbook expectation is a little too early to say that there has been substantial improvement in the labor market outlook.  But I can certainly imagine before the first quarter of 2014, we could see more rapid improvement in the labor market and be more comfortable that that was going to continue. So it is not just about the improvements. It is also the probability—the comfort level that you have that it is going to continue.  So I think somewhere in between would be where I would land, and I think the staff should try to think about whether the $750 billion assumption is the right assumption, given the language in the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 315.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  And thank you, all.  So, obviously, there is no sentiment for action today; alternative B was widely supported. We have a lot to do and a lot to learn by the next meeting.  We have two labor market reports.  We should learn something about the resolution of the fiscal cliff and fiscal policy developments more generally, so we will have some broader knowledge base. In terms of what preparation we have to do, I don’t think we know yet exactly what purchase program we would undertake.  It depends on the data.  It also depends on our further analysis.  We need to think about the implications for market functioning and exit, as well as the efficacy of the various programs.  So that is something that the long-suffering staff will have to confront. Communication will be important.  I think we need to reflect a bit on our discussion from yesterday on thresholds.  There is clearly a desire to use state contingency, if possible, but a range of views on exactly how to do that.  And I think we would need to have some discussions about whether we can find a common ground that will improve our communication.And I also take note of the importance—I think President Lacker raised it, maybe President Plosser—of making sure that we distinguish the stopping conditions for asset purchases from those for rate policy, because those obviously are going to be quite different.  I think it’s clear that we would want to use asset purchases in a directional sense to try and promote some momentum, and rates, in contrast, would remain low until we see recovery.  So those are somewhat different objectives in that respect. In terms of language, there were a few suggestions.  Governor Raskin didn’t raise her energy prices point again.  Are you okay with it where it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing various topics and reflecting on previous discussions.


Passage number 316.
 MS. RASKIN.  Completely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Ms. Raskin's statement is not contentious or disagreeable as she uses the word "completely" to emphasize her agreement or support for something.


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, good.  President Lockhart suggested strengthening the housing sector statement.  We could say, for example, “Conditions in the housing sector have continued to improve, albeit from a depressed level.”  That’s a little stronger than saying “further signs of improvement,” or I’m willing to go all the way to what you suggested.  I don’t know if there were other views on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing and considering different suggestions for strengthening the housing sector statement, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict among the individuals involved.


Passage number 318.
 MR. LOCKHART.  It’s not a burning issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "It's not a burning issue" is a personal opinion and does not convey any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The provided response does not provide any contextual information about the passage, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 320.
 MR. LOCKHART. It’s just that we’ve continued to state that meeting after meeting after meeting.  And in the meantime the housing sector has evolved, and at some stage we should bring it up to current, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit statements of disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing the need to update the discussion on the housing sector, suggesting a change in focus.


Passage number 321.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It’s accurate; it’s showing further signs of improvement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement in the passage is affirming and positive. It states that something is accurate and improving, indicating agreement or consensus rather than disagreement.


Passage number 322.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It does say that things are getting better, meeting to meeting.  So it does have that sense.  Okay.  I thought hard about President Plosser’s concern about the second sentence in paragraph 2.  If others have a view, you should say it.  I think we’reprotected there.  I think it’s clear, but if we’re not, we’re protected by paragraph 3, which is quite explicit about what we’re actually going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing and reflecting on different points of view and offering reassurance about the clarity of their actions.


Passage number 323.
  So I don’t think there’s any inference taken that we’ve changed our policy, but I’m happy to— MR. EVANS.  What’s the suggestion then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states that there is no inference taken about a change in policy and is open to clarifying the suggestion being made. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 324.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser was concerned about the second sentence in paragraph 2, concerned that that somehow suggested that we were going to take additional action beyond what we proposed in September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 325.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Excuse me.  Or perhaps it might be inferred that we don’t believe sufficient policy accommodation is currently in place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This can be seen through the use of words like "excuse me" and "perhaps" which indicate a disagreement or questioning of the current policy accommodation.


Passage number 326.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, we don’t, if we take what’s in place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is simply stating that there is a lack of information or knowledge about something.


Passage number 327.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Well, we may not in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is incomplete and therefore does not contain any content or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 328.
 Is it saying something— MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Is it saying something?" appears to be a question seeking clarification or confirmation, rather than expressing disagreement or contention. The response "Mr. Fisher" seems to be a continuation of the dialogue.


Passage number 329.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only states "President Fisher" without providing any further information or context. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 330.
 MR. FISHER.  May I make a suggestion.  I think it would convey what it appears the majority of the Committee feels just by saying “The Committee remains concerned that economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor conditions,” or “The Committee remains concerned about the economy’s ability to generate sustained improvement in the labor market conditions.”  That’s really what we’re saying.  Why do we have to include “sufficient policy accommodation”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is making a suggestion to rephrase a statement in a way that he believes would better convey the concerns of the majority of the Committee.


Passage number 331.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, because we’re saying that if we do sufficient policy accommodation, we hope to get a better result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that policy accommodation is being done in hopes of achieving a better result.


Passage number 332.
 MR. FISHER.  As you just said, we don’t know what we’re going to do in the future; you just said that in your summary.  We’re still conveying the same point:  That’s our concern.  Our  concern is whether we have sufficient economic growth to generate improvement in labor conditions.  I think that’s the point Mr. Plosser is making.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is agreeing with the point made by Mr. Plosser.


Passage number 333.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 334.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  I think this second sentence could be counterproductive.  You want to say that we’ve embarked on a path that we have confidence in and that is going to have the desired effects.  So I’m a little worried about that, but I’m happy to go with what you think.  But I think it could be construed as counterproductive.  What’s helping us here is that it’s not a big change from the last meeting, so people could say that we just left that in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage shows Mr. Bullard expressing concerns about a specific sentence but he also says he's happy to go with what the other person thinks. There is no strong contention or disagreement.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right.  President Fisher, I think your suggestion might actually say that even after what we said last September, we remain concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges President Fisher's suggestion and expresses a concern about a previous statement made in September.


Passage number 336.
 MR. FISHER.  We are, we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that indicates contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or response.


Passage number 337.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of fact, mentioning Chairman Bernanke without any disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 338.
 I know, but it falls into the trap that President Plosser is concerned about, that it might be saying that we want to do even more than we suggested we might do in September, and I don’t think we want to communicate— MR. FISHER.  Well, I’m not going to fall on my sword over that one.  I don’t think it’s a big deal.  I like Dennis’s point, though, just taking out “albeit from a depressed level.” PARTICIPANTS.  But it is depressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants in the conversation are discussing a potential issue with a statement, but they are not arguing or disagreeing with each other.


Passage number 339.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses agreement and acceptance.


Passage number 340.
 MR. FISHER.  We’ve been saying it repeatedly.  It is true, but it is still continuing to improve, period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact and acknowledges that the improvement is ongoing.


Passage number 341.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 342.
 MR. EVANS.  The thing about paragraph 2 is, it starts off by referring to our statutory mandate, so it’s about policy.  I think it’s entirely appropriate to have some kind of policyconditioning in there.  And then the other thing is it sets up paragraph 3 so well, and that seems to be the intent—“To support a stronger economic recovery”—and we think this is going to have a positive effect.  That’s what we’re trying to achieve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is expressing agreement with the policy and the intent behind it.


Passage number 343.
  So I thought that was— MR. FISHER. I’m just trying to help with two suggestions, but if it’s not helpful, I’ll drop it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Fisher is offering his assistance and providing two suggestions. He also states that he will drop the suggestions if they are not helpful. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given statement "President Lockhart." It simply states the name of a person or position without indicating any conflict or differing opinions.


Passage number 345.
 MR. LOCKHART. I have to say I’m a little confused, maybe, about the debate around paragraph 2, but my simple reading of it is that we’re kind of repeating what we said last time, but we’re continuing to express the concerns about sustaining policy accommodation.  So if you substitute the phrase “without sustained and sufficient policy accommodation” or “without sustained policy accommodation,” I think the rest of the paragraph continues to work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lockhart is expressing his own confusion but does not mention any opposing views or debates regarding the topic at hand.


Passage number 346.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s fine with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That's fine with me" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It implies agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 347.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  What’s the suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "What's the suggestion" suggests a request for information or advice, but it does not imply any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 348.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Change “sufficient” to “sustained.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only suggests a change in wording without stating any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 349.
” MR. STEIN.  “Sustained” would seem to hint that you’re going to do more purchases of Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any elements of contention or disagreement. It is a statement or observation made by Mr. Stein, and there is no indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 350.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think it might be a little too forward leaning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply expresses a personal opinion about something being too forward leaning.


Passage number 351.
 MR. STEIN.  It might be forward leaning, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The statement "It might be forward leaning, yes" is a simple acknowledgment or agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 352.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage doesn't contain any contention or disagreement as it consists of simple expressions acknowledging agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 353.
  May I— MR. FISHER.  It’s less Gary Cooper–ish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker in the passage is expressing a personal opinion about something being "less Gary Cooper-ish," but there are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments present.


Passage number 354.
  Leave it the way it— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In the interest of efficiency, may I ask that we stay with where we are. PARTICIPANTS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The participants all agree with the suggestion of staying with where they are in the interest of efficiency.


Passage number 355.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  So let’s go ahead and vote on alternative B as written.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a vote on alternative B.


Passage number 356.
 MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B and the associated directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about a vote on alternative B and its associated directive.


Passage number 357.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Raskin Yes Governor Stein Yes Governor Tarullo Yes President Williams Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Why don’t we take 15 minutes for coffee, and then we’ll take the last item.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. All the individuals mentioned are in agreement. The phrase "Yes" next to each person's name indicates agreement.


Passage number 358.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we reconvene. We’re on the final item, item 5, “Experimental Consensus Forecast.”  This is something we’ve been talking about for a few meetings.  The Summary of Economic Projections does a great job of showing the diversity of views, but I think the Committee felt there was a need to show a more coherent representation of the consensus perspective of the Committee, both to explain our policy decisions and to give the public a chance to better identify our reaction functions.  Also there was some hope that we could build this into a regular reporting, like a quarterly monetary policy report.  So in that spirit, we have undertaken a couple of exercises to try to see how it might work. I think we learned a great deal from those exercises, and what we want to do today is discuss whether we want to continue the experiment and, if so, in what direction.  So we have a brief presentation of yet another very good staff memo, and Jeremy Rudd will lead the discussion.  Jeremy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 359.
   MR. RUDD.5  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the handout titled “Material for Staff Presentation on the Experimental Consensus Forecast.” The Committee has now completed two experiments in constructing a consensus forecast that could be used to elucidate the rationale for the Committee’s policy decision.  To assist in your process of taking stock of where this initiative stands, the Chairman asked the Board staff to draft a memorandum describing what we have learned from these exercises, including what the exercises revealed about the difficulties associated with producing a consensus forecast.  In addition, the staff was asked to consider possible options for continuing work on the development of a consensus forecast, and to identify possible enhancements that could be made to the SEP that would allow it to attain some of the benefits sought by a consensus forecast.  This memorandum was circulated to the Committee before the FOMC meeting; its main findings are summarized in the first exhibit in the handout. As noted in the upper panel of exhibit 1, the consensus forecast exercises revealed some key issues for FOMC decisionmaking and communications that would need to be addressed if the Committee were to publish a consensus forecast.  Perhaps the most important of these stems from the fact that an integral part of a consensus forecast would be a transparent specification of the expected paths of the federal funds rate and the SOMA portfolio over the projection period and beyond.  In other words, a consensus forecast would necessarily go beyond the Committee’s postmeeting policy statement (as it is currently designed) by outlining the Committee’s intentions over the next several years.  This raises at least two potential problems. First, reaching a consensus on the appropriate medium- and longer-term policy path could be extremely difficult.  In particular, participants who could agree on the appropriate policy action to be taken at a given meeting might nevertheless disagree about the appropriate stance of policy further out in the future.  For example, in the current situation, participants might disagree about the likely evolution of asset purchases beyond the end of this year.  Such disagreement could make participants much more reluctant to support the policy statement, the consensus forecast, or both if the public came to see the published forecast as providing the “correct” interpretation of the statement’s implications for future policy. This issue seems particularly relevant in today’s unusually complex policymaking environment, when unconventional portfolio actions and forward guidance are important policy tools.  But I would note that even in normal times, the FOMC has typically only described its policy decision in terms of the change in the funds rate agreed to at a particular meeting, not the anticipated future path of policy. Second, presenting a consensus medium- and longer-term policy path could lead to communications challenges.  For example, specifying an explicit path of the SOMA portfolio in the consensus forecast might make it harder to describe such a program as state contingent (if that were the Committee’s intention), and could 5 The materials used by Mr. Rudd are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). mislead the public into thinking that the conditions governing the evolution of the portfolio are more clearly defined than is actually the case. The consensus forecast exercises also revealed some important production-related challenges.  First, because the Committee’s policy decisions are not known in advance of the meeting, it would be impossible to guarantee the production of a forecast that incorporates the Committee’s policy decision in time for the Chairman’s press conference.  The required delay, of course, would reduce the usefulness of the forecast for communication purposes. Second, participants appear to be unclear about how they should determine whether they support the proposed consensus outlook.  At the September meeting, many participants found it difficult to answer the question “Do you broadly support the proposed consensus forecast, support it with reservations, or not support it.” While these various governance, communication, and production issues present formidable obstacles, participants could nonetheless decide that the potential benefits of continuing to struggle with them outweigh the costs.  If you choose to go that direction, we see several possible avenues that could be explored—though none of them would be guaranteed to meet with success. These potential avenues are summarized in the lower-left panel of the exhibit. First, to address the important communication and decisionmaking issues that arise from the need to specify a full policy path, the Committee could explore the possibility of formally voting on the medium- and longer-term policy path and incorporating the resulting decision into the postmeeting statement. It seems likely, however, that this approach would greatly complicate the Committee’s deliberations and could impair its ability to reach a consensus. Alternatively, the Committee could examine the feasibility of conditioning the consensus forecast on market expectations for policy.  This approach would simplify the production of a consensus forecast in some respects.  But in an environment where the FOMC faces unusual constraints and is using multiple unconventional tools to advance its policy objectives, the Committee would almost certainly need to provide additional commentary to enable the public to correctly interpret the policy implications of a forecast based on market expectations rather than the Committee’s collective view about appropriate policy.  Hence, using market-based expectations runs the risk of significantly complicating the FOMC’s communications challenge without reducing the need for the Committee to reach agreement on the likely future course of monetary policy required to achieve its goals. Yet another avenue to explore is whether it would be possible to publish projections under a set of “bracketing” policy alternatives that span the Committee’s collective judgment as to the likely range of appropriate policy paths.  By allowing for a wider range of policy outcomes (rather than a single policy path), bracketing scenarios could make it easier for participants to reconcile the economic and policy outlook with their various interpretations of the statement.  However, the public mightfind it difficult to discern the collective judgment of the Committee from a set of multiple scenarios. As an alternative to the consensus forecast, the Committee might instead wish to consider modifying the existing SEP.  Some possible enhancements to the SEP are summarized in the lower-right panel of the exhibit.  For example, the current information in the SEP could be augmented to include medians of the projections of participants who voted for or otherwise supported the policy action.  (Our presumption here is that the SEP would also continue to summarize the responses of all participants.) In this case, the SEP might provide a clearer reading on the collective thinking of those who supported the Committee’s action.  Relatedly, the graphical information shown in the SEP could be color-coded to distinguish voters from nonvoters.  Of course, the Committee could also decide to publish the full matrix of SEP submissions, with or without attribution to individual participants, in order to align each participant’s view of appropriate monetary policy with his or her economic outlook. Finally, the subcommittee on communications circulated a memorandum earlier this month with a list of specific questions for discussion at this meeting.  For reference, those questions are reproduced on the second and third pages of the handout.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a presentation by Mr. Rudd discussing the findings of consensus forecast exercises and potential options for future work on developing a consensus forecast.


Passage number 360.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and thank you again for very good work on this background memo.  Are there any questions for the staff.  [No response] All right.  If not, we’d like to get views of the Committee participants on this initiative.  There are 13 questions on this list, so please don’t feel obligated to go through every single one.  We just prefer to get your overall sense of what you think we ought to be doing.  Let me start with Governor Yellen, who, of course, is the chair of the subcommittee that has been working on this issue.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and seeking input from the Committee participants.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 361.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we launched the consensus forecast initiative in June, we did so based on the premise that a consensus forecast had the potential to significantly enhance the Committee’s communications by clarifying the rationale for our policy decisions.  We agreed to explore this initiative in a systematic and deliberate manner, and I think the two experiments we have conducted yielded a number of valuable insights.  I’d like to thank the staff for the memo and presentation, which summarized the most important lessons and our options for either continuing the initiative or, alternatively, pursuing enhancements to the SEP.   My subcommittee circulated a memo with questions.  The first group of questions concerns possible directions for further development of the consensus forecast.  The second set pertains to possible modifications of the SEP.  And finally, bottom line, we’d like to know which of these two routes you consider to be more promising in terms of improving communications. Personally, I would say that I think there is a problem with our communications, and I think we need to address this problem one way or another.  So I do consider it very important that we decide today which path for providing further information about the rationale for our policy decisions is apt to be most effective, and that we make progress on providing this information soon.  The memo highlights what struck me as the biggest challenge associated with the consensus forecast, namely, that we would need to reach agreement one way or another about the future path of monetary policy, including, in current circumstances, the path of the balance sheet on which the forecast would be conditioned. If we detach ourselves from the policy paths incorporated in the forecast by describing them as merely illustrative, or if we instead resort to conditioning on financial market expectations of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet, we would end up depreciating the value of the forecast for its core purpose, which is to explain the rationale for whatever policy decisions we make. If, on the other hand, we condition on the path with which those who support the statement can associate themselves, I fear that the task of reaching agreement at any given meeting may become unmanageable. Of course, our inclusion of forward guidance in our statements has taken us some ways toward communicating a consensus about monetary policy sometime in the future, but this guidance has often been a bone of contention, and not all of us always agree on its interpretation.  To go forward with a consensus forecast, we would need to go beyond agreeing on, for example,   the time of liftoff to also agree on the post-liftoff pace of firming and the ultimate level to which the nominal funds rate is expected to converge.  The problem of reaching consensus on the future path of policy is even more severe now, given that we’re operating with two tools. When I think back to my first stint on the Board, I think it’s fair to say that we have made enormous progress in communicating to the public the rationale for our conduct of monetary policy based on a coherent framework with well-specified goals and objectives.  But specifying a forecast based on a common, agreed-upon path of policy under all kinds of contingencies is, I’m afraid, still a project for the future. The other questions we have posed concerning the consensus forecast are almost as hard as the first one.  I think it would be much more desirable to have a consensus forecast conditioned on the policy action taken at the current meeting, but the cost from a communication standpoint of not having the projections available in time for the Chairman’s press conference is quite high.  The reality is that a comprehensive Committee forecast seems to work well for committees the size of the Bank of England’s or the Riksbank’s, but probably not for us, given our size and geographic diversity.  For that reason, the issue of how to convey the degree to which participants associate themselves with the forecast is much more difficult in our context. So for all these reasons, I’ve reluctantly concluded that we may be better served by exploring enhancements to the SEP that would enable it to provide greater clarity about the outlook that motivates our policy decisions.  Because these decisions are ultimately taken by those members supporting the statement at any given meeting, I find it eminently sensible to publish the median of the projections of those members.  Not only does this focus attention on the projections of those whose preferences the policy decision reflects, but also the collection of median paths for real activity, inflation, and the funds rate should come much closer to   presenting an internally coherent outlook.  The materials that were circulated to illustrate how these medians differ suggest that there hasn’t been much difference with respect to the economic projections of those who voted “yes” and others, but on a few occasions, there have been noticeable disagreements about the associated policy paths. I’d also strongly support publication of the scatter plot of combinations of inflation and the unemployment rate prevailing at the time of liftoff. If we introduce quantitative threshold language, this would seem a perfect complement to these thresholds.  But even without thresholds, the scatter plot is quite informative about participants’ views concerning economic conditions consistent with liftoff.  Releasing both the median projections of those who voted “yes” and the scatter plots are steps that have very high value and require almost no additional logistical effort.  I think we should start doing so as soon as possible. Given that we released to the public our projected time of liftoff, it seems only logical to release some information concerning our projections for the balance sheet, which is currently of interest and concern to markets.  However, there are several possible options here.  For example, we could disclose the date at which we expect to stop purchasing assets or the ultimate size that we expect the balance sheet to reach.  And here, I think we should carefully evaluate our options before taking any decision, to avoid the risk that publishing balance-sheet-related projections could undermine the efficacy of our asset program. As for the other proposed modifications, I’m entirely comfortable with circulating individual SEP submissions internally, with names attached.  In fact, seeing the submissions and commentary that we provided for the consensus forecast experiments helped me understand better the thinking of some of my colleagues around the table. I’m not opposed to coloring the dots, that is, providing some information about whether a particular projection was made by a current voting member, but if we stop there, we know we will only fuel further speculation among Fed watchers about the identities of the dots in our liftoff chart.  Moreover, coloring the dots doesn’t help to link participants’ views about policy with their economic projections.  So that suggests going further to publish the SEP full matrix, with or without attribution, perhaps with an indication of which participants are voters. My guess is that Fed watchers will quickly guess the identity of many of the matrix rows.  So, ultimately, we should only move in this direction if we’re comfortable with full attribution.  I am not unalterably opposed to this step, but I admit to some qualms.  With individual attribution, each of us will have to be prepared to defend our forecasts and explain the methodology on which they’re based, a situation that may eventually prove uncomfortable for those of us who lack the necessary background and staff resources to prepare a rigorous and independent forecast. So to conclude, even though I do not advocate continuing the consensus forecast initiative at this time, I believe we’ve gained useful insights, and it has served to sharpen our collective understanding of the commonalities and differences in our views and thinking.  If it has thereby enhanced the quality of our discourse, it has, to my mind, been well worth the effort.  I’m optimistic that we can take meaningful steps toward better communications through SEP modifications, and my subcommittee would be happy to work with the Chairman to propose concrete steps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of continuing the consensus forecast initiative and suggests exploring enhancements to the SEP instead. They also express concerns about the challenges and potential risks associated with the consensus forecast, such as reaching agreement on the future path of monetary policy and the potential for inconsistent policy paths.


Passage number 362.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided as it consists only of a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 363.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman.  Could I just ask Janet to clarify, because I started taking notes too late.  Janet, if we look at the questions for discussion that the staff passed out, I  think you addressed each of these, but I was just trying to figure out whether you did, in fact.  This would be the sub-questions under number 2.  I think, if I understood correctly, you’re for A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification from Janet.


Passage number 364.
 MS. YELLEN.  I’m for A.  I’m for B, possibly C, and possibly D.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, is expressing her support for options A, B, C, and D.


Passage number 365.
 MR. TARULLO.  D possible, but think about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply suggesting that the situation mentioned is worth considering or thinking about.


Passage number 366.
 MS. YELLEN.  Yes, but we have to decide how to go about doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. YELLEN acknowledges the need to make a decision but does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 367.
 MR. TARULLO. Right. E—you said to think hard, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply acknowledging and affirming what the other person said.


Passage number 368.
 MS. YELLEN.  Yes, I’m a little bit worried about that.  F, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 369.
 MR. TARULLO.  F, yes.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a response expressing gratitude.


Passage number 370.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me turn to President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage mentions turning to President Fisher but does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 371.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with Governor Yellen that a modification to the SEP is probably the best course to follow.  I just offer the following thoughts very quickly.  I think in any communications exercise designed to look beyond the near term, it makes little sense to exclude the views of those presidents not currently voting.  They will be voting, and we change the composition of the voters as we go through time.  So that would be point number one.  Point number two is, I would argue against excluding the views of any dissenters because the views of today’s dissenters, thoughtfully argued, may well influence the decisions of the Committee going forward.  So that’s a general comment. I’m in favor of modifying the SEP, but in terms of what we publish, I don’t think it should exclude some participants.  It should not just be members only.  With the specifics, I’m just going to address some very, very quickly.  I think the best way to modify the SEP, probably, is to publish the median projection of all participants.  After all, medians are insensitive to extreme views.  The tightness of the range—which I expect will be fairly tight—of the central tendency around the median is a measure of the degree of consensus among the Committee.  The   median projection of the funds rate could be plotted if you wanted to go this far, along with the paths prescribed by a fitted outcome-based rule or other simple rules to reveal whether participants believe a departure from business as usual is warranted.  This would tell whether views can be well approximated by a simple alternative rule.  That may be too radical a proposal.  My point is that I think publishing a central tendency is probably the best way to approach this, and I would include all participants. With regard to specific questions, I’ll comment on just a couple that Janet mentioned.  I’m not sure that publishing a scatter plot accomplishes a great deal, because the decision to raise the funds rate may depend on variables other than the current unemployment rate and inflation over the past year, as we’ve discussed around this table.  For example, it may depend on the change in the unemployment rate or, if we wanted to go as far as what my staff has been advocating, a nominal income gap.  So that’s the point that I want to make there. From the standpoint of individual attributions, I have sort of mixed feelings about this.  One of the things I’m concerned about if we were to do this publicly is that participants might become less willing to modify their views in response to new information or arguments of their colleagues and more intent on defending their views.  And they may pull their punches a little bit.  As a consequence, they may be a little bit reluctant to share their true opinions when they provide their input. Then the question Janet raised, I also have a question about, which is whether we would publish internally our individual SEP submissions. I’ve noticed in our discussions of the SEP that they sort of come forward, but what I would worry about here—and, again, this is my own phobia—is that certain names might be leaked over time, and then we would just sort of add to the possibility that that would occur.  So I have a question mark about that, Janet, as to whether we should—if we’re not going to release them publicly—actually release them internally.  Although, you know, you can usually tell where people stand, and often people—I do— volunteer that information. Mr. Chairman, as you know, I have to leave a little bit early, and I apologize for being so concise, though I’m sure people welcome my being concise.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, agrees with Governor Yellen's proposal to modify the SEP and offers his own thoughts on how it should be done. He provides suggestions for including the views of all participants, publishing the median projection, and considering other variables in the decision-making process. He also expresses concerns about publishing individual submissions and the potential for leakage of names. Overall, his comments are in support of the general direction of modifying the SEP.


Passage number 372.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from a person named President Williams.


Passage number 373.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 374.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Evans.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 375.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I put together these comments looking out my second-floor view of the new Chicago Speaker’s Corner, with all of the people out there complaining about everything.  [Laughter] At any rate, the consensus forecasting exercise certainly has turned out to be an eye opener.  I didn’t think it was going to be this hard.  The staff memo does a very good job in describing the range of issues we have had to confront and the difficult decisions that we would have to make to produce such a consensus projection.  As always, thanks for all of the hard work; it was really well done. Rather than discuss all of the nettlesome details, I think it is useful to remember the first-order issue.  In its current form, the SEP is a problematic tool for describing the forecast rationale underlying the Committee’s policy decision.  As President Williams alluded to, theApril press conference, I thought, was particularly challenging—certainly to watch, and probably to experience in person.  Our goal, then, should be to find a better way to provide the Chairman, by the time of the press conference, with the information he needs to effectively communicate the role of the outlook in our policy decisions. I don’t think we are close to being at that point with the consensus forecast, and I am not really sure we can get there.  Of course, if the Chairman really wants this, we could try harder.  There are just too many issues to work out at the moment, from handling assumptions for a complete path for future policy to the conventions for endorsement.  We might be able to come up with a satisfactory way to handle the issues and produce an informative product by the time the minutes come out.  And we may want to pursue some experimentation with putting together a forecast conditioned on common policy assumptions consistent with the actions of the Committee at the meeting.  But I don’t see how we could ever do this in time for the postmeeting press conference.  Certainly, we could not do so without severely compromising the FOMC meeting itself as a deliberative process. I think, however, that we can make improvements to the SEP that would make it a much better tool.  First, at the press conference, I think we should highlight the median forecast of those Committee members voting for the policy.  True, this need not be as fully a coherent economic projection as the consensus forecast would be, but it has to be an improvement over 19 different viewpoints.  The median of the supporting voters would go a long way to describing the collective judgment that underlay the policy decision.  When we add in other members or participants who didn’t agree with the policy decision, it is not helpful for explaining any nuances in the decision.  We could go ahead and publish the median of the voters who were in favor of it, as well as the median of everyone.  There are all kinds of cuts of the data that we could produce if we chose to do that. It probably doesn’t surprise you that I would be willing to publish the entire matrix of SEP submissions myself. I am fine with doing that with attribution. If we can’t get there, I would at least identify the members voting for the policy decision, if that were possible.  With the matrix, the public would be able to see the individual projections and judge the rationales for themselves.  They could put together the scatter plots that they like—although the particular issue you were talking about, President Williams, would not be conveyed.  At a minimum, I would distribute these internally with attribution and also include balance sheet assumptions whenever possible.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement and contention in this passage. The speaker is expressing skepticism about the usefulness of the consensus forecasting exercise and sees it as a problematic tool for describing the forecast rationale underlying the Committee's policy decision. They also express doubts about being able to effectively communicate the role of the outlook in policy decisions and question whether it is possible to improve the SEP. They suggest highlighting the median forecast of those Committee members voting for the policy as a better tool for describing the collective judgment underlying the decision.


Passage number 376.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply consists of a thank you and a salutation from President Rosengren, indicating gratitude or appreciation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 377.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The staff memo is quite persuasive in describing the challenges with the consensus forecast at this time.  Different weighting of the dual mandate, different views on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, as well as the many operational challenges in reaching a consensus with such a large committee—with members with rotating votes—make a quick resolution of these problems unlikely. It is important to focus on what the primary communication objective should be for this exercise.  My own view is that the most important objective for communication is to make clear what outlook for inflation and unemployment justifies the Committee’s policy decision as communicated through the statement.  The second most important objective is to make clear how unexpected changes in the path of inflation and unemployment are likely to influence future policy actions, particularly given that we are setting policy, at least in part, by being more explicit about our future intentions.  At this time, I do not believe a consensus forecast is the best way to meet either of my primary communication objectives.  I do believe that an enhanced SEP is the best way forward.  Each participant should provide a forecast based on the median forecast of the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet path from the previous SEP, which I would do at every meeting. This would eliminate the problem of vastly different policy variables being used as optimal policy.  At meetings where policy is changed, forecasts based on the previous SEP would presumably show outcomes that necessitated further action. I would prefer to make these submissions public with attribution.  The public would then see the views of those who supported the statement and those who did not.  This would avoid the problem of not distinguishing voters and nonvoters that occurred at the April meeting.  The public could also associate forecasts with those who are likely to be voting members in future years.  It also makes each participant accountable for his or her own forecasts, and the public could discount those forecasts that have large systematic errors or that have serious consistency problems.  However, there is a legitimate concern that attribution may make participants less willing to compromise during the meeting.  If disclosure with attribution does not have support, I would propose an enhanced SEP that distinguishes voters from nonvoters, based on the year they are voting.  I would release all of the variables by participant, but with the participants not identified. An enhanced SEP with full disclosure could begin with the first press conference next year.  That would give us time to work out any remaining concerns with the approach we adopt.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The author suggests using an enhanced Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) with full disclosure, while acknowledging that there is concern about participants being less willing to compromise if their forecasts are attributed to them. The author proposes an alternative option of disclosing all variables by participant, but without identifying the participants. This shows a difference in opinion on the level of transparency and accountability in communication.


Passage number 378.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The provided passage does not exhibit any form of contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude directed towards President Bullard without expressing any contradictory stance.


Passage number 379.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the main thing we have to do here is define what we are trying to do, and I will give you my objective.  My objective is to provide  the public with a baseline Fed view of the likely path of the U.S. economy.  I would like to do that through a quarterly monetary policy report.  I view this as standard central bank practice around the world.  We should be able to do this as well.  I do not buy the argument that the United States can’t do it but everybody else can. I have more modest objectives than what the subcommittee seems to have in mind.  In particular, the core purpose, in my mind, is not to explain the rationale of the FOMC, but it is to get this baseline view out there, given assumptions about future policy that are in the market.  So my main comment is that the process around this should not be an attempt to make policy decisions through an agreement on forecasts outside of actual FOMC meetings, and I agree with President Evans on this.  This type of process is extremely cumbersome and, I think, should be abandoned.  It really takes away, maybe, from the integrity of the meeting. Here is my suggested approach: The forecast should be labeled as a staff forecast. It should essentially be a version of the information that is already used in the Tealbook.  That is number one. Number two, the policy assumption used should be a market-based one, as in the Bank of England case.  I was unconvinced by the memo discussion on this issue.  I think a market-based assumption would work well.  It could be that the market-based assumption is going to be different from what the Committee has in mind, but then we have to ask ourselves, well, why is this.  Have we not communicated effectively.  Do we not think that the outcomes that everyone else says are going to occur are satisfactory and we should adjust our policy appropriately. So I think if you are going to be a long way out of line with a market-based assumption, the Committee has some introspection to do on that.  I’ll stop on that. Finally, the third thing is that the timing of the quarterly monetary policy report should be divorced somewhat from the FOMC meeting itself, so that we are not in this position of trying to scramble around to put the statement out there.  I just don’t see it as being part of this process here, the meeting itself and any press conference, if there is a press conference associated with that particular meeting. So I would see this as a little bit of a different schedule.  One way to do that would be, during the middle of an intermeeting period, you could have an event where you give an updated Fed forecast, given the recent policy decision as it’s understood in markets at that point in time. I don’t oppose the changes to the SEP, but I would like to remind the Committee that much of the impetus for this was that there was dissatisfaction with the SEP.  So I don’t really see this as helpful, to go back to the SEP and then have the same list of complaints about it that we have had before. Identifying members is fine with me.  I am happy to discuss my forecast or my outlook on the economy and all kinds of issues at length.  But I think the main issue with the publication of names and voters, and so on, is that everyone really wants to know what the Chairman’s view is.  And once they have the Chairman’s view, they are not going to care about anyone else’s view, which is fine.  But, you know, are we really willing to go that far. So I think we would be better off with the approach that I am suggesting, which is to go to the staff forecast, put in market-based policy assumptions, get it a little bit offline with the actual meetings—either the same time as the minutes or a little bit after the minutes or somewhere else in the intermeeting period—and have it be quarterly. I do think it would provide a lot of information for financial market participants and the private sector in general, because they want to understand how the pieces fit together, at least from the staff’s perspective,understanding that you have lots of policymakers.  The policymakers have all kinds of different views, and that is good and helpful, but we don’t have to get into all of that just to give this baseline view of how things are working and what we expect to see in the future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is simply expressing his views and suggestions on how to provide a baseline Fed view of the likely path of the U.S. economy.


Passage number 380.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply contains a statement of gratitude.


Passage number 381.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So, in my view, the point of a Committee forecast is to augment the statement, to illustrate why the Committee is making the decision it is making through its outlook on key variables such as unemployment and inflation.  It enhances accountability by confronting the Committee with the difficult task of rationalizing what its decisions are in terms of the variables it is charged to influence according to the dual mandate.  So given the perspective that the Committee forecast is supposed to augment the statement, I see it as entirely appropriate to be focusing on the set of people who voted for the statement when we are thinking about the forecast.  Now, I had always hoped and thought that this should be done as a collective process.  The staff memo was excellent. I wouldn’t call it uplifting [laughter], but it was excellent and convincing that this can’t be done. After thinking about it, I realized that the people who had voted for the statement presumably had voted for it because they viewed it as appropriate policy, and they had formulated their projections under what they thought of as appropriate policy.  So there should be a confluence between what we want to achieve, which is some collective judgment of what appropriate policy would be, and then a collective forecast based on that.  So, to summarize, it strikes me as eminently reasonable to release the median projections of those who voted for the statement with the statement, and have the Chairman use that as backdrop for his press conference. A number of the other suggestions have to do with enhancing our description of the heterogeneity of views held at the meeting. I think there are a lot of arguments for sharing those with the public.  I am not sure I am willing at this moment in time to go along with all of them. I would like to think more about that.  But my basic principle is this:  Anything that has to do with the heterogeneity of views that are being described in the meeting should be in the minutes.  The Chairman shouldn’t have to stand up there and take responsibility for all of the heterogeneity of viewpoints being expressed in the meeting; that doesn’t make any sense.  He is there to explain the Committee decision and the statement, and then the projection of the people who voted for the statement should help him with that. What should be included in the minutes in terms of the heterogeneity of views.  I maintain an open mind about that.  I think we can go on thinking about that.  Certainly the SEP, in its current form, would be one thing you would put in the minutes.  That would be my starting point:  Take the SEP in its current form, and put it in the minutes.  How we want to slice and dice it beyond that, I am open to lots of other suggestions. One thing I found very useful in the process was, I really would like to have people’s forecasts conditional on their version of optimal policy and based on their forecast of what the Committee would do. I think it was almost accidental, but I found it a very revealing step when we saw not just what people’s forecasts for economic conditions would be if they were in charge, but also based on their forecasts of what the Committee would do.  And then sharing that internally with attribution, I think, would really enhance our discussions.  I think it would give us a much clearer idea of where we are all coming from.  So those are my comments, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is expressing his own perspective and offering suggestions for how the Committee forecast and minutes should be handled. There is no indication of disagreement or opposition from other speakers or individuals in the passage.


Passage number 382.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Pianalto do not imply any conflicting ideas or opposing positions.


Passage number 383.
  MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to thank the staff for the excellent work that they did on this issue. The consensus forecast experiments have highlighted the considerable diversity of views on the economy and policy held by Committee participants.  I firmly believe that historically this diversity has been a source of strength to the Committee.  However, the extent of our diversity of views poses a considerable hurdle to the development of a consensus forecast.  To have a consensus forecast, as others have pointed out, we need to have more agreement on the model of the economy, including a common policy reaction function.  Based in part on the two experiments, I am inclined to think that such agreement is out of reach. Even if agreement could be within reach, the two experiments have led me to believe that the marginal costs of a consensus forecast outweigh the benefits.  One significant cost, as has been pointed out, is the time required of System staff and Committee participants to produce individual forecasts under different policy paths and to provide other input into the development of the consensus.  As to the benefits, I certainly recognize that there would be some in terms of our ability to communicate a collective assessment of the outlook and policy path.  But given the tools that we have today with the SEP, the Chairman’s press conference, and speeches by Committee participants, I think the marginal benefits of a consensus forecast are just modest. Of the tools that I just mentioned, I view the SEP as tremendously useful, in part because it does an effective job of capturing the diversity of views.  And in that sense, it supports the diversity that has long served this Committee well. I also think the SEP does a good job of communicating the average view of the Committee, which usually isn’t going to be far removed from what the consensus forecast would look like if it were feasible.  Still, we have learned this year that there may be times when an FOMC meeting produces a policy decision that differs   some from the average view reflected in the SEP. As President Williams pointed out, that happened at the April meeting.  In those cases, I think the Chairman’s press conference provides a clear opportunity to explain the differences and the Committee’s collective thinking on the outlook and policy. As useful as the SEP is in its current form, there may be some opportunities to improve upon it.  And I will answer just a couple of the questions pertaining to possible enhancements to the SEP.  It seems as though publishing the median projections of just the voting supporters would require either a pre-vote tally of supporters or postponing the publication of the projections.  So for timeliness reasons, I would prefer to publish the median of all voters, which would be very similar to the median of voters supporting the statement, as the table circulated by David Reifschneider showed. Based on our experiments with scatter plots some time ago, I think that the plots are likely to be hard to explain to the public, so I don’t think scatter plots would improve our communications all that much.  So I would prefer not to include them in the SEP. Given our interest in better communicating the Committee’s collective judgment, I think that publishing individual details could be counterproductive.  Providing individual detail would probably increase the public’s attention on individual forecasts and reduce the attention on the central tendency. And, finally, I think that publishing more information on the balance sheet action is the biggest opportunity for improving our communications but also, perhaps, the most difficult. It may be worth exploring the addition to the SEP of individual projections, either quantitative or qualitative, relating to the duration and composition of asset purchases. So I am open to considering some enhancements to the SEP.  But to avoid any unintended consequences, I do think we need to have plenty of practice with any enhancements we decide to use before we roll them out to the public.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their personal beliefs and opinions on the topic, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 384.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards President George.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 385.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I tend to agree with the assessment of the hurdles associated with the consensus forecast and support moving forward with an enhanced SEP.  In order to better illustrate the Committee’s views, I would support identifying voters and nonvoters in the charts. I would not publish the scatter plot of the unemployment rate and inflation rate expected to prevail at liftoff because I think it would confuse the public and, therefore, not enhance our communication. And finally, I would not publish the full matrix of projections with attribution because I think it could discount the value associated with the independent views of the Governors and the Reserve Bank presidents. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with publishing the scatter plot and the full matrix of projections with attribution. They believe that these actions would confuse the public and discount the value of independent views.


Passage number 386.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. This is simply an expression of gratitude from President Plosser.


Passage number 387.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only contains a polite expression of gratitude and the name of the speaker, President Lacker.


Passage number 388.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just for clarity, I don’t think anybody is proposing eliminating the full range of the SEP.  It’s just a question of whether to add a subset.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a clarification regarding the proposal to add a subset to the full range of the SEP.


Passage number 389.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As Governor Yellen was going through her commentary earlier, I found myself in substantial agreement with almost everything she said, then others also have supported much of that, and there have been other thoughts.  I’m just going to make a few points to try to add a little bit to the commentary this morning. In an earlier discussion some months ago, I made the sort of abstract point that the institutional setup of the FOMC makes a consensus decision more achievable than a consensus rationale for a decision.  I think this exercise makes that more clear as a practical matter, and I think it’s unavoidable that our communication is influenced by that reality.  So we’re not the Bank of England, and we’re not the Riksbank either. Whatever decision we make, I think it’s important to be clear about purposes; several have pointed that out.  Particularly, what I consider to be a primary purpose of this communication tool is to equip the Chairman to explain in his press conference why a policy decision was made and what it’s expected to accomplish. As I weighed the arguments in the staff memo, the balance of pros and cons seemed to me to lean in favor of abandoning the consensus forecast and settling for an improved SEP.  I would support the suggestions made by the staff in the memo, for the most part.  The median of voters—I like the idea of the median of supporters, if that could be compiled quickly between the time of the end of the meeting and the time of the press conference.   I support publishing the full matrix of submission information.  I’m a bit uncomfortable with full attribution to the public, name by name. I made this argument, again, some months ago, and it’s important.  I say this word carefully.  I don’t want to encourage Kremlinology— that’s different from criminology [laughter]—Kremlinology that just feeds the beast of articles about who said what exactly and tries to create dissension within the Committee that may, in fact, not exist or at least not be that material. So let me just take a second and say if we were to go forward with another trial of the consensus forecast—and I’m not totally ready to throw in the towel—I think it’s obvious a key requirement is a common policy assumption going into the forecast exercise.  As I think about it, there are three options: The first is the policy status quo ante, but that doesn’t help in the press conference because that basically says what the policy as it existed before the meeting would accomplish in terms of a forecast, and that doesn’t help if we make a decision in the meeting. The second would be a summary of market expectations, probably derived from the dealer survey. I can’t get comfortable with having, essentially, the external world dictate our base assumption for a forecast.  It just seems to me to be too dependent on outside opinion, which in some cases diverges from opinion within the Committee. Then the third option I see is that the Chairman defines an assumption, perhaps broad enough to be inclusive of what seems to be the consensus going into the meeting about the path of policy.  I think that is sort of similar in spirit to the approach in one trial where the Chairman was going to summarize the forecast and come back to us with a summary statement that then we were going to decide whether we bought into or didn’t buy into.  So if the Chairman were comfortable doing this, I think he might just provide an adequate enough assumption of the   policy.  None of these is ideal.  To be ready for a press conference, a forecast based on the actual decision is not really feasible.  So it does appear to be extremely difficult. If we adopt a consensus forecast approach, I do favor doing the exercise for each meeting.  I don’t think we can render half the meetings more equal than the other half.  I think this would require a press conference after each meeting, and knowing the Chairman’s view on this [laughter], that may be the final nail in the coffin.  So those are my comments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 390.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 391.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the staff memo did a great job outlining some of the real difficulties with the consensus forecast.  I think there is a consensus about the consensus forecast today, obviously.  So I am with others in that I think that it makes sense to spend our time now turning back to the SEP process, to try to fix the shortcomings of the SEP.  As I have noted in the past, the SEP has numerous difficulties, so I just want to restate those, because I think at the end of the day, in terms of what we want to do, we want to fix the SEP so that it works correctly. The first difficulty is that the central tendencies are not consistent across the different variables.  The second is that there is no way to distinguish voters and participants, and those differences are important to people in the markets.  And, third, the interest rate projections are not tied back explicitly to the real economic variables in a consistent manner.  So my test for the SEP is something that actually fixes those three things. In terms of the questions posed by the staff memo, I have one caveat about the median projection of voters supporting the statement.  I’m not really opposed to it, but I don’t really want a median forecast where it is the medians of the individual variables. I want a median  forecast that actually has a consistent set of variables.  So I would encourage the staff to see how one would go about doing that, because I think if we just have a median forecast that is just the medians of the individual variables, we haven’t solved the issue of actually having a consistent set of forecasts.  And that seems to be a problem that I just wanted to highlight. I do think that publishing a median forecast, though, is still second best to putting out a lot of additional information.  I would publish all of the individual forecasts, and I would identify the forecasts as voters and nonvoters.  But I also would be happy to identify what year the nonvoters are going to become voters, so people could actually anticipate when they actually move into the voting—because that does matter, especially as we get late in the year and people start to anticipate what is going to happen as the year flips over.  I don’t feel strongly about the names versus no names issue, in terms of public disclosure.  I guess I would favor publishing the names in the interest of transparency, to avoid the Kremlinology issue.  But I would be happy to defer to others on that.  If we do publish the names, though, I think you want to publish everybody but the Chairman, because I think that you want to give the Chairman a little bit more flexibility. Obviously, if we identify voters and nonvoters, and the nonvoters by the year they become voters, it is going to be pretty easy to identify most of the forecasts.  So if you decide to go that far, you might as well just disclose all of the forecasts. I think that regardless of where we come out in terms of external disclosure, it is crazy not to circulate the forecasts and the names internally.  I don’t see what the point of that is, so I think that we should have all of that stuff circulated.  I think the consensus forecast exercise actually did improve the exchange of information within the Committee, and I think that is the one lesson of the exercise that we should actually try to build on.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The speaker in this passage is expressing agreement and offering suggestions for improvement in the consensus forecast and SEP process. There is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 392.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a polite expression of gratitude and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 393.
   MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have not been a fan of the consensus forecast idea, and I didn’t even like the idea of rushing to publish the fed funds rate projections.  So these efforts just don’t feel to me like they are designed so much to provide more transparency about the range of views in the room but, rather, as an attempt to show more agreement than I believe actually exists. And as one who has occasionally struggled to support the decisions about current policy, I feel even more conflicted about signing up for a more comprehensive level of agreement about the decisions that are going to be made over a number of years than I found necessary to allow me to support the policy at any given meeting. The reason why it is so hard to formulate a consensus forecast might actually be because there is not that much consensus.  So I feel like trying to shoehorn a large majority into agreement on several dimensions could actually increase the level of dissent and be counterproductive to the strength of the policy statements. I know the communications in the current environment have been awkward at times, but I think it is because decisionmaking in this environment is really hard.  And there are a lot of moving parts, and we are in uncharted territory, and knowing what we are going to do in three or four years is especially difficult.  So trying to come up with more detailed communication devices doesn’t necessarily reduce that complexity.  So to the extent that the consensus forecast implies any commitment, it seems to me more likely that such efforts will yield better results when the path of the fed funds rate is actually the only policy variable available. As Governor Yellen noted earlier, there is a lot of work to do for the next meeting, primarily by the staff.  There is always a lot of work for the next meeting to be done primarily by the staff.  And this effort seems an unproductive use, or less productive use, of critical staff resources that are also needed to understand the costs and the benefits of the policy actions that we are actually taking.  So I strongly believe that this is the wrong priority for these valuable resources. By now, my answers to the first set of questions are probably obvious.  I also don’t see the value in separating the submissions of individuals, or voters, or voters who supported the action, or any other subgroup.  If you are talking about projections of policy for three years, everyone submitting projections will be voting at some point in the projection period.  And, once again, separating the views of those supporting the action from those who did not could have one of two outcomes—either exposing varying degrees of conviction in support or pushing some who are on the edge of support into dissenting positions.  I fail to see how either of these actions strengthens our policy statements. I also think it is a real possibility that this solution could create a new source of awkwardness for the Chairman to explain at a press conference. If our objective is to be truly transparent, and we do decide to go down this road, the policy variables that are in the SEP should include a balance sheet variable as well as a fed funds variable.  If we had adopted this approach prior to our last meeting, the public would have been able to see the diversity of expectations about continuing LSAPs among the voters, and the market reaction would likely have been quite different. So I guess I am in the camp of “be careful what you wish for,” and let’s be very careful that we know the consequences of what we plan to do before we go public with it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention and disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Duke, expresses her disagreement with the consensus forecast idea and rushing to publish the fed funds rate projections. She believes that these efforts are not designed to provide more transparency but rather to show more agreement than actually exists. She also believes that trying to shoehorn a large majority into agreement could increase dissent and be counterproductive to the strength of policy statements. She argues that trying to come up with more detailed communication devices does not necessarily reduce complexity. Furthermore, she disagrees with the idea of separating the views of those who support the action from those who do not, as she believes it could weaken policy statements. Overall, she strongly disagrees with the priorities and approaches being taken.


Passage number 394.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.    The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 395.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the spirit of wanting to give the chair of a subcommittee with a really difficult assignment at least some faction of support, I am going to lead by saying I would just endorse everything Janet said in terms of a starting place for the rest of the work of her subcommittee, meaning put the consensus in cold storage, and then follow the inclination she had on each of these six items. Let me just say a couple of things to elaborate a few points.  One, as I think has become clear—and Dennis came close to saying this—there are two basic ways you can get to collective judgments on things in any group.  One is through a consensus-type approach, and the other is through an aggregation-of-individual-positions approach.  Almost no decisionmaking process is purely in one realm or in the other; everything is kind of a hybrid.  But I think it is pretty clear that this Committee more resembles a congressional committee than it does a committee producing a proposal for curricular reform, which is to say that it begins with a lot of views that are basically at odds with one another, and it ends up there most of the time. [Laughter]  We just need to take account of the idiosyncrasies of this group.  One, that it’s big; another, that it is geographically dispersed, as I think Janet said, so there is no real ongoing opportunity for interaction; and third, that it’s pretty polarized in ideological terms right now. It’s not unpleasant; it is just polarized. So I think we do need to lean more toward the aggregation of views as a way to get collective judgments, and that is really what we do with the monetary policy votes.  At some point, the Chairman defines something on which we will vote yea or nay. The difficulty with the consensus statement is it required this sense of manifold inputs into a process that could be shaped in a lot of different ways with a lot of different outputs, and that has just proved unmanageable. On the SEP, if you start from my working proposition that we are closer to the congressional committee end of the spectrum, without being anywhere near all the way there, I think, in general, just having the individual views aggregated—and having everybody’s views  aggregated, because as people have said, some will be voters tomorrow and some next year and some the year after that—is in general the best way to go but with one exception.  That is A—the likely future path of policy—which is why I support Janet on A. It does seem to me that we have to get some reconciliation of the actual decision taken in a particular meeting by those who happen to have a vote at that particular meeting with the projection of the policy path and economic developments as reflected in the SEP.  The April anomaly may well remain an anomaly rather than become a recurring pattern, and maybe Charlie Plosser is right that it was a growing pain. But it seems to me it is important to ensure that there will be a reconciliation of the collective judgment as manifested in the policy statement with the collective judgment on the forecasts of the relevant variables based on that policy judgment.  So the bottom line is, while I endorse everything Janet said, I feel most strongly about A.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is expressing his support for the chair of a subcommittee and endorsing her views. He also offers his own opinion on the matter, specifically focusing on the importance of reconciling the actual decisions taken in meetings with the projections of policy and economic developments.


Passage number 396.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 397.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you.  The two experiments regarding the creation of a possible consensus forecast provided us, I think, with really rich results.  This was because these experiments were conducted in the context of several economic headwinds that different participants weighted in different ways, and these experiments were also conducted in the context of a range of different policy responses and different views as to what constitutes monetary policy.  So the laboratory conditions were a close approximation to the conditions that exist here in real-life policy decisionmaking.  That said, I want to also commend the staff, in particular, for conducting the experiments with true laboratory-like conditions, in a way that I would say did not interfere with the very difficult policymaking decisions that this Committee was undertaking simultaneously.   I find the ideas set out in this go-round very thoughtful and very informative—so much so, really, that anybody here would be an excellent addition to the subcommittee on communications [laughter], and I would heartily endorse any of you as a likely successor to me. What we find after conducting these experiments is that the hard issues involved in framing a consensus forecast have been brought to the foreground.  Even if we suitably anchor, for experimental purposes, a set of policy assumptions upon which we can all build a forecast— which is what we did in the second experiment—those assumptions become of limited value in terms of the likely future paths of the fed funds rate and the balance sheet.  And so we’re back to a place where everyone then has a different view of these likely further paths, both for the fed funds rate and the balance sheet, and hence different views of what constitutes appropriate monetary policy.  We also saw the almost humorous challenges involved in asking participants whether they broadly endorsed the forecast, sometimes subject to specific qualifications and sometimes not. So these results and challenges leave us at a crossroads.  We can try to create a consensus forecast a different way, or we can try to make the SEP better.  The consensus forecast, as many of you have said, really presents a logistical challenge.  Policy needs to be imbedded in the forecast, but the policy isn’t decided upon until the meeting.  We want the public to see the forecast with the policy choices reflected in it, but such a forecast isn’t possible until after the Committee has voted and the staff has carefully had the chance to analyze its effects on the forecast.  Alternatively, we could construct a consensus forecast going into each meeting unvarnished by the policy decisions to come at that meeting, but if indeed policy decisions are made at the meeting, the going-in forecast will not contain the effects of these policy decisions.  We might not have a problem with a consensus forecast that contains the last meeting’s policy decision, but there would have to be another communication step inserted.  In other words, the public would have to understand under that scenario that the consensus forecast is the forecast that the Committee generally agreed was the forecast it was presented with as it convened its FOMC meeting.  The public would have to understand that this consensus forecast imbeds monetary policy decisions that have been made thus far, before any that have been made at the meeting.  The public would then have to understand that the Committee would use this consensus forecast as the forecast to consider when it decides appropriate monetary policy. But with this conception of a consensus forecast, the Chairman would not have, by the time of his press conference, a forecast that imbeds the most recent decision into the forecast.  He’d have to indicate that this would come later. So if we don’t like having to explain all of this, we’re left trying to enhance the SEP, and there are probably hundreds of ways that that could be done.  To narrow them down, it makes sense, I think, as several of you have said, to reiterate our purposes. For example, if it is our purpose to communicate a consensus, we could think about retrofitting the SEP as a consensus document.  From this perspective of creating a consensus forecast proxy via the SEP, the idea of publishing the median projection of nondissenting voters may provide a useful communication tool.  It has the virtue of being relatively costless and not being a jarring addition to the disclosures already made to the public.  The communication enhancement, though, would only be a proxy. It might be very far away from what a perfectly constructed consensus forecast might look like.  It might imbed a view of appropriate monetary policy—fed funds path and a balance sheet path—that are not at all representative of the whole   Committee.  But in highlighting the median, the middle person on each variable, it might look like a centrist view. I’ll say a couple of things about some of the other possible SEP enhancements.  First, as suggested by President Plosser, the scatter plot might convey useful information to the public.  It is not as helpful, I think, as setting thresholds in the FOMC statement, but maybe it is a baby step that would begin to accustom the public to the use of thresholds. Second, I’m not that enthusiastic that we convey meaningful information by distinguishing members by name.  The use of names, even when used internally only, diminishes, in my mind, the robustness of the Committee as a whole by potentially chilling individual contributions and the addition of different perspectives.  Injecting a notion of identities could introduce an element of egotism that should play no role in the collective decisionmaking body that is the FOMC. Third, as I think the scatter plot is a precursor to communication about thresholds, I think additional information related to balance sheet actions may be a precursor to such communication within the statement itself—that, too, might have value. Finally, I’ve always been reluctant to disclose for the mere sake of quantity and don’t think that any of this substitutes for quality.  I also don’t like an incremental disclosure pattern and prefer to explain to the public the reasons for any new disclosures in terms of what the disclosures are, in fact, intended to reveal.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a reflection on the results of experiments and a discussion of potential enhancements to the communication of the consensus forecast.


Passage number 398.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply expressing gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 399.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree that it makes sense to table the consensus forecast project for now.  The limitations have been pretty well explained, both in the memo and by others who have spoken before me.  So I won’t pile on here.In terms of modifying the SEP, I’m agreeable with many of the things that have been proposed.  In particular, I think it’s a good idea to publish the median projection of the voters supporting the statement.  Publishing the scatter plot seems also like a good thing to do.  I’m perfectly open to the idea of doing the matrix, preferably anonymized, and also I think it’s probably a good idea to circulate our stuff internally with people’s names.  That’s pretty much it.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Stein, agrees with the suggestion to table the consensus forecast project and expresses agreement with several other proposed modifications.


Passage number 400.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Thank you very much. Governor Powell" simply shows appreciation towards Governor Powell without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 401.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also agree that the consensus forecast is not doable now, although I would say that I think there may be something still in the idea of a quarterly monetary policy report, either with or without a consensus forecast.  I think it’s worth holding that thought aside from this for now. As far as the SEP is concerned, I’m comfortable with most of the ideas that have been put forward.  I would publish the median projection of voters.  For that matter, all of the medians are essentially empirically identical, and I’m comfortable with publishing any of them. I’d publish the scatter plot, and I would identify voters on it, but not by name. I would not try to publish the balance sheet projections, just for the reasons that I don’t know what you do with an open-ended program and I also think you’re going to wind up being dragged into a policy discussion over that again, which has been the thing that brought down the consensus forecast. I would go ahead and publish the full matrix.  I would not do it with names.  I just think the issue with names is that it has the potential to change outcomes to bring forward human traits, like risk aversion and reluctance to admit error, that I see others experiencing from time to   time.  And finally, I would be very happy to circulate—in fact, I thought we already did this— the projections internally under our own names.  I can’t think of a good reason not to do that. And let me end with a thought that maybe we could have an inertial component to our SEP publication function and maybe put a toe in the water by publishing the medians first and then move into the scatter plot and/or the matrix over time.  Just a thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, expresses agreement with the ideas that have been put forward and shares his own suggestions on how to publish the monetary policy report and the projections.


Passage number 402.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  This was actually a very informative go-round.  It is important to remind ourselves of the goal, which is both to show the diversity of views and to provide a coherent outlook that justifies the Committee’s decisions.  So I think both of those things are important. There was general consensus that we should abandon for now, perhaps not permanently, the consensus forecast exercise and focus on improvements in the SEP.  Under the heading of the SEP, there were a number of things that got specific attention, and it would be easy enough to go around and figure out how many supported each.  The median voter idea, the scatter plots, the matrix, and possibly balance sheet information were ones that got mentioned considerably. President Bullard was one of the few who wanted to continue with the consensus forecast, in which he was not joined by many people, but he also mentioned the QMPR, the quarterly monetary policy report, and President Plosser and Governor Powell mentioned that point as well. I think we should consider this a less-urgent issue at this point, but I myself also think that converting the existing congressional semiannual report and including information from Tealbook, Book A, could provide a very useful document at some point in the future, including SEP information or however we wanted to do that.  Again, this is not something we want to do immediately because of the press of the priorities that we are facing, but perhaps this is something we can keep in the back of our minds as we go forward.  What I’d like to do, if Janet is willing, is to ask her and her subcommittee, with the help of staff, to make some tentative recommendations back to the full Committee.  In December we have a quarterly SEP, and we can simply try them out; we can just look and see.  If you propose one particular statistic, we can look at what that is, and we can have a brief discussion, at least a presentation of what those numbers look like in the context of the December SEP.  And then based on that, perhaps we can decide to go live in the subsequent meeting. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It is a reflection on the discussion that took place and the various suggestions made by different individuals.


Passage number 403.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just add onto what you said that I do think it’s useful for us to think about, as I indicated in my earlier remarks, what we’re releasing at what point in time, as well. We collect a variety of statistics.  Which of them should be released at the time of the press conference.  Which of them should be released three weeks later, at the time of the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing the release of statistics at different times and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


