Meeting of Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 6, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee washeld on Tuesday, May 6, 1980. This was a telephone conferencemeeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., exceptas otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following listof those participating.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Guffey (Kansas City)Mr. Morris (Boston)Mr. RiceMr. Roos (St. Louis)Mr. SchultzMr. Solomon (New York)Mrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Baughman (Dallas), Eastburn (Philadelphia),Mayo (Chicago), and Willes (Minneapolis),Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Balles (San Francisco), and Black(Richmond), Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco and RichmondMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Axilrod, EconomistMessrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis(Cleveland), T. Davis (Kansas City),Eisenmenger (Boston), Kichline, Truman,and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight (New York), Manager forDomestic Operations, System OpenMarket AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board ofGovernors5/6/80Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open MarketSecretariatMessrs. Forrestal (Atlanta), and MacDonald(Cleveland), First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta andClevelandMessrs. Brandt (Atlanta), Boehne (Philadelphia),Burns (Dallas), and Scheld (Chicago),Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Atlanta, Philadelphia, Dallas,and Chicago, respectivelyMessrs. Bisignano (San Francisco), Broaddus(Richmond), Cacy (Kansas City), andDanforth (Minneapolis), Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco,Richmond, Kansas City, and Minneapolis,respectively-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofMay 6, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we should proceed, even thoughsome of the Board members have not yet arrived, because I have verylittle time myself. Mr. Axilrod, why don't you proceed?MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, [as the Committee knows], ofcourse, we have had continued very weak money supply data since thelast get-together. And total reserves for the four-week intermetingperiod, estimated from what we can tell about the amount of requiredreserves and the excess reserves that would be held at roughly currentinterest rate levels, seem to be running about $800 million below thetarget path. And that's with borrowing coming down very close tonominal levels. In the current week, borrowing ex First Pennsylvaniais now down to about $500 million. Our projection and expectation isthat in the next two weeks it will run around $250 million ex FirstPennsylvania. Thus, if any more reserves were put in to try to attainthe total reserve path, they would have to go into excess reserves,which would cause a very sharp drop in the funds rate from the recentlevel. The funds rate has been moving down toward the 13 percentbottom limit of the Committee's range and yesterday was below it.Thus, effectively now, the funds rate is a constraint on theadjustments we would make to the total reserve path. We won't haveany additional data on the aggregates until tomorrow, but I would notexpect them to change substantially enough to indicate that the fundsrate would not remain a constraint in adjustments to the reserve path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The general question we face here, towhich no one knows the answer, is how forceably we have to push inreserves to get the money supply turned around or what influence thathas on the federal funds rate. We are operating in an area in whichwe haven't operated before under the present technique. But it seemsquite clear that if we do not change the federal funds rateconstraint, we will simply be operating at a 13 percent level of thefederal funds rate indefinitely without any assurance, and with aprobability, that that will not in the short run turn the money supplyaround. The question in my mind is how much additional leeway shouldbe given. I suspect that 12 percent [as a lower limit] will mean thatwe will operate with a 12 percent federal funds rate, so I wouldpropose going somewhat below that. My own hope would be that thefunds rate won't necessarily decline all that much further with thenecessary injection of reserves. But we don't know, and I think weought to give ourselves a little more leeway. I would suggest 11percent as a possibility, but people could talk about other numbers aswell. We meet in two weeks; whether that kind of adjustment will holdus until then I do not know. It all depends upon what happens to thedata, what happens to reserves, and what happens to interest ratesduring that period. We could have a little more leeway if we moved itdown to 10 percent, which is still consistent more or less with thepresent level of market rates for instruments other than federalfunds. But that presumably would also be consistent withfurther declines in those rates. It would give us more opportunity tobe sure that the reserve base was performing the way it's supposed toperform. But that's a matter of choice. I think we have to make somereduction, and it's a question of how much. I will stop right there.MR. MAYO. Bob Mayo here, Paul. Just to put it on the table5/6/80I move that we go to a 10 to 17 percent tolerance range [for the fundsrate]. That's 3 perentage points off on both ends. The symmetry withremoving the 3 percent surcharge is purely coincidental. But I thinkthat would give us the flexibility we need.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Other comments?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, this is Tony Solomon. I thinkwe ought to move the funds rate as gradually as we feel we can. Eventhough I feel that we will end up with 11 percent, I would hope thatwe could operate for the next week or so at slightly above 11 percent.So I would like to recommend that we put the floor at 11 percent. Idon't have any strong feeling on the ceiling.MR. BALLES. Paul, this is John Balles. I would go alongwith moving the floor down to 11 percent; I think we have to take[whatever steps] we have to take to get the money supply turnedaround. But, having said that, I do want to convey to you the strongfeeling that was expressed to me over the past week when I met withseveral members of our board of directors. I've written you a letter,which probably hasn't landed on your desk yet, hoping and urging thatyou would find an appropriate occasion to make a strong publicstatement as to why we have not resisted this decline of interestrates. [I'd urge you to say] that it does not mean we're [abandoningour] anti-inflation fight and to explain that it's to head off theunexpected and undesired absolute shrinking of the money supply. Inshort, these directors feel that there's a great danger of a broad-based public misunderstanding of what we're up to that may beinterpreted as an easing of our anti-inflation policy and may resultin some bad effects on inflation psychology.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm aware of that [risk]. We've beenpretty lucky in escaping it so far. I think we've fairly largelyescaped it. I do not have a lot of time, so I hope the comments canbe kept fairly brief. Maybe we could hear from the members first.MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I would supportmoving [the lower limit] to 10 percent. I think 11 percent is alittle tight, even for the [short] interval because the commercialpaper rate is already below 11 percent. So if we have to catch upwith the rest of the money market structure, it seems to me that 10percent is consistent with the rest of the market.MR. GUFFEY. Paul, Roger Guffey. I would reluctantly accept11 percent but would be happier with 12 percent. I would hope thatthe move down would be very cautious and that [we] will catch up withthe market someplace around [that] level.MS. TEETERS. Funds are already trading at around 12 percent,aren't they, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Peter may wish to speak to where the funds rateis this morning. Yesterday it averaged 12-1/4 percent. I think it'saround there this morning.MR. STERNLIGHT. The last I heard it was 11-7/8 percent. Themarket is really waiting to see what actions the Desk might takebecause there is a sense of reserves being available today.5/6/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have to take any action the rest ofthis week?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it depends on the Committee'sdecision, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it depended upon the reservebase.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, compared with our interim nonborrowedreserves objective, we're looking at a need to take out something like$500 to $700 million. But one might say that there isn't a great needto take that out, given how far below we're running on total reserves,as Steve has outlined.MS. TEETERS. If you left the $500 to $700 million in, whatwould happen, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. The funds rate presumably would soften, downto whatever lower bound the Committee agrees on.MS. TEETERS. All the way to 10 percent?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it could, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not talking about a lower bound thatis necessarily binding every day. Who else has a comment? I'll justgo down the list. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I don't think it makes a great deal of differencewhether we lower it to 11 or 10 percent. I would go along witheither. It's a matter of [what level] we expect the funds rate toreach if we continue to follow our objectives. So, either 11 or 10percent [is acceptable to me]; I don't think it makes much differenceat this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos. Is there no Mr. Roos?SPEAKER(?). He's coming in a second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, given what appears to be extreme weaknessin the economy, I would favor 10 percent. I had been afraid thatperhaps we could get some surge in either the economy or the moneysupply but the chances of that at this point seem slim or none. So, Iwould agree with Frank Morris that we ought to go down to 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I suppose I'd go to 10 percent if the market isas weak as it sounds. If we settle on 11 percent, I think we will beback here pretty quickly, probably before the end of the week orcertainly the early part of next week. We might as well giveourselves the leeway and let the market sort of find its own level atthis point. So, I would favor going to 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.5/6/80MR. WALLICH. I think we're in danger of making a greatmistake. The real policy action is on interest rates, not on themoney supply. Whatever happens to the money supply over a period of amonth has next to no effect on the economy. But these interest rates--not only internationally but domestically--convey an impression of adrastic shift in policy and create expectations that we're all forinflation as soon as we work out of this difficulty. So, I'd stickwith 13 percent.MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos. I would strongly recommendthe 10 percent figure. I think we've got to be willing to letinterest rates move fairly freely, both upward and downward. And 10percent would be my position.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do others want to make a quick comment?MR. BAUGHMAN. I would prefer the 10 percent.MR. WINN. In Cleveland we would prefer the 10 percent, too;we need the flexibility.MR. BLACK. Same in Richmond.MR. EASTBURN. Philadelphia would go with 10 percent, and Isecond John Balles' views [regarding a public statement by you].MR. WILLES. Minneapolis prefers 10 percent.MR. FORRESTAL. Atlanta prefers the higher number, but we'dbe willing to go with 10 percent. However, we still think, as doesGovernor Wallich, that inflation is the major problem and that twomonths of decline in the money supply should not cause us tooverreact. So, I would prefer a number higher than 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously have a somewhat splitview. Does anybody have any further comments?MR. MAYO. My support of 10 percent, Mr. Chairman, is reallyto give the Desk the flexibility that I think it badly needs. I'm notsaying that we ought to go to 10 percent; we should do what comesnaturally in terms of the way the market responds. But I see noparticular point to moving [the lower limit] to 11 percent and thenhaving to come back in another week or so and move it to 10 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I really feel that it's not aquestion of catching up with the market. Whatever action we take willinfluence the market. We have to be perceived as moving fairlygradually and prudently. And I would hope that everybody feels aswell that we want to retain the perception that the Fed is notchanging its policy [of fighting inflation]. So it's really importantto show a sense of prudence and gradualism in this [so as] not toprecipitate further sharp declines in the market rates by peopleseeing us move so abruptly to a level as low as 10 percent. I wouldhope we would move down to 12 or 11-1/2 percent in the next week or soand maybe stay there for a week, and then move to 11 percent ifnecessary.5/6/80MR. ROOS. There are [several] points I would like to make.First of all, we have announced that the foundation of our policy isto permit money to grow at 5.5 percent. Secondly, we have announcedthat we have abandoned the policy of attempting to stabilize interestrates. And thirdly, I think we recognize that the most importantobjective of the Federal Reserve today is to restore credibility inour willingness and our ability to stick with a long-range policy andnot change course the minute any short-term phenomenon occurs. So inaddition to what Tony Solomon said [regarding] our objectives, I thinkthe most important objective is consistency and re-establishing ourcredibility. And I know of no way to destroy that credibility morequickly than to start dancing back toward the stabilization ofinterest rates, after you and all the rest of us have said that we'reno longer targeting on the fed funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think there is some question as tohow credibility gets defined in these circumstances, which I supposeis what the argument is about. In my mind, the one thing that bearsupon this a little is that whatever we decide is going to be publishedfairly quickly. I don't know what way that cuts, but it leads me tobe a little more conservative than I would otherwise be. And thatlends some support to the 11 percent number. On the other hand, Idon't like the idea of just going to 11 percent and sitting there on afloor for too long, because I think it might be inconsistent--thoughwe don't know what the money supply figures will be--in getting [moneygrowth] turned around. So I'm left in a bit of dilemma. But we canalways meet again. And if it makes [Committee members] more happy orif we maximize the satisfaction and minimize the risk by taking aninterim step to 11 percent, recognizing that we may have to come backnext week, that's okay with me, too.MS. TEETERS. You know, Paul, I'm a little disturbed by thefact that when [the funds rate was] going up nobody was concernedabout the speed at which it went up. It ratcheted up over a period ofabout six weeks. And if we are really going to follow this policy,then we're going to have to let the market determine how rapidly itcomes down. It seems to me we should give ourselves some leeway andif we're wrong, the market will turn the rates around and they will goback up again.MR. SCHULTZ. I would hate to see that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may be in a situation where literallyin order to get the [money supply] turned around [the funds rate] hasto go very low and then go right up again, which bothers some people,including me. But I don't know how to avoid that either. If we wereonly talking about the funds rate, it would be one thing. But we'retalking about dragging the whole structure [of interest rates],probably.MS. TEETERS. Well, with the prime rate at 17-1/2 percent, itdoesn't bother me very much to drag it down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That I don't think there'd be any argumentwith. Well, the choice is between 10 and 11 percent, I think; and Idon't know that anybody wants to change his or her mind basically. Itcomes out with a slight majority for 10 percent, I think. Well,maybe--5/6/80MS. TEETERS. Could we settle for 10-1/2?MR. ALTMANN. Six [members indicated their acceptance of 10percent].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four.... I don't knowhow you get six.MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I wouldn't objectto adopting 11 percent, with the proviso that we have another meetinga week from today. I just don't think that 11 percent is going to doit. But if you want to proceed on that basis, that would beacceptable to me.MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos. I feel that setting up ameeting a week from now could be bad practice, if we were to toleratea further withdrawal of reserves. Our big problem right now is thatthe aggregates are undershooting our targets. If, for example, forfour or five days the Desk had to withdraw reserves in order to keepthe funds rate at 11 percent, that would further exacerbate ourundershooting problems. And I think we'd end up being accused ofhaving once again been procyclical in making the prospects for arecession even more real.MR. SCHULTZ. Prospects? It's here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds to me as if maybe we ought to do10-1/2 percent.MR. RICE. I really don't think it makes any difference.MS. TEETERS. We're in a range where it doesn't make anydifference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's vote on 10-1/2 percent.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesPresident Guffey NoPresident Mayo YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesPresident Solomon NoGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you get everybody? Did you get Mr.Mayo?MR. ALTMANN. I got Mr. Mayo. There were seven votes for andthree against. We only had ten [voting members present].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, I guess we're settled. Thank you.MR. BALLES. Paul, would this be an appropriate time to spenda few minutes on the discount rate?5/6/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't have a few minutes. Iassume that we're going to remove the surcharge very promptly.MR. MAYO. The Chicago board has just approved that.MR. ROOS. So has St. Louis.MR. GUFFEY. I would hope that the Board of Governors wouldwait until the end of the week to announce it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have to decide that today, butI don't know quite why you say that.MR. GUFFEY. Well, because some of us have meetings [of ourboards of directors] on Thursday and would prefer that this not appearto the market to be an unusual action by the Board of Governors or therespective Banks.MR. BAUGHMAN. We just had a special meeting to approve this.We had a special meeting on the presumption that it would be announcedpromptly; otherwise, we would have waited until Thursday.MR. MAYO. Same way with Chicago.MR. EASTBURN. Same for Philadelphia.MR. ROOS. Same for St. Louis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll be considering that today.MR. SCHULTZ. I have one other comment. I would hope thateverybody out there is doing some hard thinking about how and howquickly we can get rid of these credit controls.MR. BLACK. Yesterday!MR. EASTBURN. Philadelphia votes yes.MR. MAYO. Keep the money markets mutual funds control on alittle longer.MR. GUFFEY. Let's declare a victory and withdraw.MR. WALLICH. I would agree with that.MR. BALLES. If we go down to 10-1/2 percent on the fundsrate, that's going to make the basic discount rate a real penalty.SPEAKER(?). Yes, we'll consider that Thursday.MR. SCHULTZ. Okay. Thank you very much.END OF MEETING