FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEECONFERENCE CALLJune 5, 1980PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMr. SolomonMs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Balles and Baughman, Alternate Members of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Axilrod, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline,Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board ofGovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Doyle, Gainor, Monhollon, and Smoot, First Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Chicago, Minneapolis, Richmond, and Philadelphiarespectively-2-Messrs. Corrigan, Fousek, Kantnor, Keran, Parthemos, and T. Davis, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, New York, Atlanta, SanFrancisco, Richmond, and Kansas City respectivelyMr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMessrs. Broaddus, Cacy, Cox, Mullineaux, and Ms. Nichols, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Kansas City, Atlanta, Philadelphia,and Chicago respectivelyMr. Miller, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of MinneapolisTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofJune 5, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't seem to have all the Banks on theline but why don't we proceed. I think we can have a rather briefmeeting. I wanted to touch base before I go off to China and also wecertainly are running into our checkpoint constraint [for the federalfunds rate] if not the other constraint. Perhaps Mr. Axilrod can justfill you in on the situation.MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, the latest deposit numberswe have that we'll be publishing tomorrow--and of course these canrevise even in the next 24 hours--indicate a drop in M1 for the weekof May 28th. Whereas on the basis of preliminary numbers we had beenexpecting an increase of $1.2 billion, the drop in M1 in the week ofthe 28th could be on the order of $600 million. And the early data wehave for June suggest that M1 is at a lower level than we had beenexpecting when we built the path. Thus we have a situation where atthe moment our best estimate for M-1A growth in May is around 3percent and for M-1B growth it's closer to 1 percent. M2 is stillholding up rather strongly because of the great strength in moneymarket funds and we have its growth in May at 8-1/2 percent. Ourestimates for June are all for more rapid growth rates based on ourcontinued expecations of a rebound. But the two months together wouldbe at a slower growth rate than the minimum growth that the Committeewas contemplating at the last Committee meeting.That means in effect, without going into the details of thepath, that in the current week and in the next week--taking thoseweeks as the remaining part of an initial four-week period--borrowingwould probably drop to zero. While it should need to be around zero,that is virtually unattainable because someone is bound to borrow fromus. And in adhering to the original nonborrowed path, excess reserveswould probably move up above the $250 million minimum to between $250and $275 million. So under those conditions we would be confrontedprobably with a drop in the funds rate from recent trading levels.The only other point I might add, Mr. Chairman, is that the roughestimates we have for May for bank credit show continued substantialweakness in that measure, with probably a further negative in totalloans and investments. So in those categories, total loans andbusiness loans, the outstanding amounts also would be dropping.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have a general picture[of weakness]. Contrary to the weekly estimates we seem to get earlyevery week continued weakness in the M1 categories and in bank credit.M2 and M3 look more like they're returning to target but largelybecause of money market funds rather than any really rapid growth ineither deposits at the thrift institutions or the time deposits ofbanks. Although they should be improving they have not improveddramatically in the latest figures we have, despite the [market] ratedeclines. Everything that Steve says points to a drop in the federalfunds rate, but in fact the federal funds rate so far has been more orless comfortably, in terms of our checkpoint, above the 9-1/2 percentlevel. But it surely looks as if it will go through that. I don'tknow whether at this stage our account managers in New York haveanything to say.MR. STERNLIGHT. I didn't hear your question, Mr. Chairman.6/5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you have to say?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I agree with Steve that on the path heoutlined we are likely to be encountering that lower bound of thefunds rate. I think it has been somewhat fortuitous that in thelatest week the average rate moved up to about 10-3/4 percent from the9-1/2 percent of the previous week. In meeting this week's reserveneed I think we are likely to find that 9-1/2 percent checkpointconstraining. And it could inhibit our meeting the Committee'sreserve path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does our foreign manager have to say?Our foreign manager isn't there?MR. PARDEE. I'm here. There was some pressure on the dollarjust after the last FOMC meeting and we did have to intervene, and inbigger amounts than we had before. But the market has quieted downsince then, given some good coordination between us and the Bundesbankin our intervention. And the firming of the domestic rates andEuromarket rates particularly helped. The market is currently quietbut very, very uneasy. I think we've been lucky that there's a lot ofselling of U.S. dollars out there but money is going into the Swiss[franc], the Japanese yen, and the pound sterling rather than into themark. So people have not been interpreting it as a general weaknessfor the dollar. However, we do have an ominous rise in the goldprice--it touched $600 this afternoon in the [Comex] and the silvermarket prices are still creeping up. Whether or not we're gettingmore speculative influence creeping in the markets, I don't know.MS. TEETERS. What is the reason, do you think, that the goldprice is going up?MR. PARDEE. I haven't found a satisfactory answer fromanybody. It broke out of a trading range. People are worried aboutthe oil price that will come out of the OPEC meeting. There are anumber of things in the Middle East that are bothering people as wellas these general fears of inflation that still haven't been killedcompletely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When is the OPEC meeting?MR. TRUMAN. Monday.MR. PARDEE. It's supposed to be next week. I don't know ifthe date--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Monday, Mr. Truman says. Well, I suspectwe are in a difficult area in the exchange markets, [with a]psychological reflection of the same factors in the gold market andelsewhere. Ordinarily I would think that we wouldn't necessarily needthis consultation today, but I'm not going to be here [for a period oftime] and all the present indications point in the direction ofslippage, at least in the M1 targets, from where we were. Bank creditis weak, as Steve said, and all the paths certainly look like theywill threaten and conflict with a 9-1/2 percent funds rate, ourcheckpoint. This doesn't take any vote, but I would suggest that wetake this as that checkpoint and pass [through] it if the marketdevelops that way.-3-6/5/80I would not propose at this stage that we anticipate the needfor dealing with the 8-1/2 percent [lower bound on the funds raterange]. We've been a fair amount away from that. I would visualizethat that could well become a constraint before too long and it willhave to be dealt with one way or another when it does. But I see noreason to prejudge that this afternoon. I would let it happen and myguess would be, unless we get a radical change here, that it's goingto happen before very long. But we can bump up against it for a fewdays anyway. I don't interpret these contraints as saying we have toavoid the rate falling below [the lower limit] on a particular day.The general understanding has been a weekly average kind of[constraint] and it has to be judged in part ex post rather thanconsidering the limits as an absolute constraint on day-to-dayoperations. So that would be my proposal. If anybody would like tocomment, I think it is timely to do so at the moment.MR. BALLES. I would certainly concur, Mr. Chairman.MR. MORRIS. I would, too.MR. WINN. I join the group.MR. ROOS. Yes.MR. MONHOLLAN. Yes.MR. DOYLE. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.MR. GAINOR. Yes.MR. BAUGHMAN. Yes.MR. SMOOT. Philadelphia agrees.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Has everybody outside of Washington beenheard from? I have a silent, surly looking group in Washington.Strike that adjective. It's not true. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I would like to postpone the time when we dropbelow our checkpoints as long as possible. I know that MiltonFriedman is tremendously excited about our failing to hit our targets,but I just can't follow him.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does postponing as long as possiblemean practically? We really haven't hit it yet, Henry. You're sayingdo what we would normally do except that if we run into the 9-1/2percent, let it stick there for a few days anyway?MR. WALLICH. Yes.MR. PARTEE. I don't agree with that. I think we ought tolet [the rate] fall. I didn't care much for the checkpoint in thefirst place, as you know. In fact I didn't care for the 8-1/2 percentlower limit either. So it's obvious that I feel we ought to continueto operate in a way to find a market level at which some borrowingoccurs again and at which there is some expansion in the narrow-4-6/5/80monetary aggregates. I'm not at all certain that we've seen anythinglike the total configuration of the decline in business that's inprocess. I haven't heard anything as yet of any stopping of thedecline, of any comeback in consumer spending, or of anything otherthan further cutbacks in production. Tomorrow morning we get anunemployment figure and employment figures in the BLS series. It willbe very interesting to see what they show. But I wouldn't expectimprovement in either employment or in the unemployment rate comparedwith last month's number. So I think we still ought to try to findthat level, which means going right through 9-1/2 percent if providingthe reserves would take us through 9-1/2 percent. I agree with Paulvery much that there's no need to make any decision on the 8-1/2percent at this point. We'll have to wait and see whether it's testedor not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. While I think of it, if anybody out thereat the other end of the telephone has any particular insight they wantto offer as to what's going on in the economy generally or whether yousee any revival of home building or anything of that sort, you may aswell take this opportunity to report it. I don't want to interruptwhat comments the Board members may want to make on this particularproposal at the moment, so let me ask who else wants to comment here?MS. TEETERS. I basically only have a question for Steve. Iscommercial paper [issuance] still rising? Are the corporationsturning to that market?MR. AXILROD. I don't have up-to-date figures with me, but ithas been rising. And of course corporate bond issues have beenextremely strong. So it [accounts for] a large part, but I don'tthink all, of the weakness in the business loan component of bankcredit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm informed that it has gone up $3billion since the 2nd of April.MR. AXILROD. Well, a large part, but not all of the weaknessin business loans probably represents refunding of short-term debtinto long-term debt and also continued use of the paper market wherethe rates are considerably lower than the prime rate. But I would sayan additional part of it represents the underlying weakness in theeconomy, the weakness in credit demands. And that's particularlyevident in the real estate area and probably the consumer area as wellas the business area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What happened to this loan demand that wassupposed to result from a decline in consumer spending leading to abuild-up in inventories which would lead to a temporary increase inborrowing? In other words, what is happening to inventories? Mr.Axilrod is looking at Mr. Kichline.MR. AXILROD. Desperately!MR. KICHLINE. Inventories seem to be rising, on the basis ofthe manufacturing data we have for April. I would only say that it'svery difficult to track [inventory] developments in one month withbusiness borrowing at banks in a given month. We do know thatbusiness borrowing in the first quarter substantially exceeded6/5/80external financing demands, so presumably some of the financing of thecorporate sector is being done internally with [the proceeds from] theheavy borrowing they had undertaken in the first quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're living off their fat in part, butyou said you think inventories are going up. Can you quantify theorder of [magnitude] of the rise compared to what we were getting? Isit very much faster or about the same rate of speed?MR. KICHLINE. It's a bit faster [than earlier] in book valueterms. The latest data we have is just for manufacturing in the monthof April. And manufacturers' book value inventories rose at about a$49 billion annual rate compared to a $40 to $41 billion average inthe first quarter. I might note that production dropped substantiallyin the month of April. And the limited but significant information wenow have available for the month of May suggests at least as large adecline, if not larger, in industrial output in that month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am concluding, rightly or wrongly fromwhat you say--concluding is too strong a word--that there may be someinventory buildup but it's not very great because production isdeclining very rapidly.MR. KICHLINE. That's correct. We have a faster pace ofaccumulation in our forecast but not a substantial pace and we wouldnot expect--given all the other borrowing, the first quarterperformance, etcetera--to see from the inventory side a substantialincrease in demand for business loans at banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's return to the specificsubject. What other comments do we have? Any other comments on theWashington end?MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I would associate myself withHenry Wallich. I think we are looking at a very steeply decliningeconomy. I don't think, however, that a further drop in interestrates is likely to be very helpful in turning the economy around. Ithink what we need is mainly a consolidation of declines in interestrates on things like mortgages and the prime rate to catch up withwhat has already happened to short-term market interest rates. And Iwould prefer not to be overly impressed with this drop in M1. Iremember that Steve in his presentation at the FOMC meeting indicatedthat some of that drop might well be a consequence of another downwardshift in the money demand function. So I would rather hang on to the9-1/2 percent consultation level for as long as we can.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's get a little more precise aboutwhere the aggregates are. I'm not talking so much about M1, which Iknow is way below the target, but it is correct that M2 and M3 havecome up into the target range in our present June estimates?MR. AXILROD. Yes. I don't have the precise number, but withthe June estimates for M2 the December-to-June growth rate would beabove 6-3/4 percent, probably on the order of 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's almost in the middle of the range,or a little below the middle of the range.-6-6/5/80MR. AXILROD. It's coming up into the target [range]. On M3we would have a December-to-June growth rate, if our projections areright, on the order of probably between 7 and 7-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The M3 growth is less than M2? No, I'msorry, it's [a little] higher. Now, both of those figures allow forquite a big increase in June as I recall.MR. AXILROD. Yes, though not so much for M3. Well, it is9.3 percent against our current estimate for May of 8.7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And M2 was over 10 percent?MR. AXILROD. For M2 we had an 11-1/2 percent estimate forJune, tracking the very high estimates for M-1A and M-1B also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What other comment do we have here?MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I would think that whether we gothrough the 9-1/2 percent depends on what happens over the next twoweeks. If we continue to get very low rates of growth and we don'trealize these June money targets, then it seems to me we should slidethrough the 9-1/2 percent and down to the 8-1/2 percent. On the otherhand, these numbers have been so unbelievably volatile between thefirst estimate and the second estimate that I think this is one ofthose cases where we need to feel our way along. If the numberscontinue to come in weak, then we go through the 9-1/2; if the levelsprojected for June begin to be realized, then we more or less keep[the funds rate] in the 9-1/2 percent area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you basically joining Henry and Lyle?MS. TEETERS. Well, I think I'm halfway in between.Depending on how things develop, we go through the 9-1/2 percent. Andif it looks as if the economy is turning down as rapidly as we thinkit is, we'll reach [the 8-1/2 percent lower limit].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any case, we're not saying in ourinitial comments that we aim below 9-1/2 percent; we're just assumingthat the path will bring us there.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I think both Mr. Sternlight and Ihave the feeling that if an effort is made to provide the reserves tohit this literal nonborrowed reserve number, the funds rate will droprather soon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think we want to be clear on thatpoint though. We're just dealing with a contingency here which Mr.Axilrod and Mr. Sternlight think is a highly probable contingency.But nobody is arguing--at least the question was not posed this way--that we deliberately aim below 9-1/2 percent. It was just a matter ofa fallout from the other operating procedures. The opposing view isthat if that contingency arises, the checkpoint is held for a few daysor longer. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, my views were well expressed by GovernorPartee. I don't believe that we should become excessively alarmed ifthe funds rate, in the normal course of events, falls below the 9-1/26/5/80percent level. But I also agree with others that we don't need todecide anything today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you say something, Governor Schultz?MR. SCHULTZ. No, and I don't have anything special to say.I think we're talking about contingencies and we'll move down through9-1/2 percent if we have to. If things are very weak and we begin tobump against the 8-1/2 percent, we'll look at it on a weekly basis.But we will not push it down; we'll just respond and do what we haveto do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just wondering where this leaves us.We do have some voices of caution and I'm wondering how best toincorporate perhaps a little more caution than was implied in what Imay have stated initially.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The market has seen the Desk enterearlier at 8-3/4 percent. It has seen the Desk enter at 9 percent. Ithink there's a general impression in the market that that's the areaof our floor but it's an impression of a fairly wide range in terms ofthe floor. It seems to me, even though I've been rather strong in myarguments against precipitous declines, that it's perfectlycomfortable to let the floor stay in an area that would be somewherein the present range. I think the 9-1/2 percent would be interpreted--if the market were to see us entering at that rate in a consistentway--as being somewhat higher actually than it believes [the floor] tobe. So I don't have that much difficulty living with your earlierproposal that if necessary we come down to the 8-1/2 percent level.But if there is more support for a more cautious approach among othermembers of the Committee than there has been in the past, then wemight suggest to the Desk that it continue basically operating in thisrange around 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the substance of thisproblem--MR. ROOS. I feel strongly that our greatest danger currentlywould lie in draining reserves at a time when the aggregates arealready on the weak side. If anything were done to drain reservesfurther, I think we would merely be accentuating the recessionaryinfluences that exist. I thought we agreed a few minutes ago--and Ithought we agreed in our last call--that we were going to set 8-1/2percent as the bottom limit. To equivocate and not to let the fedfunds rate fall through the 9-1/2 or 9 percent level, if it wouldnormally do that, I think merely creates additional problems for us.Fundamentally, if we're going to be hanged, I think we're going to behanged for letting the aggregates weaken as a result of our efforts todrain reserves when we started seeing interest rates and the federalfunds rate dropping. I think that's the fundamental issue. And Ifeel very strongly that we should stay with our 8-1/2 percent flooruntil rates get there.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Larry, are you aware of the fact thatwe are hitting our reserve path?MR. ROOS. I'm not really clear on the reserve path. I don'thave the--6/5/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have been hitting our reservepath. But the economy is somewhat weaker and the monetary aggregatesare not performing in relation to that reserve path as we had assumed[they would] at the last Open Market Committee meeting.MR. ROOS. Well, maybe the reserve path is the wrong reservepath. From all I hear the aggregates are undershooting our targets.The problem is even a little perverse as we see it now. And if we endup not achieving our objectives in terms of the aggregates, I think avery good case can be made that the Federal Reserve has exacerbatedthe present recession, as it has many times in the past, by trying toinhibit the normal movement of the fed funds rate.MR. MONHOLLAN. We would like to echo the sentiments of Mr.Roos.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the substantive problem we havehere is that nobody much cares about what happens to interest rates ifthat didn't affect some other things--like the exchange markets orinflationary sentiment--and cast doubts about our intentions and allthe rest. If I were sitting here alone--it's a little more difficultwhen you're in a committee--I would say this: We've got an 8-1/2percent floor and if we begin approaching that in the midst of greatconcern in the exchange market and the declining dollar, I'd be alittle more cautious under those conditions than if we approached itwithout that. Now, I don't know how to translate that [into preciseoperating instructions]. We don't have to write a directive here, butI'm perfectly willing to be left with a basic decision that 9-1/2percent is not the floor we have in the sense of a floor. We do havean 8-1/2 percent floor in the interpretation that we gave earlier.There is a certain cautious note that a number of people have struckwhich should be reinforced tactically depending upon what was going on[elsewhere], let's say in the exchange market. In other words, if wecan get by with it, I'd go right to 8-1/2 percent--we're talkingpurely about contingencies here--if that's where the path brought us.I might be a little more cautious in precisely when I time myoperations if it were a bad day in the exchange markets or whatever.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's a fair statement.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we can leave it that way.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's a good idea.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there's some kind of understanding,which leaves some discretion with the Manager, I think that's broadlyconsistent with what I said initially. His day-to-day tactics may beaffected. We give him some room for [judgment in] day-to-day tacticsif disturbances are arising or imminent elsewhere that [ouroperations] could perhaps calm down. And that could benefit us in thelong run, given that there is some concern on the Committee about [thedeline in rates] being too precipitous--in going below 9-1/2 percentanyway.MR. MORRIS. Paul, were you thinking of just a generalslippage as a constraint or are you thinking of a really disorderlymassive move in the markets?6/5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm not thinking of massive disorder.If we really had massive disorder, we would have to reconsider this.I'm thinking of a pronounced movement that seems to be requiring a lotof intervention--that we have an atmosphere in the market that seemsto be cumulating or threatens to cumulate. On the other hand, if thedollar is strong, who cares if the rate goes to 8-1/2 percent? I'mjust talking about this as a day-to-day tactical [consideration] butnot a floor--specifically removing the floor at 9-1/2 percent to theextent that there is a floor there now. But if we had a day, assometimes happens early in the week--if it happened on a Wednesday itwouldn't be bothersome--when the federal funds rate seemed to besettling at 8-1/2 percent or below, and as I said earlier we'retalking about weekly averages, I think maybe I'd step in on that dayif the exchange market happened to be weak on that same day. I woulddo that so as not to give rise to an impression in the market that thefederal funds rate could go to a wholly new level on that particularday. That requires a little fine-tuning if the exchange markets arein fact under pressure. If they are not under pressure, it doesn'trequire any. I see some nodding of heads in Washington and I thinkthis is broadly consistent, but somewhat more cautious in at least onecontingency, than the flat proposal I made earlier. If that issatisfactory, I think we can stop for today. We may need anotherconsultation in a week or so depending upon how this develops. We mayeven need a decision. We won't need a decision unless we're at 8-1/2percent, but if we are that question will arise.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We here in New York feel that thatkind of strategy makes a lot of sense. If you have nodding heads onthe Washington side, I think we ought to go with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if I don't hear widespread objectionwe will leave it at that. We have consulted.Before you get away, does anybody have anything useful to sayon the business scene or on anything they're picking up in theirDistricts? I'm not interested in doing a mechanical go-around, but ifanybody has some insight that they would like to offer, please do so.MR. WINN. Paul, the steel industry is very much in a stateof panic. They are really hitting an air pocket in their business.MR. BAUGHMAN. I don't know how useful the observations fromdown here are, but I do hear reports that houses are moving again andI think the references are primarily about used houses. Ourdepartment store sales figures are showing increases over a year ago,after running several weeks with no change from a year ago. We havequestioned the banks on loan demands, and they continue very weak.SPEAKER(?). Texas is not useful!MR. BALLES. On the West Coast the housing industry is stillvery much in the doldrums. Some possible revival remains a hope andan expectation rather than a fact because mortgage rates haven't comedown enough yet to really do the job.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where would you say mortgage rates are nowin California?-10-6/5/80MR. BALLES. Probably at the 12 percent level, or 12-1/4.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nobody wants to borrow at 12 percent?MR. BALLES. Not very much.MR. WINN. Not when your neighbors are out of work, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's in Ohio, not in California, Willis!Anything else?SPEAKER(?). The discount rate is still pretty badly out ofline with the federal funds rate. Our Bank for one has sent in arecommendation on that today and it's for moving down another point.I think we're going to have to come to grips with that problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that will be a continuing problem, Isuspect. If we do a point [change], it will still be out of line, sowe've got lots of room. If there are no other comments, I thank you.SPEAKER(?). Have a good trip, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you.END OF SESSION-11-