Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 12, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee washeld in the offices of the Board of Governors of the FederalReserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 12,1980, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMr. SolomonMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo,Alternate Members of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMessrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Minneapolis, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Holmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin,Henry, Keir, Kichline, and Zeisel,Associate EconomistsMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for DomesticOperations, System Open Market Account8/12/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board ofGovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Boardof GovernorsMessrs. Gemmill and Siegman, AssociateDirectors, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Czerwinski and Doyle, First VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofKansas City and Chicago, respectivelyMessrs. Boehne, Brandt, Burns, Eisenmenger,and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,Atlanta, Dallas, Boston, and Chicago,respectivelyMessrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, Cacy, Danforth,and Ms. Nichols, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco,Richmond, Kansas City, Minneapolis, andChicago, respectivelyMr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 12, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's come to order. We have two newfaces at the table today. Another way to put it is that we have onenew face and one old face in a new guise. I want to welcome Mr. Fordand Mr. Corrigan. You have great privileges as new members. You mayspeak first, last, or in the middle when it comes to delivering somecogent comments on what we should be doing. I'll give you a littletime to think about that. We do welcome you around the table.I would like to mention and emphasize a matter on which Isent you a note. We had a leak about the aggregates [targets] for theyear after our telephone consultation, which disturbed me. Whatdisturbed me was not just the substance of it--though I don't think itwould be considered the most damaging leak in the world in terms ofthe market [effect]--but that it could happen at all. I'm notsuggesting at all that the only place a leak can come from is aReserve Bank, but in this particular case the reporter identified [theinformation] as having come from a Reserve Bank or Reserve Banks. Isuppose it might have come from Washington in other circumstances.Wherever it came from, there is nothing more corroding of theconfidence with which we sit around the table or in a telephoneconference and discuss [policy] than the fear that somehow there isgoing to be a leak of what is discussed. I just cannot operate inthat way. I know of only one way to deal with this lack ofconfidence, which I don't want to have, and that is to diminish anddiminish and diminish the [attendance at] meetings so nobody is herebut the people who actually have to be. At least then we would haveidentified [the source of any leak] down to a smaller group. I don'tthink anybody wants to go in that direction, but that is one of theprices of having this kind of leak. I don't know where it came from,and I don't care where it come from in this particular incidence, butI do care about the matter in general. If you haven't already doneso, I would urge you to take whatever [measures necessary to convey]the message in your own way within your own institutions to give usthe best assurance we can have that this doesn't happen again. We aregoing to end up not talking very freely if it does. Enough of that.One other thing I would mention is the meeting schedule for1981. I don't want your reactions at the moment but perhaps we cantake that up at the next meeting and you can convey any reactions youhave before that. You will recall that I raised the question somemonths ago--assuming we continue with the reserve targetingprocedures--of whether the logic somehow suggested that we should havea meeting near the beginning of a quarter. We are compelled to dothings according to the calendar: annually, quarterly, monthly, orwhatever. Given that what we have been doing is setting the targetfor every quarter, the logic seems to suggest that it would beconvenient to have a meeting near the beginning of the quarter or theend of the previous quarter. Then perhaps a reasonable checkpointwould be somewhere around the middle of the quarter. Doing that wouldmean intervals of six or seven weeks between meetings, typically,which is a little longer than what we have had in recent years. Thisyear we are scheduled to have ten meetings. I would be perfectlyhappy to have more telephone updates between meetings if that seemeddesirable--if it seems like a long time between meetings. But itstill seems to me a rather attractive way of proceeding, assuming8/12/80we're on this kind of targeting. I'd like to get your reactions to itat or before the next meeting and then we can set some dates so peoplecan get them on their calendars, however we're going to [proceed]. Ican send out some tentative dates after this meeting, just so we havesomething concrete to look at. But the general concept is moreimportant than the particular dates at this point. I think thatcovers all the extraneous business.We need to approve more than one set of minutes. I take itthere was a lapse in approving the minutes of a couple of telephoneconferences, Mr. Secretary.MR. ALTMANN. We need approval for the minutes of March 7 andMay 6 and for the regular July 9 meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. March 7th and May 6th got lost somehow.Were they telephone conferences?MR. ALTMANN. Yes, they were telephone conferences.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need a motion.SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we'll approve them.Mr. Pardee.MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is the Treasury behind in covering Swissfrancs and Carter bonds?MR. PARDEE. They are fully covered on the Carter notes. Thefrancs that we have accumulated recently have been put aside forpayment of interest on those notes. They [have] discussed a littlethe issue of accumulating additional francs. [They are leaning to theview] that if we don't want any more they will acquire them. But westill have very modest balances for the System.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions? Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Scott, you said that these countries would bequick to support their currencies. Do you see any indications thatthat attitude might change if they go more deeply into recession?MR. PARDEE. It could, but the question of financing theirdeficits is very important. And they want to maintain a strongcurrency so they can get the funds. There's a tremendous amount ofcompetition among the authorities to get OPEC funds at this point.Any slippage on your currency means that the money just isn't going tocome in your direction.MR. WALLICH. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody really wants fixed exchangerates?-2-8/12/80MR. PARDEE. No they want strong exchange rates rather thanfixed. In fact, a gently rising exchange rate is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given that everybody can't have that.Governor Rice.MR. RICE. You said that the market accepted the reduction ofthe discount rate as largely a technical adjustment. Does thatindicate to you that the market is becoming more sophisticated or wasit just a happy circumstance of timing?MR. PARDEE. Well, on that particular occasion, I talked toseveral people who tried to interpret it. As you recall, on thatFriday there were two other elements [involved]. One was that thefederal funds rate did ride up and the other was that a large increasein the aggregates was published later in the afternoon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. PARDEE. Several [market players] sent out letters orcables around the world from New York and other centers over theweekend trying to assess the implications. Those who said that therising federal funds rate and the aggregates were important wereright. And those who said that the Europeans were going to reactnegatively to the discount rate were wrong. They are verysophisticated but they can make mistakes, too. It's very hard tojudge which way to read it. I raised the question with some of oursenior people in the market as to whether the people who don'tunderstand the Federal Reserve are making money at the expense ofthose who do. I think the [answer] is that it's more haphazard:That, in effect, handing the decision of determining interest ratesover to the market on the domestic side is very much like the exchangemarket where we've turned to floating exchange rates. I had to scoldsome of the fellows a little in that they had been so pleased to havefloating exchange rates and they should be able to take advantage ofthe freer market for money. But they're very nervous about it. So ifsophistication is part of it, there's also a difference in the marketnow with these OPEC funds. The OPEC funds come right into theEurodollar market in overnight money. It's sitting there. Where isit going to go? It's not going to stay necessarily in overnightmoney. And the sensitivity to interest rates is much greater than wehave felt for some time. If the federal funds rate goes down, itmeans that the next day the Eurodollar rates will trail off in theEurodollar market, which means that the fellows in OPEC and others whoare moving money on that day will make a decision to put those fundsthat they are moving into marks or sterling or some [other currency]at that particular moment. If the federal funds rate is moving up atthat point, giving signals to the Euromarkets to firm a bit, then themoney will come our way. It's a very knife-edge sort of thing.There's much more volatility in the dollar exchange rate than we'vehad in other periods when not much was really going on.MR. ROOS. How is our national interest adversely affected ifthat night the OPEC people shift some of their money into sterling?Whom does this hurt?MR. PARDEE. It's not a question of hurting or helping atthis stage; it's just that there's more volatility.8/12/80MR. ROOS. Is that bad?MR. PARDEE. [It is] if all of a sudden we have a cumulativemovement that is triggered by it.MR. ROOS. Have we had such a--MR. PARDEE. No we haven't. We haven't had it this month andwe've been rather quick to operate. Of course, we're basicallyinterested in acquiring as many marks as we can to clear the decks forthe next problem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think to some extent we can takesome cheer from the fact that there is this much sensitivity tointerest rates. It really reflects a neutral view about the likelymovement of the dollar. The fact that we're running virtually inequilibrium this year and Germany and Japan have such large deficitsoffsets a traditional pessimism about the dollar. There is a neutralview and, therefore, we get very large movements of money in responseto very tiny differences in interest rates. If [market participants]still had the same pessimistic view of the dollar that they had overmost of the period in the last three years, then I don't think we'dsee this much sensitivity to interest rates. We'd see consistentpressure on the dollar.MR. PARTEE. The interest rate differential as reportedyesterday supports [that view]. It is 400 basis points more adverseto the United States than it was at the beginning and the exchangerate is the same. There is obviously a stronger undertone ofconfidence in the dollar than before, as you say.MS. TEETERS. There must have been surplus OPEC fundsfloating around in 1974-75. How long did it take for them to settledown or disappear from the market?MR. PARDEE. In that case the surplus did disappear over thecourse of the next two or three years. By 1977-78 there wasn't muchsurplus left.MS. TEETERS. Yes, but they must have had some investiblefunds that they didn't put some place permanently.MR. PARDEE. Yes, a lot of that came in directly into U.S.Treasury bills and so forth. At that time there wasn't quite so muchdiversification as there is now. Also, the other central banks andauthorities were not bidding so eagerly for the funds. Now the Germanfinance ministry is working very hard to get as many marks in aspossible. The Swiss have been very active, as have the Japanese. Ithas not been very open, but a lot of work is being done. And, ofcourse, the French have quietly opened all the doors and windows forpeople to invest in francs. In some ways that's healthy since theyare deficit countries and the money has to go some place, so it'sbetter to go in places where it's in strong hands. But there is adifference this time. The OPEC countries are not so automaticallyputting their funds in dollars and holding them there, particularly inopen ways such as in Treasury bills. And the others are pressing hardfor funds to come to their way.-4-8/12/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have some recommendations?MR. PARDEE. Simply some renewals. With the Bank of Francewe have one swap drawing for $26 million. We've been repaying ourmark swap debt but we have coming up in the next period some sevenswap drawings in the amount of $382 million. All of these are firstrenewals.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We do have to ratify transactions sincethe last meeting. If there are no objections to renewing the swaps,we will renew them if necessary.MR. PARDEE. If necessary.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can I have a motion to ratify?MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are ratified. Mr.Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Peter, to what extent have thesedealers who are under water hedged in the futures market when they mettheir underwriting responsibilities? Is it now fairly prevalent amongall of them to hedge their positions?MR. STERNLIGHT. It's more prevalent than it was. I don'thave fully up-to-date figures on that. I expect that they are reallylong and really hurting to some degree.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What lag is there on their reportingtheir positions in the futures market?MR. STERNLIGHT. It's about a week or two. We're onlygetting those futures positions twice a month now, so we're not quiteup-to-date on that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we changing that or--?MR. STERNLIGHT. We're implementing a whole new set of dealerreports. We began one schedule, which we've been getting for just amonth. Within the next few months we'll be getting a report that willhave the futures position daily, but we don't have that phased in yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I was wondering if we shouldn'ttalk a little about the way we respond to changes in the demand forexcess reserves in terms of the implementation of open market policy.It isn't just a matter of letting interest rates move up in responseto an increase in demand for excess reserves. If we do not treat thatas though it were a change in the multiplier and adjust the target for-5-8/12/80nonborrowed reserves accordingly, then we're implicitly changing bothour targets for growth of the monetary aggregates as well as the levelof interest rates we consider acceptable. We wouldn't do that if wethought this was going to be a change of [some] duration for, say, asix-month period. We'd obviously make some adjustments. And I wonderif we ought to think about the possibility of doing that in the shortrun, recognizing of course that we'll have to reverse that once itgoes the other way. I'm curious what your comments would be.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there is some adjustment. In fact, wemake modest technical adjustments in the path, which are worked outmostly by Ed Ettin and Steve Axilrod in consultation with the Desk.There was a modest adjustment allowing for the higher level of excessreserves, although it went up only a small extent of the way, in thereview that was conducted a few days ago. I think your point iscertainly a valid one. Nevertheless, I would note that in a sensethat [bulge] in excess reserves is not causing us to aim forsignificantly higher levels of borrowed reserves currently because atthe same time the banks have been wanting to hold a lot of excessreserves they also--irrationally, perhaps--have come in [to thediscount window] and done a fair amount of borrowing. So one couldargue that we should also have allowed for the reserves they got viathe borrowing route. But in the forward-looking part of our path wewere not deliberately forcing the banks to borrow much more than thatroughly $100 million level that had been the starting point forborrowings when the path was set up for this recent period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is that we can't do what youare suggesting, I don't think, in any particular week, and then thenext week assume [the relationship] is going to go back to normal.That has more or less been the behavior.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, usually we have assumed that a highexcess reserve week would be followed by a week in which excessreserves would be subnormal. But this time we figured that there mayhave been something unusual in the demand for excess, so ourassumption was that excess reserves would come back more or less tonormal rather than to subnormal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can make some kind of guess, whicheverway, in the following week. But we can't do anything in the actualweek when that big excess arises, I don't think.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we know what required reserves arebecause required reserves depend upon deposits for a prior period. Weknow what actual reserves are on a day-to-day basis. So, asoperations are going on, we know what level of excess reserves isbuilding up and we would have to interpret this as an increase indemand for excess reserves. Then the question would be: Couldn't werespond to this with a recognition that we don't want to have changesin the demand for excess reserves affect either the growth rates forthe monetary aggregates or the level of interest rates? There wouldbe no real reason for doing so.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, at some other level, I could say thatin a way we did respond to that. In that last full week that had the$1 billion plus of excess reserves we were trying to take out theexcess, but we had no expectation that we were going to be able to8/12/80wring out all of it. To have wrung it all out probably would havesent the funds rate soaring. As it was, when we were taking out asmuch of the excess as we could, the funds rate was fairly easy ataround the 7 percent level.MR. PARTEE. I would emphasize that we do have the safetyvalve of the discount window. If something began to tighten themarket, we'd automatically tend to get an increase in borrowing.That's the reason why it's important to have the discount rate well intune with money rates. Fortunately it was changed just before [thissituation occurred], or I suppose the funds rate would have gone above11 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. I agree, but we wouldn't use that approach forleaving our target for nonborrowed reserves the same irrespective ofwhat happened to other factors affecting the multiplier. That's thesafety valve we always want there for any basic changes in demand formoney that come about.MR. PARTEE. I guess we'll let a week occur, Lyle, before wechange it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we could forecast that, I think you areright. But every week is different. In that particular week, thebanks went out and borrowed a large amount of money at the beginningof the week, which gave them the excess. But they had alreadyborrowed it and that's the point at which the federal funds rate wentup. And then it was too late.MR. GRAMLEY. My thought would be that we really don't haveto forecast excess reserves. What we want to do is to deal with thechange in demand for excess reserves as it occurs. And as it occurs,we can measure it.MR. BALLES. How would you do it, Lyle?MR. STERNLIGHT. You're only responding to the funds ratethen, aren't you, Governor?MR. GRAMLEY. You're responding to what you observe as thechange in demand for excess reserves on a day-to-day basis. You haveto be at least one day behind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the one day behind is the day thatscrews it up. The banks already did the borrowing, which made themarket tight.MR. BALLES. What specific things would you like to see done,Lyle?MR. GRAMLEY. My thought is that this is really like a changein the multiplier. It's a shift in the demand for excess reserveswhich we do not want to carry through to a change in the growth rateof the monetary aggregates or a change in the level of interest rates.So if we see excess reserves building up over the course of a week--tobe sure, we're always one day behind--we can make some allowance forit as the week goes on.8/12/80MR. BALLES. What would you do?MR. GRAMLEY. I don't have any answers off the top of myhead. But this seems to me something we ought to be exploring as apossibility.MR. ETTIN. The only thing I can add to this argument is thatthe daily pattern of excess reserves historically has been a very poorindicator of the excess reserves for the week. Sometimes there's abig buildup in excess early in the statement week and the average willbe far away from that because it will drop off later in the week.Sometimes it's the exact opposite, as the people taking care of thereserve position in individual institutions are making their ownpredictions of what the daily pattern in the funds rate will be. Asfor that [recent] period when the excess reserves were very large,there had been similar periods in the past of substantial excessreserves, say on Thursday and Friday, but they had disappeared by theend of the [statement] week. So, it's very difficult to predict.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we're going to resolve thishere but, as I remember that week, unbeknownst to us they borrowed awhole lot of money on Thursday. We [questioned why] they would borrowso much money on Thursday. We thought they were going to end up withbig excess reserves and we figured they would be reducing them [thenext day] presumably. Then they borrowed a lot over the weekend. Themarket remained tight. By that time they were locked into the excessreserves and most of them were left in. If the excess was going tocontinue the next week and we knew it, then I think you're perfectlyright. But I don't know how we can manage it within the week.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Ed's argument is a very persuasive one ifwhat has happened on a day-to-day basis in the reserve period up to aparticular point can in no way forecast what is going to happen overthe rest of the period or what the average for the whole week is[going to be]. That's a persuasive argument for not, in effect,chasing our tail.MR. WALLICH. I am concerned about the danger of chasing ourtail because if excess reserves go up and we say there is this demandfor reserves and we have to accommodate it and supply some more, thenexcess reserves might go up further. We would feel impelled toaccommodate that again. Isn't there a danger that we'll findourselves involved in supplying more reserves than are needed?MR. GRAMLEY. I think there would be if we didn't take themback out after the demand went down. That's only possible if in factwe can use what's happening over the first three days of the reserveperiod, let's say, as a reasonable approximation for what's likely tohappen over the period as a whole. What we need to look at isn't justwhat is going to happen in the last couple of days of the reserveperiod but what is going to happen over the period as whole. Maybe wecould take a look at this to see whether or not your hypothesis iscorrect. If it is, then my suggestion has no merit whatever.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll take a look at it.MR. MORRIS. Peter, with respect to the discount rate andyour job of managing the availability of reserves, how would you8/12/80describe the optimum relationship of the discount rate to the fundsrate under the new operating procedures?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think we'd like to have a band for thefederal funds rate a few percentage points wide so we have the mostflexibility. It depends at any particular point on approximately whatlevel of borrowings we're looking toward. In the recent period, whenthe objective was to have borrowings around the $100 million level,the relationships have made pretty good sense, with the discount rateat a point such that funds could vary from moderately below tosomething above the discount rate. [It helps] to have the discountrate somewhere well within that band where we would expect the fundsrate to be moving.MR. MORRIS. [Preferably] on the high side of the band ofyour expected level?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't know. Yes, if borrowing isgoing to average as low as $100 million, I would expect the funds ratewould more often fall below [the discount rate] than above. To picknumbers out, I'd say from 8-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent surrounding, in asomewhat lopsided way, a 10 percent discount rate.MR. MORRIS. Are you saying we should aim for a frictionallevel of borrowing--that that should be the norm?MR. STERNLIGHT. No, not for all time. I think it has madesense given the objectives that the Committee set out a month ago onwanting to achieve the aggregates that it specified.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me try to answer what I think you'regetting at. When we have a very low level of borrowings, frictionalor very close to frictional, it's natural and convenient to have thediscount rate above the federal funds rate, presumably not by toomuch. But if we have a sizable level of borrowing, which we don'thave [now], the federal funds rate will go above the discount rate.And there's not much we can do about it. That's the dilemma we're inbecause the banks won't borrow unless the funds rate is above thediscount rate. So we can't have a penalty [discount rate] under thosecircumstances. I may be exaggerating a bit, but if we try, it justkeeps ratcheting the rates up.MR. PARTEE. We make it move up?MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, we were disturbed, as perhaps Frankwas, that in the Bluebook for the first time there was a reference tothe relationship between the fed funds rate and the discount rate. Ithink it would be a mistake in policy, or at least in practice, if wecaused or inhibited the movement of interest rates for the purpose ofmaintaining some relationship between the fed funds rate and thediscount rate. That's a totally new concept, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you may be interpreting that theopposite of the way the staff meant you to interpret it. The idea isnot to manage the funds rate below the discount rate.MR. ROOS. It's to move--8/12/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just says that with a given level ofborrowings this is what we would expect the federal funds rate to be.And the higher borrowings are, the higher the federal funds rate willbe relative to the discount rate, wherever the level may be.MR. ROOS. Well, I must have misinterpreted that.MR. MORRIS. If I interpret you [correctly], Paul, whatyou're saying is that it really doesn't matter what the discount rateis, as long as the level of borrowing is predictable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think it does matter where thediscount rate is. All I am saying is a very simple thing. It's verydifficult or impossible in the short run to maintain a penaltydiscount rate when borrowings are sizable, given the way we doeverything else--the lagged reserve accounting and these paths and allthat. It's not hard to do, obviously, when the borrowings areminimal. But the problem that we had before--and that we may have nowto a slight degree--is that when the discount rate was way above thefederal funds rate and borrowings were in fact minimal, as soon asborrowings became appreciable the federal funds rate would jump way upto the discount rate. Whereas if the discount rate was lower, thediscount rate is somewhat of a drag on that process. That is the mainreason why some of us, at least, wanted to get the discount rate down.That way, as soon as we ran into any borrowing we wouldn't have toosharp a jump in the federal funds rate. During a period like we'vehad in the last three months, I would say it would have been veryconvenient to have a floating discount rate--to let the discount ratejust go down with federal funds rate--and avoid all these announcementeffects. But if we did that, what do we do when borrowings increaseand we begin putting a little pressure on the money market? Thediscount rate would go up very fast and maybe we wouldn't want itgoing up all that fast. We haven't got any brake on the increase inthe federal funds rates from a fairly low level of borrowings.MR. WALLICH. Unless we supply reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, unless we prevented the [rise in]borrowing, in which case we wouldn't be getting the restraint we'd belooking for. That's the dilemma that we have perceived. If we couldadopt a floating discount rate on the down side and an administrativeone on the up side, it would be all right. But I think we'd end upwith more confusion than we started with. We did have a problem onthe down side because we were afraid every time we moved [the discountrate] that we would be giving rise to more expectations than wewanted.MR. PARTEE. The trouble is that we would need to float thedifferential as well as the rate in some way so that we've got movesfrom above to below the funds rate. To put it another way--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have to have the flexibility tosend some kind of policy signal if our situation requires it. And ifwe were to have a completely symmetrical automatic relationship, we'dbe tying our own hands.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's another aspect.-10-8/12/80MR. SCHULTZ. That was exactly what happened to us this lasttime. We wanted to get the discount rate down but we were verynervous about the foreign exchange problem. [Unintelligible] policythat had to come to an end. Then we changed the path. Given thechange in the path, it became almost essential that we just go aheadand bite the bullet and lower the discount rate, which we did. Itjust so happened that we got lucky because at the same time the fedfunds rate was strengthening. But the real reason was to attempt tolower that gap because, given the change in the path, we needed to doit.MR. MORRIS. Back in the days when we were controlling thefunds rate, it didn't make much difference where the discount ratewas. But now I think it does.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it does, too.MR. MORRIS. I think we need a concept of what raterelationships make the most sense in terms of controlling the rate ofgrowth in bank reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what I am resisting--and thisconfusion arises all the time--is the concept that there is a raterelationship that makes sense on both sides of the cycle. I don'tthink there is. There may be a general concept [that makes sense]when there's practically no borrowing. Then I would think, ideally,we'd keep [the two rates] pretty close. Look at the other extremethat we were facing maybe a month or two ago: Suppose we reallyforced excess reserves on the system; the funds rate might have goneway way down if we had done that. I am not sure we would have wantedthe discount rate to go down to 5 percent, if that's where the fundsrate had been going for a few weeks. And there's the more generalconsideration that Tony mentioned. I don't see how we get out of thisbox with an automatic rate, although it would have been convenient fora period of a couple of months or weeks.MR. BAUGHMAN. It is implicit in your observations that thereis little or no reluctance to borrow in this equation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think implicit in what I am sayingis that there is a reluctance to borrow and that's why we can't keep apenalty rate on the way up.MR. BAUGHMAN. Is it also thought that the reluctance varieswith the level of borrowings?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether I'd put it that way.There is a reluctance. And the higher the level of borrowings, themore we have moved on the reluctance schedule, so the higher the fundsrate gets relative to the discount rate. The more reluctant borrowerswe have, the higher the federal funds rate will be relative to thediscount rate.MR. BAUGHMAN. It seems to me that if the reluctance toborrow increased with the level of borrowings, that would tend tomoderate the suggested inability to maintain a penalty rate whenborrowings are high.-11-8/12/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's still harder, if I understandyou correctly. I think we just move along a schedule of reluctance;we have more reluctant borrowers with a high level of borrowing. Thatmeans the federal funds rate will be more above the discount rate.MR. BALLES. I would like to ask Peter a question at thispoint. If we were to go along with the Banking Committee proposal totie the discount rate to market rates, how do you see that affectingyour ability to carry out the Committee's directive?MR. STERNLIGHT. It could have an effect on the way we tie ina level of borrowing in our path. I'm not sure I want to try toextemporize entirely on how it might impede our [operations]. Butinstinctively I feel it would call for some adjustment in the way wehave operated in the past with a borrowing level that tends to fallout as the differential [changes]. We have had borrowing levels thatrise because demands for required reserves exceed what we have allowedfor in the path. If we also had a discount rate that was going to bemoving up along with that, it could set in motion this kind ofratcheting process unless we made some adjustment.MR. WALLICH. Isn't it a technique [that resembles] a halfway[move] toward closing the window altogether? If the gap between thefunds rate and the discount rate--that is, the penalty-- were largeenough, clearly, nobody would borrow. And we would be operatingpurely on nonborrowed reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's quite clear what would happenif we didn't change our techniques, which might have some implicationsfor whether to change them. What would happen is that we would getmore volatility in the federal funds rate in the short run.MR. GRAMLEY. Is it necessary to think of tying the discountrate just to the federal funds rate? If one is worried about theratchet possibilities, another way to go is to tie it to some marketrate of interest or to a combination of market rates. If looked at inthat way, it would still be a penalty rate in some sense.MR. MAYO. But if we used the bill rate, Lyle, given whatbill rates have done, we would have a different problem on our hands.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I was thinking of tying it perhaps tosomething other than the bill rate--to a combination of bill rates andother things--precisely because the bill rate is so sensitive tothings like foreign demand and technical scarcities in the market.MR. MAYO. Well, the Canadians--MR. BALLES. One can also be judgmental rather than automaticin a formula. We could have a basket of rates but not reduce [therelationship] to a simple formula. We could vary the relation betweenthe basket and our rate if we wanted to go the tying route, I think.MS. TEETERS. I don't think that would get us out of theproblem we've been talking about because if we tied it to a longer-term rate it's going to switch from being a penalty rate to being asubsidy rate when the yield schedule inverts.-12-8/12/80MR. MAYO. We always used to show a three-way average rate toour directors, just as a point of contact, [using the rates on]finance paper, Treasury bills, and commercial paper--all fairly shortterm. We have had to abandon that recently. We give them the tablebut we don't talk about it because we think it's out of whack.MR. EASTBURN. If I remember right, Paul, after the change inprocedure last fall there was to be a paper written by the staff onthis whole question of the [funds] rate and the discount window.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I thought there was. Where do westand on all of this? We discussed this once before.MR. EASTBURN. I think the legislation came along andpreempted that to some extent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't remember how far we got on that.We did have a preliminary discussion about it at one point. Did youever circulate a paper?MR. ETTIN. No, not to my knowledge. There are some draftsof some of the papers, but President Eastburn is right: The resourceshave been diverted for work on the Monetary Control Act.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had forgotten that that had never beendone formally, and I think we ought to do it. Meanwhile, I have beenanswering Congressional and other inquiries along the lines that Ihave been expounding at this table. I don't think this situation istotally satisfactory, but I don't think the answer is just to[establish] an "automatic" discount rate for the reason that Isuggested and for Tony's reason--whatever weight one gives thatreason, which is something people have debated back and forth. Idon't think technically we have the [alternative of doing that]without changing other things. I think it would call for ratherprofound changes in path setting, or maybe in whether we open up thediscount window or close it, as Henry was suggesting.MR. EASTBURN. It's [further] complicated by the fact that wenow have the thrifts in the situation, which involves Home Loan Bankrates and so on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. With regard to the comment of what to peg it to:Should we go to a floating discount rate, my feeling--[given my priorexperience at a commercial] bank--would be in line with what Lylesaid. We should consider an alternative that no one here hasmentioned [yet], and that is tying it to something like the bank issuerate on CDs. From the point of view of the money desk manager of amajor bank--and those are the people we are dealing with--whether ornot the bank goes to the discount window obviously depends on itsalternative sources of funds. And in terms of maturity matchings,since borrowings through the discount window are not normallyovernight but rather are done on a more than overnight basis, I wouldsuggest that the staff in its analysis of this question look at thepossibility of applying it to the reserve adjusted CD rate for majorbanks on large quantities of money. That would make the movements inthe discount rate less volatile since a longer maturity [is involved]-13-8/12/80and would tie it to the alternative source of funds that money deskmanagers tend to consider. Also, we might consider having thediscount rate normally set close to that reserve adjusted cost--perhaps a little below it to give us some leverage--because then[money managers] would want to come in if we set our rate just alittle below, but the reluctance factor would sort of balance thatout. It would give us some leverage over them.MR. KEIR. I was just going to comment that we did have afootnote in that earlier study on the discount window, which sort ofreviewed the conclusions that come from these other papers we havebeen doing. The expectation is that those papers will be completed assoon as the staff gets through this other work that they are doing onthe discount window.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions of theDomestic Desk. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we discuss the economicsituation and outlook at this point. Mr. Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. One of the most interesting questions is whatis going to happen to housing because that may be a clue to how fastthe recovery will be. I think the situation with respect to interestrates and the availability of money cuts two ways. A lot of peopleout there are watching mortgage rates and are waiting to get into themarket if they think the bottom has definitely been reached.Therefore, if they see an upward movement in mortgage rates, thatcould induce some demand to become effective. On the other hand,there must be a lot of other people who will be discouraged asmortgage rates go up. Do you have any feeling about that, Jim?MR. KICHLINE. That has constituted a large debate in thepreparation of our forecast. I would say that in the very short runwe would expect the argument to hold that people will jump in. Thatis, if we are talking about a rise of just a few basis points, thosefolks who were out of the market in the second quarter but were on theverge of buying may in fact be prompted to move off the fence. Ingeneral, however, we believe the impact of tighter financialconditions--in the sense of rising mortgage rates throughout theforecast period, which is implicit in our forecast--would have asignificant damping effect. There are two other factors and one is[particularly relevant]. Our forecast implies slower rates ofincrease in deposits at thrift institutions than in previous cyclicalperiods when interest rates declined and stayed low. I might mentionanother factor, which is that the growth of real disposable income inour forecast is really very small--certainly much smaller than in pastcycles. And we expect that to act as a drag on generating effectivedemands for housing.MR. SCHULTZ. One other factor is the effect of actions bythe Federal Home Loan Bank Board. Monthly payments are the crucial[factor for most homebuyers]. If the FHLBB proposes that thrifts dropdownpayments from 20 to 10 percent and that [mortgage terms] go from30 to 40 years, that will considerably lower [the initial outlay and-14-8/12/80then] the monthly payments. What effect will that have on the wholepicture? That's another factor that probably will be important.MR. KICHLINE. Oh, I think that's right. That whole area ofalternative mortgage instruments is a positive feature, particularlyfor younger families. But past experience generally indicates thatthese [practices] grow fairly slowly, particularly in an environmentin which the institutions are rather risk averse, which they seem tobe. If one starts talking about going out 40 years instead of 30years, in a fixed-rate environment with today's inflation I think anumber of institutions will be fairly reluctant to move in thatdirection.MS. TEETERS. Jim, why don't you tell us what happens tointerest rates under the monetary assumptions we have? Where does themortgage rate go?MR. KICHLINE. For the third quarter we have the quarterlyaverage rate on conventional mortgages at around 12-1/4 percent, whichis where it is now, and it goes to the 13-1/4 to 13-1/2 percent areaby the latter part of 1981. So in effect, it's drifting up throughoutthis period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the main point of difference we hadwith the staff continues to be that we expect less inflation than theyhave been forecasting recently. The Greenbook analysis places almostall the emphasis on the supply side. It talks about the effect ofrising oil prices and food prices and unit labor costs causinginflation, but it really doesn't address this question of thecontinued deceleration we have had--and that we see prospectively--inthe money supply. Nor does it address the shift toward a greatersurplus in the high employment budget. We would place great weight onthis slowdown in the money supply and some also on that shift in thefiscal mix. This will represent about the third year of decelerationin the money supply if [it continues] next year. If anything wasright with that October 6 policy, somewhere along the way we are goingsee some effect on prices. And we think it will come sooner than thestaff does. It's easy to forget that the rate of increase in priceshad hovered at double digits before the last downturn and we got [it]down to 4-1/2 percent but we let the aggregates get away from us and[inflation] went back up. Most people don't remember that. We alsothink that if we are partly right on this, we will have less upwardpressure on interest rates than the staff expects, both because of theremoval of the inflationary premium on long rates and probably lessgrowth in nominal GNP and more growth in real GNP than the staff isprojecting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that the development PresidentBlack describes would imply either that there will be differentialwage movements--because we know the movement in the organized sectoris for fairly strong increases, the pressures would have to be in themuch larger [non-union] sector--or very severe pressures on corporateprofits. Is there any other place where a decline in interest rateswould work or where productivity would [lead to] a decline in prices?-15-8/12/80MR. PARTEE. Raw materials prices.MR. WALLICH. The dollar could rise.MR. MORRIS. The difference is that in 1974-75 we had aV-shaped recovery. For a short while we had very big gains inproductivity, which were reflected in a big decline in the inflationrate. If we don't get the V-shaped upturn, the rate of gain inproductivity is going to be a lot less; I guess that's the reason whyyou're pessimistic on prices, as I look at this chart.MR. KICHLINE. That's a principal reason. Unit labor costsin our view are going to be coming down, but precious little. We alsohave the social security [increase], I might add. That adds directlyto business costs beginning in January, and we assume that will bepassed through quite quickly. We have the food and energy situationadded on, and it's hard to be optimistic there. So overall, our viewis that our [inflation] forecast, given our GNP, is perhaps on the lowside of what many people might come out with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how you forecast interestrates but in the long-term area with your mortgage rate, your bondrate must be up in the neighborhood of 13 to 14 percent. That wouldbe an extraordinarily high interest rate compared to your priceindices at the end of next year. It would be the highest realinterest rate, in my memory anyway, for a long time. Any comment?MR. KICHLINE. I'll give you the answer you're looking forfirst, and that is that we forecast interest rates with greatdifficulty. It comes from a combination of the model exercise as wellas judgmental forecasting. And we take the monetary policy assumptionas given, which is 4-1/4 percent [M-1A growth] for 1981. Implicit inthat [assumption] is a substantial further downward shift in the moneydemand function. So in effective terms money is growing more rapidly.But simply to hold money growth to 4-1/4 percent, even with a downwardshift, implies to us a substantial further increase in interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Short-term interest rates.MR. KICHLINE. We have short-term rates rising above long-term rates by the end of this forecast period. So we're once againback to an inverted yield curve. That seems to me rather an unusualsituation for a very sluggish recovery with inflation coming down, ifpeople believe that. But it's very hard to envisage a significantdecline in long rates unless one believes that price expectations arechanging dramatically and that, in fact, our inflation forecast iswrong. Otherwise, yes, we come out with rising real rates. Andthat's one of the reasons why we have a sluggish recovery.MR. MAYO. A $60 billion budget deficit doesn't help on therate side either [even] if we keep our eye on the ball of the monetaryaggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I will agree that it's hard toforecast [interest rates]. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. I have to differ with my colleague on the left onprice expectations. I sense quite a feeling that our inflation-16-8/12/80problem is not behind us. Labor is very restive, with food costsbeing a real trigger for their demands. Secondly, new car prices aregoing to surprise people. Every business that I can find is quietlytrying to raise its prices to position itself. In that kind ofenvironment, I think there's an explosive side. The other factor isthe political environment on top of that, with everybody trying toout-promise everybody else. If we just look at what has happened tosensitive materials prices in the last few weeks as well as all of theothers, it seems to me that, despite our roller coaster ride, we havenot dented inflation expectations very much. I think we have a realgroundswell for an explosive development on that side again. In spiteof all we've done, we haven't laid to rest the inflation expectationsvery much.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I never meant to imply that we hadat this point. All I meant to imply was that by next year, with acontinuation of the policy we've begun, I would expect somesignificant effect on prices, or else our actions have been completelyfutile. And I don't think they have been.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that we have agood news/bad news syndrome here today. In terms of recent economicstatistics as well as the updated and revised forecasts of both theBoard's staff and our own staff at San Francisco, we see a betteroutlook for the economy and better news on the unemployment front.But both sets of forecasts show a worsening picture on inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say "better"--I just want to helpMr. Altmann a little [in preparing the record of Committee member'sviews]--are you saying better than the staff is projecting?MR. BALLES. No. I mean both staffs are now forecasting moreinflation, less decline in real GNP, a shorter period for therecession, and less of a rise in the unemployment rate than they werea month ago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just wanted a clarification of yourstatement. You're not saying you are necessarily more optimistic thanthe staff?MR. BALLES. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're more optimistic than you were lastmonth, which they are too.MR. BALLES. I find no quarrel with the general thrust oftheir updated forecast relative to where they stood a month ago. It'sbetter on the real side, better on unemployment, and worse oninflation. To put our current recession in some perspective, for whatit may be worth, we went back and looked at the behavior of pricesduring the last two recessions. We looked at the behavior of the GNPdeflator--and I had forgotten this, frankly--but it turned out that atthe end of the last recession, the GNP deflator was no better than ithad been at the beginning of the recession. That was also true of therecession prior to that. In fact for the 1974-75 segment, it was fourquarters after the trough of the recession that the inflation rate, as-17-8/12/80measured by the GNP deflator, hit its low point. Now, if I look atwhat seems to lie ahead--if the Board's staff and my staff are correctthat this dip in the economy will be over by the fourth quarter ofthis year and we will then be into the next expansion phase, as weakand anemic as it may be--to the [projected] GNP deflator by the end of'81, which is four quarters after the now projected trough of therecession, I get very disturbed indeed. The Board's staff shows theGNP deflator still rising at an 8.7 percent annual rate. My staffwould be a bit more optimistic. But that's an awfully high inflationrate to have at the beginning of the next expansion phase of thecycle.Also, with respect to the comments a little earlier on wherelong-term rates are headed, with special attention to the mortgagerate, I am distressed to see how high those rates are forecast to be.But I am also convinced that we won't get those rates lower than that12 to 13 plus percent for both the corporate bond issues as well asmortgage rates until we get the inflation rate down. Obviously, long-term interest rates are very heavily influenced by both actual andexpected inflation. I think we have a real dilemma here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the real economy, Mr. Chairman, Iwould be inclined also to view it as a little better this month thanit looked last month. I am also inclined to the view that, at leastover the next couple of quarters, the real economy might be a bitstronger than the staff forecast. But I am only willing to say thatfor the next couple of quarters. I think, for example, that we maysee a little more strength in housing in that period and that autosales might be a little stronger than is suggested simply because ofthe greater availability of fuel efficient cars. Partly because ofconsumer credit reductions but also because of what's happening in thestock markets, consumer balance sheets are probably a good dealstronger than they were, which I think is consistent with thatdevelopment. But looking out a bit further I see some risks,including the point that has already been made about what will in facthappen to interest rates and what that may mean for housing andcapital goods. On the price side, we have a situation where in thenear term the CPI certainly will look better. But my own perception,like that of others, is that the price outlook and [inflation]expectations actually have deteriorated in the last month or so. Theunit labor cost situation, of course, looks terrible. The budgetdeficit situation, in terms of its implications for expectations, is amatter of concern. The weather and [its impact on] food prices is anunknown, but at least for now I think it can only work in onedirection. And I sense a growing element of concern in the markets[about] the recent money statistics and what they may portend forinflation over a longer period of time. The fiscal [side], as hasbeen said, is full of uncertainties. The one thing we are sure of isthat the deficits are going to be big. Financing requirements of theTreasury are going to be substantial, whatever that implies.Certainly we think we know something about what it implies forinterest rates. In summary, as I look at the situation, I think therelative risks have shifted. While we still have a weak economy, inthe near term it may be a little stronger than we thought it was. Butthe price situation, if anything, looks a little worse--conceivably agood deal more than a little worse--rather than a little better.-18-8/12/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I share John Balles' view that the real sectorlooks a little better and inflation looks a little worse. I thinkthat's a fairly general impression among forecasters. I also see twocharacteristics of our economy that seem to be visible now. It hasvery quick defenses against a sharp downturn, given that the downturndidn't go very fast. Automatic stabilizers went into action and seemto have been holding--MR. PARTEE. It went pretty fast.MR. WALLICH. That's what I said. It caught--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say the downturn went pretty fast?MR. WALLICH. The downturn went fast but didn't go very far.It caught itself pretty fast, and we are already beginning to feel thecounterforces on the other side. That is, interest rates are alreadybeginning to rise, which I think could choke off the expansion. Inother words, the economy now reacts very quickly on both sides. Whatwe have not gotten at all out of the recession is much adjustment.There doesn't seem to have been time for much adjustment in corporatebalance sheets or household balance sheets. I don't think anybody'sexpectations and behavior patterns are likely to have been changedvery much by this experience. Not to put too fine a point on it,nobody has gone broke. Nobody has been hanging on the cliff for avery long time except some of the thrift institutions. In otherwords, this has been a surprisingly mild recession. It is veryunlikely to have [set the stage for] much long-term improvement if infact it now takes off from here. It's not likely to change ourattention, expectations, or behavior in a favorable direction if [theeconomy] bottoms out quickly and resumes a modest advance, as seemslikely. So the conclusion I draw is that this is a situation thatcalls for continued restraint in order to get some more effect out ofthe situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline, I meant to ask you earlier,and I didn't, about consumer balance sheets. Governor Wallich saysthey haven't had a lot of time to improve all that much. There hasnot been much time, that's for sure; but the decline in debt at leasthas been much sharper, I think, than in earlier recessions. How doesthe improvement in the consumer's financial position look compared toearlier recessions? Do you have any judgment on that?MR. KICHLINE. As you know, the ratio of debt outstanding todisposable personal income peaked [last] summer, in the third quarterof '79. It came down a little in the fourth quarter and a bit more inthe first quarter. We don't have a final second-quarter figure but,obviously, given what has been happening with the run-off in consumerdebt and the slow growth in mortgage debt, there was a significantfurther improvement in the second quarter. I would think the changein debt outstanding we've seen in the second quarter is just a hugechange in terms of historical [patterns of] debt reduction. So whileit hasn't gone very far, my guess would be that it ranks with some ofthe largest declines in consumer debt outstanding that we've seen in asix-month period.-19-8/12/80MR. SCHULTZ. Jim, I thought I saw some figures the other daythat [the ratio] had peaked at 18 or so percent and has dropped now toless than 15 percent in this very short period of time.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, that's just for consumer debt. We'vecombined consumer and mortgage debt, and the mortgage debt helps thatstory because it grew at a much reduced rate in the second quarter. Idon't have the figures at hand.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, another point that Mr. Corriganmentioned, which I think is worth remembering, is that we've had avery marked upswing in the stock market this time in contrast to avery very weak stock market in late '74 and in '75. We were massivelydestroying consumer wealth in that earlier recession and this time Ithink we're creating it. It would make a big difference if we tookthat into account, too.MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, if one looks at both the asset side andthe liability side, we really do have a--MS. TEETERS. But didn't interest rates hold up for a longerperiod in the recession of 1974-75? We've had a terrific drop ininterest rates, which is going to have a bouyant effect on the stockmarket at this point.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't think they held up particularly. Theydidn't go down as fast as they did this time, but my recollection isthat interest rates started declining about September or October '74and continued on down into the spring of '75. In terms of timingthere has not been a lot of difference, but the speed of movement iscertainly [different].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments on thebusiness picture?MR. MAYO. The stock market seems very unreal and a lot ofpeople are predicting that we will have a correction. Of course, ourformer Secretary of the Treasury announced he was selling all hisholdings and the market went up 20 points in the next two days!MR. PARTEE. It's based on his past record!MR. MAYO. I see a lot of the investment people from LaSalleStreet and almost without exception they are expecting at least a 75to 100 point correction.MR. MORRIS. Of course, that never happens when the judgmentis unanimous that it's going to happen.MR. MAYO. I know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Altmann is left at this point withsaying [in the policy record for this meeting] that you all agree withthe staff's outlook. Is that the impression you want to leave himwith?MR. MAYO. Basically, it's all right.-20-8/12/80MR. PARTEE. I am impressed by the signs of the economycatching as we've [eased our policy]. I don't know to what extent weshould regard that as unusual. The decline in consumer spending wasexceedingly rapid and took us to pretty low levels in real terms insome areas such as automobiles. It may not be that unusual to have alittle recovery after we've had a decline of that extent--a littlecatching up--particularly with money and credit conditions easing.So, I guess I am not as convinced by the evidence that the recessionis nicely bottoming out and that it won't be very long before we getan upturn. I don't agree that this is conclusive since [the period ofimprovement] is so brief and since it seems any market would have alittle see-sawing when big changes occur. I wouldn't agree with thecomment that Henry made that nobody has gone bankrupt. I believebankruptcies are at an all-time high all over the country. Smallbusinesses are going bankrupt and the automobile dealers are having amajor shakeup. It's just that no big companies have gone bankruptbecause we didn't permit Chrysler to do so. Otherwise we would havehad a big bankruptcy as we've had before. Also I would point out thatthere is a long tail on this. If Bob is right, even if the staff isright in their price projections, we're going to have a period ofquite restrained profit performance. And when that occurs, there is afrequency distribution around it; some [firms] are going to be a lotless good than average and they might be bad enough to go bankrupt.So there's still a lot to be played out. What gives me most pauseabout being somewhat bearish about the outlook is the stock market,which has performed extraordinarily well, and sensitive industrialmaterials prices have moved up without fail for two months or more bya rather marked amount. And there are a lot of people out there who,unlike us, are putting their money behind their forecasts. They saythat profits are going to go up--I presume in order to justify thestock market--and that prices are going to go up because of the demandfor raw materials. And that does give me a pause. So, I am justuncertain. But I wouldn't be quite as favorably inclined on theoutlook as the discussion around the table has [suggested] so far.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd just like to add a few comments. I am verymuch in agreement with the staff's forecast for real activity. Allthe signs are now pointing to a fairly near-term bottoming out of therecession and to the recovery beginning in the monthly statisticsbefore the end of the year, although it may well be that the real GNPfigure would be negative for the fourth quarter. To comment furtheron what Governor Wallich was saying, I think the business communitylearns something a little different from each recession. In therecession of 1974-75 what the business community learned was that byJove they better not have excess inventories. They didn't forgetthat. So they are reacting very strongly in this recession, as theydid throughout the whole recovery. In this recession what I thinkthey will have learned is that they better not borrow at the primeplus 2 percentage points because the interest rate risks they face areferocious, given the kind of inflation that we have and given thepolicies that the Federal Reserve is now following. That is going tohave a very, very sobering influence on planning in the businesscommunity in the next several years.I am more pessimistic than the staff on the price outlook fornext year. I think compensation is not going to moderate as much asthe staff indicates. More of a rise in prices relative tocompensation than the staff has forecast is likely also. I think-21-8/12/80that's what the stock market is saying: That businesses are going toraise prices to get profit margins up as soon as activity begins toimprove. That's exactly what Chrysler is doing in pricing its K cars.But the price situation for next year poses for us a very profoundproblem. The staff has a weak outlook for economic growth and a veryweak outlook by historical standards for a recovery period, despitethe fact that they're assuming--with no good basis for it, really, andthey know that--that the money demand function is going to shift downagain. If it doesn't and if prices go up still more than the staff isforecasting, then holding to the kind of targets that we have is goingto produce a very, very sick economy. It's something we don't have toface as a Committee now, but it's something that is going to give usagony as the next 18 months unwind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. As perhaps the two newest members might not know,we base our projections on output and prices primarily on the rate ofmoney growth, M-1B specifically. Our projections show a significantdifference in what will happen depending on whether M-1B grows, forexample, at a rate of 3 percent or 5 percent or 7 percent from thethird quarter of this year on. Let me very briefly give you thedifferent results that we would anticipate for GNP growth in 1981. Ifmoney were to grow at only a 3 percent rate, we would see real GNPgrowth throughout 1981 at a negative rate of minus 1/2 to minus 1percent, whereas if we persist in our announced target of about 5percent money growth, we would see positive real GNP growth ofapproximately 3/4 to 1 percent. If we lost our good judgment--that'sa subjective statement--and permitted money to grow at a 7 percentrate, we would see real GNP growth at a rate of between 2-1/2 to 3percent next year. Price-wise, there is also a significantdifference. If we had the 3 percent money growth next year, by theend of '81 we would see a deflator of maybe 6-3/4 percent by thefourth quarter of next year. If we persist in our 5 percent growth,we feel that prices as measured by the deflator would rise at about 7-1/4 percent rate on an annual basis. And if we lost our good judgmentand went to 7 percent growth, the deflator would be up close to 8percent, as we see it, by the end of next year. So we feel there is asignificant degree of responsibility in our hands in determining therate of money growth and thereby influencing both prices and outputfor 1981.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A lot of people might conclude from thatanalysis that good judgment is 7 percent, Larry.SPEAKER(?). But you don't know about '82.MR. ROOS. I'm a 5 percenter, Mr. Chairman. That used to bea bad word--5 percenter--wasn't it?MS. TEETERS. I'm a little surprised at the strong change insentiment based on so few facts. We have a few good numbers or a fewnumbers that aren't terrible. That's about what it comes down to. Wedon't have a good indication of what the third quarter will be yet.The labor force data on the payroll basis are going to catch up withus. We've just had some good luck on the size of the labor force inthe last month or so. I would also point out that the past five yearshave been characterized by a good quarter followed by a bad quarter.-22-8/12/80It hasn't been a smooth recovery or [pattern of] growth anyway. Manytimes we thought we were on the verge of a recession and then recoupedfrom it. So, I think [the economy] is just jiggling around. I amalso terribly concerned about 1981 because I think we have a verystrong possibility, with the low rates of growth that are beingprojected, that this will turn into a 1959/1961 situation where we'llhave a double recession--one right after the other. There is just nostrength in this particular forecast; [activity is at] very lowlevels. I think this forecast has the longest string of negativebusiness investment--if it turns out to be as forecast--on record.That gives us a very, very poor outlook over a fairly long period oftime. So I don't think we need to hit the horse any harder than we'redoing at the present time. We've knocked it off its feet. Let's giveit a chance to rest awhile and hopefully let it get up at some pointrather than constantly pushing it back down again. I would say thatif we move for any further restraint, we're almost guaranteeing thatthe housing market will not recoup. The prices of cars are such thatnobody can buy them; and even though the industry is trying to push upprices, the consumer is in no position to meet those higher prices.We have a lot of uncertainties at this point. I think we've gottensomething out of [our posture of restraint]. I'm worried aboutprices. But we haven't had any time at all for [our policy] to bereflected in the current statistics.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we turn to Mr. Ettin [and thenhave coffee].MR. ETTIN. [Statement--see Appendix.][Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we have what I hope will be arelatively brief general discussion or questioning of Mr. Ettin andthen we'll get around to the [policy] specifications. We can divideit up. We have an hour and a quarter. Henry has put his hand up,too, but we'll let Mr. Eastburn go first.MR. EASTBURN. Right before we adjourned, Ed was giving someparameters for M2. I said to him [during the coffee break] that M-1Ais not much good to us anymore and M2 doesn't seem very good either,so we're reduced to M-1B, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which isn't very good either. Don't lookat these too carefully. That's [the message].MR. EASTBURN. It's the least worst, perhaps.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Try M3.MR. EASTBURN. I was just asking whether he had any guesseson that, particularly. I'm looking for something in the Bluebook, butI can't put my finger on it, about the presumption that the recentchanges in interest rates are going to narrow the gap. How confidentdo you feel about that and what do you think the magnitude of thatmight be?MR. ETTIN. We're reasonably confident that that's the trend,because as market rates rise relative to the ceiling rate on passbook-23-8/12/80accounts, we think that's going to slow down. It's hard for me toestimate how much that strength in savings deposits is adding to M-1Bbecause the amount of ATS accounts relative to M-1A is relativelysmall. I would say maybe 1/2 percentage point, but that number ispulled out of [the air]. The point is that I'd make it on the modestside.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't really think we can assume any ofthese numbers are the right numbers. We know M-1A is bad because moregoes out of demand deposits than from M-1B; but to the extent [funds]go out of savings deposits into M-1B, that measure also is distorted.We just don't know the extent of this.MR. MORRIS. Maybe we ought to move to L.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I tell you: The M3 chart is such abeautiful one that I am tempted to move to M3; we're right in themiddle [of the range].MR. WALLICH. M3 is another of those [variables] thatmaintains its stability because one [component] goes down andsomething else goes up, which is a little suspect.MS. TEETERS. That's what we thought we were doing with M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had some comments, Henry?MR. WALLICH. I really want to say the same as Dave: M-1A isnot much good and M2 is not much good. Isn't the main argument infavor of M-1A--and the reason why we keep talking about it--that it isused in the model?MR. ETTIN. That's the reason why the staff places particularemphasis on it.MR. WALLICH. Can't we re-program [the model] for M-1B?MR. KICHLINE. Certainly, but the model is not the problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What makes you think M-1B is [any better]?To say that M-1B is better than M-1A, you are making an assumptionthat there is very little movement from savings deposits into M-1B.That may be true, but I don't think you know it.MR. WALLICH. There is another guide that we could go to,which is to look at what happened in 1974-75. The impressiveexperience at that time was that we all underestimated--except maybeyour distinguished predecessor by one--the increase in velocity thatwe were likely to get. So, I ask myself: Do we see something in theeconomy that implies a very large increase in velocity? All I can seeis that we have had a tremendous experience of very high interestrates and, as someone just said, the economy has learned [from that].As Lyle said, [firms] learned not to borrow at the prime rate plus twopercent. I think they also learned not to have idle money around witha prime rate of 20 percent. So that may be the thing that hastriggered a new increase in velocity.-24-8/12/80MR. ETTIN. If I may, Governor Wallich, I would point outthat to the extent that kind of [positive] ratchet effect would behitting [velocity] after a sharp run up [of interest rates then],interest rates would be hitting money demand [negatively]. Eachperiod with that impact should be shorter and shorter; indeed, theevidence we have is that when it first begin in 1974 it took a littlelonger than the next round. I think the evidence supports that thedrop-off [in demand for M1] in the second quarter was very short-lived.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, one could argue just that. I thinkwe had a big impact in the second quarter, but now because we have hadthat impact it will make the velocity relationship even tighter thanit was before.MR. PARTEE. The staff projection for the third quarter[implies] a decline in every velocity measure.MR. WALLICH. Well, that's simply the result of dividing afalling income by--MR. PARTEE. But what is [velocity in] the second quarter,except the simple result of dividing income by money supply?MR. WALLICH. Yes, but one has to think about what happens ata constant level of interest rates in order to measure the velocitytrend. We have to hold the rates constant and then see whether or notthere is an increase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I wanted to talk about this very subject.I wanted to indicate that I am somewhat dubious about giving muchimportance to M2 in the current environment for several reasons.Number one, our range for M2 was developed on the basis of arelationship the staff presented to us some time ago, which might havebeen right or might not have been right. Certainly, it is at leastdealing with an instrument that has different components in it thanbefore. Number two, the top end of our range for M2, an aggregatewhich includes most kinds of instant liquidity that people can thinkof, is 9 percent. That is about equal to the rate of inflation; so atthe top end that means the real value of liquid assets will notchange. That doesn't sound all that great. And we have the [prospectof] these shifts of the sort that Ed was mentioning, which do strikeme as possible. M3 is better than M2, I think, because of thepossibility that M3 components--that is, large CDs [primarily]--aremoving to identified M2 components as a result of interest ratestrategies and so forth on the part of holders. I don't find M-1A allthat bad an indicator. I think what we have to recognize about M-1Ais that it has a downward bias. That is, there is some shifting awayfrom M-1A, and we can't quite quantify it, but the basis for M-1A'srelationship to the economy is pretty well established over time andhas been pretty well researched. M-1A still does have currency in itand it still does have demand deposits in it so that we see what therelationship might be. It seems to me the best thing to do is to lookat M-1A principally and make an allowance--I don't care whether wemake it a 2 percent allowance or what--for the understatement of thegrowth rate that is occurring because of shifts into other-25-8/12/80instruments. I think that's the safer way to go. An alternative way,along our usual lines of suggestion, is why not average M-1A and [M-1B] and say that's our goal, on the [grounds that] neither is right.One has an understatement and one has an overstatement, so let's takethe average. It can't be all that bad. But I think M2 is verydangerous to use importantly in trying to steer monetary policy, and Iwould certainly advise against that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. First, I'd like to compliment Ed on someperceptive remarks on the interpretation of these numbers. This isthe kind of thing we always need to watch very carefully to see if wecan analyze the particular factors that are influencing the growthrates of these numbers. None of them is perfect and we need to try tomake some judgments about what is influencing their behavior. I guessI don't really understand, Ed, the comments that you made on ATSdeposits. Let me ask a question first and then ask you to elaborate abit. Do you have hard information on the ATS deposits? Or is this anestimated number based on an assumption that so much of the growth ofsavings deposits must be in ATS accounts?MR. ETTIN. We have hard numbers for member banks andestimates and samples for nonmember banks.MR. GRAMLEY. Could you make that point again that you weremaking about ATS deposits?MR. ETTIN. The ceiling rate for ATS accounts and regularpassbook accounts at commercial banks is identical, at 5-1/4 percent.One would presume, because our evidence is that everybody is payingthe ceiling rate, that it would be unlikely that an ATS account holderwould have both an ATS account and a regular savings account. It'sprobably one account. To the extent, for whatever reason, thatpassbook accounts generally have been strong, some of the [depositors]who would be increasing their savings account funds would call theiraccount an ATS account. So the measure of those transaction balanceswould be biased upward.MR. GRAMLEY. Thank you.MR. MORRIS. It's also true of NOW accounts, even thoughthere is a penalty, a quarter [point lower return]. A lot of the NOWaccount total really, in a sense, represents savings accounts.MR. ETTIN. While that's true, I feel less certain that thebig run-up in savings may also be [spilling] over into NOWs because wehave heard, and have some evidence, that people in fact have a NOWaccount and a savings account. I don't know how much weight to put onit. We don't know. I am more certain about it for ATS accountsbecause there is no ceiling differential.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We [face] a real problem next year, in myrole wearing my other hat as Depository Institutions Chairman, onwhether to differentiate these rates. There is going to be a lot ofarguing about that. Mr. Corrigan.-26-8/12/80MR. CORRIGAN. Two quick questions, Ed. I am inclined to thesame view that you articulated in terms of M2 and these assetpreference shifts. If that's right, is it also your judgment thatthat pattern will likely continue for at least several months? Ifanything, presumably in this environment, we are talking about atleast a couple of months in which money market certificates or savingscertificates are going to be perhaps even more competitive.MR. ETTIN. My answer, President Corrigan, would depend onhow rapidly interest rates rise over the next several months. To theextent that market rates do rise, I think there will be some slowingin M2 because market instruments will look somewhat more attractive.But I don't think it will make a great difference.MR. CORRIGAN. One other quick question. I have heard thatthere is already talk in the markets, for whatever it's worth, of avery, very, large money supply number this Friday. Do your numberssuggest that?MR. ETTIN. Yes, our preliminary estimates suggest that inthe week of August 6th there will be an increase in M-1A of over $3billion. I think the market talk may be reflecting Mr. Sindlinger,who is expecting an $8 billion increase in the first two weeks.MR. CORRIGAN. The number I've heard--and I've heard it fromtwo sources--is $4 to $5 billion on M-1. So I was just wondering.MR. ETTIN. Part of it also is the social security--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. A couple of points. Ed made the point very wellon savings bond redemptions; that has eased off a little now. But alot of that money is just parked waiting for what people think will be[higher] interest rates, I think. Also, the Treasury has a 9 percentbond coming due August 15, which was subscribed to by a lot of[individuals], at least in our area. They are already makinginquiries as to what [return] is available [on Treasury securities]and typically are saying: "Oh well, I'll put [the proceeds] in amoney market mutual fund when it comes due. So we will be seeing moreof that, which again leads credence to the fascination with M3. Butit also gets to the point that the further out we go in the Ms, theless control we have over what we are doing. So I think we have to becareful not to get too fascinated with M3. I'm inclined to differ alittle with Chuck [on the relative merits of] M-1A and M-1B. We'dhave to adjust either one of them, whatever we were doing, and M-1Bmay be the better one going out a year or so. Also, that is what themarket is looking at. I think not much attention is paid to M2 in theeveryday market. Whether Peter [Sternlight] and Allen [Holmes] wouldagree with that or not, [I don't know].MR. STERNLIGHT. I think M2 gets less attention largelybecause it only comes out monthly. There has been some notice takenof it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We hope 18 months from now M-1B will bethat number, and we will have washed out all these---27-8/12/80MR. MAYO. Well, we hope so. We will have a different reasonmaybe a year from now. But the further out in the Ms we go, the moretrouble we get into in terms of what we can influence. I feel we arebetter off sticking pretty much with M-1A and M-1B for the moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I'm in line with what Bob said. Our researchdepartment has done quite a bit of work recently in checking thepredictive value of these various aggregates. Their conclusion isquite clearly that M-1B has predicted output much more accurately thanthe other aggregates. If we can ever get this material edited, Mr.Chairman, we will circulate our wisdom to this wiser body if you'dlike.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will look at it with great interest.MR. ROOS. Thank you, sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Lyle, you had a comment?MR. GRALEY. I was just going to say that Mr. Sternlight isright [about M2]. And we might be well advised to choose an aggregatefor which we only have monthly figures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other general comments? I take itthere is a good deal of acceptance of some of Mr. Ettin's comments,and there is some question about being too serious about M2. Maybe Ihave misstated that. [Perhaps it's more accurate to say] we shouldlook at it but there is some reason to think it may be somewhatdistorted on the up side.MR. WALLICH. Just a comment. If we are getting sufficientlyfrustrated with the aggregates, there is the old standby of realinterest rates, after tax. We have done a certain amount of work onthat now.MR. PARTEE. The "old standby" of real interest rates?MR. WALLICH. After tax, real interest rates.MR. PARTEE. Your old standby.MR. WALLICH. I've mentioned it from time to time here. Ijust wanted to tell you that it's available now. It has been runthrough the computer, so perhaps it has acquired a little more--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Along with Mr. Roos' material, you cancirculate that.Now we have to turn to the serious business of the Committee.A number of people, John Balles and others, have described our basicdilemma in that we have both a serious inflation problem--or morepessimism about inflation and great sensitivity to expectations ofinflation--against a rather shaky business recovery. So some of thethings one might ordinarily think would be good for the businessrecovery may not be good for the business recovery if they maximizethe inflationary uncertainties and have an adverse repercussion on the-28-8/12/80market for that reason. As one market caller put it to me the otherday, if the money supply really goes up very sharply for a couple ofweeks, we will have big increases in long-term interest rates. Ithink that is descriptive of the kind of dilemma we are in. I don'tknow how we get out of that without going through a painful process ofdeflating the inflationary expectations, which are not deflated yet.And I don't know how they get deflated without deflating the economymore than one would like to see it deflated. I don't have a readyanswer to that.MR. MAYO. Paul, there is one other option that we haven'texplored for a long time. It's probably not practical, but as I tolda number of you, when I was in Frankfurt some years ago, Emmingersaid: "Mayo, we've got one advantage here over you folks that we arenever going to give up." I asked: "What is that?" He said: "Wehave no weekly figures on the money supply and we're never going tohave any." Arthur Burns even threatened at one point to put out dailyfigures on the money supply to point up the absurdity [of followingshort-term fluctuations so closely] and then obviously thought betterof the idea. Is there any chance in the reporting from all these40,000 customers we have now--it's probably too late even to suggestit--that we can solemnly decide that we should have only monthlyfigures on the money supply? Or is the world too sophisticated toaccept that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My instinct is that we couldn't get bywith it. And I don't really think it would cure the problem. Peoplewould wait for the monthly figure.MR. PARTEE. We couldn't do it unless we didn't collect them,Bob. Then we wouldn't have anything for our own use either.MR. MAYO. Well, that's the problem. But it's tempting totalk about; we'd have one eruption a month instead of four.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would help in terms of these intra-monthly gyrations, but I don't think it would deal with the dilemmathat I am referring to, which is a real dilemma for the economy.Actually, the Washington Post had a good editorial just the other day.They put the same dilemma [in terms of] New York versus Washington.Washington wants to expand whenever the economy gets into a recessionand New York will run for cover with inflationary expectations if thathappens, which will undermine the expansion. Therefore, you can't doeither. And I think there is a lot of reality to that.I don't know if it will speed up the process or not but, if Imay, let me give you something to shoot at. When I look at thesepretty charts--though obviously when we are talking about differencesas small as those in "A" and "B," it is not a widely differentpicture--I come away with the feeling that alternative A is not in anysense off course. Under alternative A, so far as the M-1A figure isconcerned--it's not true of M-1B, which has been rising more rapidly--if we took off from M-1A the target for the quarter is the same as[the one we had previously]. It is consistent with a higher M-1Bfigure according to the current estimates, if they are any good, and aconsiderably higher M2 figure than we were talking about at the lastmeeting. But those charts don't give a very disturbing picture; infact, they give a rather nice picture. If we held to it and just-29-8/12/80extended [money growth] at the same rate, M-1A would end up right atthe bottom of the range for the quarter or a little above it by thetime we got to December. M-1B, if I am right, would be just about inthe middle, or maybe a bit below for the quarter and a little above inDecember. For M2, alternatives A and B are very close together, butit's high in either case. M3 is in the middle.We are dealing with an extremely [unintelligible.] Themarket, as nearly as I can read it, has anticipated some tighteningwhich hasn't taken place. Maybe another way of stating it is thatthey also have a heavy supply of securities. They see better businessnews and anticipate perhaps a bigger increase in the money supply andassume that would bring a higher federal funds rate. That may or maynot be true. I myself don't see any reason, particularly, to biasthat question at the moment. If we are satisfied with something likethe alternative A money supply figures, I don't think we have to doanything now to bias where we are in terms of the federal funds rate.I am talking, really, about the borrowing figure at the moment. Ifthe money supply comes in higher, that doesn't imply, with ourordinary techniques, that [policy] would be tighter. But [in thatevent] we would have seen evidence that the money supply is in factrunning even [above] this figures which looks all right. Or if itcame in lower, we would be moving somewhat in the other direction. SoI would be inclined, in general terms, to take something like "A" andunbias the decision this week. I don't know whether that means $100million of borrowing or maybe a trifle less than that, but somethingin that neighborhood. And as I say, if the money supply comes in--just in M-1A terms with similar changes in the others--at 9 percent,let's say, the borrowings would go up and presumably we'd get anincrease in the funds rate. If it came in weaker, as I guess the NewYork projection suggests, we could perhaps run down to trulyfrictional levels of borrowing and the funds rate might go in theother direction. But in either case, there would be better evidencethan we have at the moment. I don't think it's clear that we are offcourse, if we discount M2 a little at the moment. So I don't see anyreason for a bias at the moment in one direction or another,particularly given the sensitivities in the market. With the dollarin a little better shape, conceivably we could make the bottom end ofthe federal funds range a little less close to the current marketlevel than it is. I don't know that we have much risk of running intoeither of those constraints, but it might look a little better. So wecould alter that a bit if you wanted to, but those are the verygeneral thoughts that I have. Why don't you proceed from there,Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, as everyone around this table knows, Ibelieve that inflation is the major problem and that hasn't changed atall, so I think we have a long hard pull ahead of us. I believe,though, that alternative B would be a mistake at this time because itseems to me, short term, that we are already getting some restraint.Interest rates have already backed up some, and I think it is notlikely that mortgage rates will come down from where they are. Theymight rise a little. One of the things we didn't talk about is thefact that mortgage rates are much more sensitive to bond rates becauseof the passthroughs. We have this enormous backlog of securities thatare sitting there, and it's just hard for me to see that mortgagerates are going to come down any; they might even back up a little.We have already seen some of that in California, where they are-30-8/12/80particularly sensitive to this kind of thing. So it seems to me thatthe path we are presently on is already giving us some restraint. Iget the feeling that we are doing reasonably well at this point and Idon't see much sense in trying to shut down further. In addition, Ihave a feeling that longer term we may need some flexibility nextyear. I don't know what shape recession we're going to have--whetherit will be a square root or an L or a W or whatever. But onecharacteristic I think it will have--and I think properly so--is thatit will be a very slow recovery. I don't see how we can get out ofthe mess we are in without that slow recovery, because I don't see howwe are going to be able to get unit labor costs down without somepain. And we are not getting very much pain in this economy at thistime; corporations still are looking to increase prices, as PresidentWinn said. And until there is some real restraint on them in terms oftheir corporate profit margins--and I think there will be next year--Idoubt that they are going to start getting really serious about tryingto hold wage rates down. So it seems to me that we are looking at avery slow period of recovery for next year. I have the feeling that Iwould like to go into next year [with money growth] near the middle ofthe range, and not biased toward the bottom, to give us the kind offlexibility we may need. So my feeling is that alternative A is muchsuperior [to alternative B], both for the short run and the long run.MR. BALLES. I'd like to present the case for alternative B.The dilemma that I described earlier might be put in a little broadercontext. If you remember, last spring quite a few of us were a littleworried about the undershoots in the aggregates and the fact thatfailure to achieve [our objectives for] them might unnecessarily andconsiderably exacerbate the recession that was then under way. I'vebeen pleased, of course, by the catchup in the aggregates produced inthe June and July figures--and they're pretty solid--and in theprojected August figures. I suppose part of what determines how onecomes out here depends on one's reading of the tea leaves on thebusiness outlook but also on the judgments one makes as to which M isthe lesser of the evils in terms of its reliability as a predictor. Ihave to say that on the outlook I came out much closer to the viewsGovernor Gramley has articulated than the opposite view. And withrespect to M-1A versus M-1B versus M2, the research that we've done atour Bank indicates that M-1B is a better predictor of future pricemovements than M-1A. Now, they're both obviously contaminated to someextent, but I think M-1B is less so than M-1A. For that reason, andbecause of the failure to achieve any significant progress thus far onthe inflation front--especially if one looks at the staff's forecaston where inflation will be by the end of 1981--I am very concerned.So, all things considered--in view of the catchup we've now had on theMs and in view of what I consider to be a less gloomy or, if you like,a more optimistic outlook in terms of the recession being shorter andshallower than we had earlier expected-- I'd begin to shade [moneygrowth down] a little now. Speaking for this year as a whole, I'dmove broadly in the direction of aiming somewhere in the lower part--certainly at or below the midpoint--of the range we have set for M-1B,which I would consider the most reliable of the three Ms for themoment. That may change next year when we get NOW accounts. But Iwouldn't be unhappy if we reduced our sights a shade and tried [forgrowth in] M-1B at what we had said in July would be our target forthe third quarter, which is around 8 percent. So "B" or "B minus"would be the way I would lean, Mr. Chairman.-31-8/12/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "B minus" meaning even less than "B"?MR. BALLES. Yes. I'd like about 8 percent for M-1B for theJune-to-September quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out very close to the[approach] you advocated. I don't see much difference between "A" and"B" and I have a slight preference for "A." I lean, like most here,toward M-1B for the reasons indicated, although I duly heeded youradmonition that we ought not to take this at face value. There's atemptation, I think, to go with "B" because of the inflation we see.But if the staff is right in its projections on M-1B, that would meanthat its growth would decelerate to a rate of 5.5 percent this yearfrom 7.6 percent last year and 8.1 percent the year before. Thatseems to me sufficiently fast deceleration to work toward graduallyreaching a noninflationary rate of expansion in the aggregates. Andit would set the stage for a further reduction next year, as we havepromised every one we would [seek]. I do have a little concern aboutthe overshoot in M2 because of the credibility problem, but theovershoot is very small; and as others have stressed, the [narrow]aggregates are looked at much more carefully than M2. And I think thepoints that Ed Ettin made about M2 are quite valid. But if for someunexpected reason M2 did come in high, we might want to take anotherlook at it. I also have sympathy for your position that maybe weought to [reduce] the lower end of that funds rate range. I have longstated that I don't favor any range on the funds rate, but I think wemight be having in the aggregates the kind of [pattern] Chuck Parteewas stressing on the behavior of consumer spending, where we have veryrapid declines and then a bounceback. So with the abandonment of thespecial credit restraint program, the aggregates may have taken offmore than they ordinarily would have. If that is the case, we mighthave to come down a little more on interest rates in order to keep theaggregates on target. Therefore, I would be inclined to drop thelower end to about 7-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I want to second John Balles for many of thesame reasons [he cited]. When we talked about the recession somemonths ago, it was frequently said that we shouldn't be too tightbecause of the danger that we might overshoot on the low end. Now wesee that it's likely, although not certain, that this will be a milderrecession than anticipated. And that doesn't give me any reason forwanting to go on a more expansionary course. I don't see muchachieved by the recession so far. There have been no great changes inexpectations. It may well be that a few years from now we will lookat this experience as something that was unnecessary because it didn'tproduce anything except a resumption of inflation from a new higherplateau into new and higher levels. I think we're in some [danger] ofconcluding that because it's reasonable to expect the recovery to beslow we therefore ought to be relatively easy now. If we arerelatively easy now, we will be prejudicing our policy next yeartoward being still easier, precisely because the recovery is likely tobe slow. Finally, as I look at our policy for next year, if we takethe hypothetical assumption that we go for the midpoint of the rangesthat we've now supplied, which are 1/2 percentage point below this-32-8/12/80year's ranges, that will mean a drastic reduction in the rate of moneygrowth in early 1981. For instance, on M-1A the range is 3 to 5-1/2percent. So presumably we would have to shift to somewhere close tothe midpoint of that from what on the present course is [growth of]7-1/2 percent from the second to the fourth quarter of this year if wego with alternative A. If we go with alternative B, we will beshifting to the midpoint of 3 to 5-1/2 percent, or about 4-1/2percent, from the 6-1/4 percent rate B implied for QII to QIV of 1980.If we look at M-1B a similar picture prevails; the midpoint of itsrange of 3-1/2 to 6 percent is 4-3/4 percent. And we would have toshift to that from 9-1/4 percent [growth] on "A" or 8-1/4 percent on"B." These could be some very drastic changes in course, if we reallywere to stick by our policy when the economy begins to turn around. Iwould rather minimize the degree of change that we have to introduce--not go down so far with interest rates now and not have to changetheir direction so drastically, or else abandon the proposed targets.That is why I would go with "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I probably am as optimistic asalmost anybody around the table about the prospects for the end of therecession in the near term, but it is still a forecast. And there isabsolutely nothing in the statistics yet that suggests that a turn hasoccurred. We all agree, I think, that the recovery next year is goingto be quite weak. I don't see any reason at all, therefore, to letinterest rates go up at the present time. I don't mind staying wherewe are. I don't know if interest rates need to go down to shorten therecession but I certainly don't think we need to knock the [economy]in the head once more and make sure we have killed inflationaryexpectations. I just don't think that's a feasible course. We haveto remember that the staff is forecasting a recovery so weak thatunemployment does not go down at all. I think that's as weak arecovery as we need. I agree with Governor Schultz completely in thatrespect. But if the recovery is so weak that unemployment continuesto rise, then I don't think we're following a policy that we can stickwith over the long run. That's the only way we can deal with thisproblem: To look at it as a very, very long-run problem and a long-term commitment [on our part] to try to bring inflation down. So, Iam quite prepared to go with your suggestion of alternative A. Iwould wonder, if we go in that direction, if we shouldn't do somethingabout taking M2 out [as an operational variable] because if M2 keepsgoing up as rapidly as it has been, we might end up having to turn thescrews to push interest rates up. And that may not be what we want todo.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did M2 do in the last month?SPEAKER(?). It grew at a 17 percent rate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't understand what Lyle means bytaking M2 out.MR. GRAMLEY. In the directive we have targets for M2 alongwith M-1A and M-1B and we're giving the same weight to the three; allthree are mentioned in the directive as such. So if M2 were to exceedits target level, then we would begin to tighten up again, even ifM-1A and M-1B did not.-33-8/12/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, from what I understand, the waythe staff calculates the reserve paths, it is basically a qualitativecorrection of a path constructed primarily on M-1. If M2 is moving upvery rapidly, it's not given equal weight by any means.MR. PARTEE. It doesn't have much arithmetic effect, I agree,Tony.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it may; the only effect it can haveis if we change the path on the basis of [its behavior].MR. WALLICH. If we eliminate those aggregates that misbehavein our view, what kind of credibility do we have?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're still left with the fact thatat the end of the year the public and the Congress are going to seewhat the behavior of M2 was in relation to the targets.MR. GRAMLEY. They will probably also see that M-1A is at thelower end of that chart.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. As a well-known Washington philosopher a fewyears ago was fond of saying: "If the thing ain't broke, don't fixit." I don't think the thing is broke here. It seems to me [theaggregates] have been moving rather nicely along their path with aninterest rate performance that was, if not pleasing, at leastacceptable to almost everybody after that abysmal April break in thenumbers. And as you said, Mr. Chairman, a continuation of our earlierstatement [regarding our objectives for the quarter], particularly interms of the profile for M-1A but to a large degree for M-1B, would bealternative A. It seems to me that that's the path we have and it'sworking quite fine. So I would certainly [support] that. I dobelieve that there will be a tolerance in the society as a whole,though not in Washington, of higher interest rates if we can say:"Look, we've had a big rise in the aggregates so we've got to resistthat rise because that will bring inflation." But if we have higherinterest rates because we're fiddling around with a path that weearlier specified with the Congress--and if we're on that path orwould have been on it had we not changed it--there isn't going to bethat tolerance. I think that's a very dangerous game to get involvedin. We may have an explosion in the aggregates; some are forecastingit. If we do, then we'll raise interest rates. But we may not. Andif we don't, I don't think we have any basis for trying to biasinterest rate movements upward. So I would take "A" for sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I come out very close to theposition that you set forth for the reasons that you did and for thereasons set forth by Governors Schultz, Gramley, and Partee. I wouldsimply emphasize that the outlook for the economy is for a slowrecovery--one which will be lackluster and far from robust. It alsolooks as if it is going to be interest sensitive because, as has beennoted, the recovery in housing is going to be interest sensitive andthe recovery in investment is probably going to be interest sensitive.We have to note that under either alternative A or alternative B,-34-8/12/80we're likely to see some increase in interest rates. The increase ininterest rates under alternative B will be significantly greater thanunder alternative A. And at this point we have to be very careful notto do anything unnecessarily that would choke off the recovery. Itseems to me distinctly possible that fiddling around [and getting]interest rates up runs the risk, as Governor Partee suggested, ofchoking off the recovery before it begins. So it seems to me thatalternative A is a much [safer] course to take.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. I think it is clear that we have a timingproblem here. It is compounded by the fact that we're in a cycle withno precedent and we don't really know how to time our action. On theone hand, Nancy's earlier comment is right that in the discussionabout the business outlook we really are basing our opinions on somefairly small evidence over a short period of time. That would leadone to alternative A. On the other hand, Henry's argument has a lotof [merit] in that we're dealing with an exceptionally difficultsituation and we have the possibility of [substantial] growth in theaggregates ahead of us. So perhaps we should take this opportunity tomove earlier than we ordinarily would to meet that. Between those twopositions, I come out about in the middle. I'd take "A" and shade ittoward "B." There is a one point [difference in the growth rates] inthe two alternatives, which is wider than we have quibbled about attimes. I don't think it's quibbling too much to [aim for] somethingin the middle. That's what I'd do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. We are again, I think, magnifying very smalldifferences. I could be comfortable with either "A" or "B," but Ilean toward "A" basically for the reasons that have already beenstated. As for the recession, everybody is looking for good news nowand I think they have over-emphasized what little good news has beenin the papers. We probably have at least another six months to gobefore we get any real positive signs of economic recovery. I wouldrather, as the cliche at the moment goes, "keep our powder dry" andstick with "A." I do not worry at all about the overshoot in M2; infact it helps, especially with M-1A coming out at the low end undereither "A" or "B." It tends to illustrate again the fragile nature ofthese figures. It isn't that we should say cavalierly that thetargets aren't worth anything, but let's be practical about it. Wehave our own little security blanket here of being at the low end onM-1A, in the middle on M-1B, and overshooting on M2. So what? Itdoesn't bother me. It gives us a beautiful array to illustrate ourpoint that there is no such thing as the perfect aggregate. I wouldalso comment that if we narrowed our ranges, which some of our friendson Capitol Hill wish we would do, it wouldn't solve anything. Wemight end up below on M-1A and way over on M2 and be in the samesituation we are now. It wouldn't make us any better hewers to theline, if I can put it that way. So, I lean toward "A" as thesolution.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I hate to disappoint the WashingtonPost editorial [staff], but between "A" and "B," I prefer "A" [even8/12/80though I'm a New Yorker]. I have a slight preference for splittingthe difference, as Dave Eastburn suggested, and going with a $75 to$100 million borrowing assumption. But--MR. PARTEE. When you say split the difference, Tony, do youmean the July-to-September difference?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, and that would give us for Julyto September [6] percent for M-1A, [about] 7-1/2 percent for M-1B, and9 percent for M2 with, as I say, a $75 or $100 million borrowingassumption. But if the consensus is for alternative A, I'd go alongwith that. I certainly prefer it to alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I have a preference for alternative B. It's not asharp preference, but I base my position on a belief that because ofincreased business borrowing and the extent of borrowing by thegovernment, an increase in interest rates toward the end of this yearis probably inevitable. And if, as I sense, there is a reluctanceamong some of us to permit interest rates to rise because that wouldbe viewed as contributing to cutting off the [recovery]--if indeed onewere to occur--then I would see the prospect of expansionary policiesahead. So I'd much rather position ourselves in a more restrainedposition a la "B" than the other alternative. But I'm not going todig in my troops on that particular decision because I don't thinkthere's that much difference [between the alternatives].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I would prefer "A." For once we don't have toworry about the international value of the dollar currently, which issomewhat of a relief.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a week.MS. TEETERS. Yes, I know that. Given that, we seem to be ona pretty steady course and we're getting where we want to go with it.It seems unconscionable to raise interest rates when the economy isstill going down--and I don't think anybody expects the third quarterto be a positive number on real growth. I would say if we are goingto have to raise interest rates for international reasons, I certainlywould like to save the room and do it at a later date. So I wouldcome out in support of "A" and just leave [the path] the way it is atthe present time.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think there has been much--let me use the word "distortion"--in domestic monetary policy byinternational considerations in the time that I've been on the FOMC.There have been some considerations of timing, maybe a 1/2 pointdifference from time to time on the low end of the fed funds range.It hasn't been very significant.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The position I've taken publicly, in thesense of responding to Congressional inquiries, is that it was aconsideration in the background and tended to parallel the moreimportant considerations of what we had domestically. [For example],we didn't press for as quick a makeup of the shortfall in the money-36-8/12/80supply as we theoretically could have. That was not a decision basedjust on international grounds, although that happened to be aningredient in that decision.MR. SCHULTZ. I think the Congressional comment was that he'dmake a very good prisoner of war because he'd tell the enemy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think [my statement] is also true. Mr.Winn.MR. WINN. I am a bit on the fence. I guess I'd join thosewho favor splitting [the difference] in terms of the target set-up.I'm a little confused, as I listen to the conversation, as to whetherwe're following our resolve to try to target the aggregates or whetherwe're back on an interest rate course. It seems to me that we've allbased this [analysis] on a projection of growth in the aggregates thatmay or may not occur. If it doesn't, then it seems to me that we havesome responsibility to get the path back up and let the [funds] ratehit the bottom. If the aggregates explode, it seems to me that wehave to face the interest rate problem right now. And we will havedeferred it. I've been around this table for some time, and I've seenus drag our feet time after time and then get caught in a realsqueeze. I'd rather face it now if this explosive problem--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are saying, I think, that the questionto debate now is between assuming that the aggregates are going toexplode and biasing the decision upward--MR. WINN. No, I wouldn't bias it upward. I'd wait and seewhat happens. But if the aggregates explode, it seems to me we'd haveto face it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't hear anybody sayinganything different, but I agree the temptation historically has beennot to do anything about it. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. Well, as one of the novices here, I must say I amvery relieved by the narrow range and the bias of the two alternativesbefore us in that I see no danger that the markets--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are not necessarily confined to thosealternatives.MR. FORD. I may choose at some future date to suggest athird. But I like the way the alternatives have been structured herebecause whichever way we go with this decision there seems to me nodanger that we'll be reading in the newspaper--even without a leak butafter due time when we release the [record]--that we biased ourselvestoward getting off the path that we set last October. We willprobably not be accused of loosening monetary policy based on limitedinformation of a recovery, and so on. So either way we go, I thinkthis decision can be viewed in the marketplace as a reasonable one.With regard to the arguments on whether we should make this minoradjustment toward tightness, [as in] "B," I am persuaded by [several]things. First of all, I've seen virtually no evidence of pricesoftening, which is what the name of the game is supposed to be as Iunderstand it. [Our goal is] to promote a view in the world whichsays that we're determined to wring inflation out of the economy. And-37-8/12/80the facts as I have heard them and see them are that we're not seeingthat price relief yet. The second argument that persuades me is theone that Mr. Wallich made, assuming he is correct about the course ofthe aggregates and that we will have to crank down the numbers later.For smoothing reasons, I find it rather persuasive to think ahead andto try to avoid the need to bring the aggregates down later at a timethat may inopportune. Also, with the limited evidence we have thatthe aggregates may be expanding in the next few days, I would lean,along with the rest of the splitters, toward "B."MR. ROOS. It's nice to have you aboard.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I would support "A."MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I would be inclined toward "B."We see the economy essentially as the staff has in its outlook, withthe exception of the strength in interest rates. I am inclined to viewthe strength we see in interest rates as temporarily greater thanjustified by what is happening in the economy. So I think there maybe a softening rather than a continued rise in interest rates. The[behavior of] inflation, as has been mentioned, is critical. Therehas been no reference to the presumably substantial additional thrustto prices that is going to flow from the food sector. I think it'sgoing to be very difficult to keep that from simply passing through,as our policies over a period of years have permitted energy prices topass through and raise prices generally through the economy. I thinkit would take pretty substantial restraint to keep that from happeningagain, in this instance flowing from food. Also, I am inclined tothink that we're seeing a rather rapid buildup in liquidity in theeconomy, whether it appears in the particular measures we call moneyor in other measures. In this inflationary environment, it's entirelypossible that people will behave with less money the way they normallywould behave with more money. So I think "B" would be the preferableposture right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I am very comfortable with "A"at this time. I say "at this time" because I am inclined to the viewthat the near-term risks on the aggregates are probably on the upside. I am willing to wait and see what happens. But if in fact thatstrength in the aggregates were to materialize, a lot of this debateabout rates would be academic because the mere fact of that strengthwould quickly reflect itself in higher interest rates in themarketplace in any event. If that too were to occur, we would be alot closer to the kinds of real dilemmas we were talking aboutearlier, which were very well captured in Governor Wallich's commentsabout the task of getting back to where we want to be for 1981. So, Ithink "A" is fine for now, but if indeed the aggregates do run strong,we're going to to have a dilemma immediately in front of us. All ofthis underscores to me the point that somehow, somewhere, we have toget help from other elements of public policy in this [fight against]inflation. And I just don't see that coming. I'm not sure how orwhere we get it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Czerwinski.-38-8/12/80MR. CZERWINSKI. Mr. Chairman, it is our view thatalternative B might result in a more rapid run-up in interest ratesthan might be desirable. On the other hand, alternative A would pushM2 above the top of its range, which might not be desirable from aperception standpoint, particularly with all the attention being givenlately to the ranges established by the Committee. So for thosereasons, we would tend to favor the ranges that were suggested byPresident Solomon, [about] 6 percent for M-1A, around 7-1/2 percentfor M-1B, and about 9 percent for M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there seems to be a good deal ofagreement around the table. I think what really happens between nowand the next meeting is going to be determined, by everybody'sspecifications, by what happens to the aggregates. And since thatrange of uncertainty is much greater than the one percentage pointdifference between these figures [for the quarter], that is theperspective in which I would view this, as many people already have.My main concern is that we not bias this. The bias is more in theborrowing level that we start with than in the difference between "A"and "B." Actually, the difference between "A" and "B" is more thanone percentage point for the remainder of the quarter; it's 1-1/2percentage points. Considering the lags and all the rest, we don'thave a lot of room for changing this between now and the end of thequarter. The predominant view is clearly "A," but there was somesentiment for "B," obviously, and some people were willing--and maybeprepared--to go in between. I suppose the practical choice is whether[or not] we go with A. If we did, I would be inclined to put thefederal funds rate range at 8 to 13 percent if we want the [width ofthe range to be] 5 percentage points. It's 5-1/2 points now, but wecould [set it at] 8 to 13 or 8 to 14 or 8 to 13-1/2 percent. So letme assume something like that for the moment.MR. ROOS. Wouldn't that have a perceptions effect?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've thought about that. I am notsure it's going to have much effect because it will come out a month[or so after this meeting]. [The funds rate] either will have beenthere or not have been there. I don't know; I may be wrong. I havethought about it and I am not sure it will have one because of thedelay in the release of the record. I think it would have an effectif we were announcing this today. What do you think, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it's true that you won't announce thistoday. You will be announcing in a few days that at the July meetingthe funds range was 8-1/2 to 14 percent. So if the market should seethe Desk being more accommodative--if the numbers worked out that way--and funds were trading in the 8 to 8-1/2 percent range, then I thinkthey would get the idea before [the new range is released.], perhapseven in the next--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the funds rate works out that way, Iagree. But it won't work out that way, presumably, unless the moneysupply is also running pretty low.MR. RICE. What's the advantage of narrowing the range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My purpose is not to narrow it; I justwanted to lower it.-39-8/12/80MR. PARTEE. Why don't we make it 8 to 14 percent and makethe width 6 points?MR. SCHULTZ. I think 8 to 14 percent looks better; thatleaves the top of the range at the same place.MR. PARTEE. [The top of the range] doesn't seem operational.MR. SCHULTZ. I think that would be important.MS. TEETERS. What do you expect the funds rate to be withthese specifications? You expect it to be around 10 percent, right?MR. STERNLIGHT. With borrowing averaging $100 million, I'dexpect it to be a little more often below 10 percent than above,perhaps in a range of 9 to 10-1/4 percent.MS. TEETERS. So that's basically an increase in the ratesover the month from where they are now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you want 8 to 14 percent, that wouldn'tbother me. Just to complete this, I would start off the borrowings atmaybe $75 million--I'm thinking of the federal funds rate at around 9percent or a little more, perhaps 9 to 9-1/2 percent now--if that'sthe [borrowing] number that's consistent with that [level of the fundsrate]. We are just talking about the first week here really, but I'dbe inclined to say $75 million. Let me just test the sentiment andsee whether this in-between [number is acceptable]. The intention isto put the quarterly figure in the directive now?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we are really talking about the toppart of this [Bluebook] table if we assume that. And that's probablythe safest thing. If we went halfway, the rates would be 6-1/2,8-3/4, and 11-3/4 percent, if I calculated correctly. Now, that makesa bigger difference for the remaining part of the quarter, but thoseare the numbers that would appear in the directive. As I said, therewas a clear majority for "A." Let's see whether people are happierwith the halfway between numbers.MR. ETTIN. Mr. Chairman, [some of] those who talked aboutsplitting the difference were talking about the numbers for July toSeptember. Just arithmetically, if you do it for the June-to-September figures, you are biasing the numbers a little tighter forthe remaining two months of the quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. June to September is what appears in thedirective, right?MR. ETTIN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably, it means the difference forthe July-to-September figure is halfway in between, too, doesn't it?Isn't that correct arithmetically? It's just a bigger distance inbetween, in effect.-40-8/12/80MR. ETTIN. Yes, but given the fact that July itself wasstronger for each of the aggregates than the targets adopted the lasttime--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But don't we get the right July-to-September numbers if we average those numbers in the table below?MR. ETTIN. I don't think so.MR. PARTEE. I would think so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It isn't immediately obvious to me.MR. PARTEE. Did we publish June to September last time?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we would have is 6 percent [for M-1Afor July to September].MR. ETTIN. We'll publish it in a few days.MR. MAYO. What we did before was 7, 8, and 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the quarterly figure, right?MR. PARTEE. For the third quarter.MS. TEETERS. If we took the midway point, what would youexpect to happen to the funds rate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it biases [the funds rate] a bittoward rising subsequently. I am saying we don't bias it at allinitially. But in practice what it says, just looking at M-1A--if thearithmetic is correct--that we have an objective of 6 percent growthfrom now to the end of the quarter instead of 6-3/4 percent [under"A"].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if we assume only $75 million inborrowing, we are going to be supplying more reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the first period, that's right.MR. PARTEE. $25 million more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we are looking at in practice is thatif the $3 billion figure holds up for this week--I don't know whetherit will--it will depend to some degree upon the projectionsthereafter. We will get a preliminary figure for the week after. Butif the $3 billion held up and there wasn't any reason to think it wasgoing to be reversed immediately, we would presumably have a higherborrowing level a couple of weeks from now. And your straightforwardprojection of "A" even implies a slight increase in interest rates,you believe.MR. ETTIN. In my view, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those estimates are obviously unreliable,but even [a forecast of] an ordinary figure for next week isunreliable. These figures have been jumping all over the place. But-41-8/12/80if [the estimate] held up, whatever path we set now is likely to implymore borrowings. That's one of the reasons I don't want to set thepath so we get an increase now and then automatically get an increasetwo weeks from now. That, I think, is [moving] too strongly.MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, if that estimated $3 billionincrease [in M-1A] holds up, I don't think anything would flowautomatically from that in terms of raising the borrowing because wewould build the paths assuming that $3 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends. Right now the $3 billion, asI see it, depends upon your projection--MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the $3 billion is a harbinger of [M-1A]running high, it's going to affect [borrowing]. We can technicallyallow for that if your subsequent projections say no [it will not runhigh]. But presumably you would want to allow for [an increase inborrowing] if the next preliminary figure is another $3 billion or so.There's an element of judgment here. You can wash it out completelyif you think it's of no significance. But in the path--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have no reason to assume that our[estimate] is any more correct than Ed's, but our calculation is thatalternative A does not involve even a slight increase in interestrates. It might involve a slight decrease in interest rates,depending upon the assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're saying interest rates. What Iam talking about is the federal funds rate. I am not sure that theother rates aren't too high relative to the federal funds rate rightat the moment. So if it worked out that we didn't get an increase inthe federal funds rate, the other rates might come down again. We aretalking now about expectations among other things. What we aretalking about operationally, just to repeat it, is that if we wenthalfway in between, that involves knocking three quarters of apercentage point off the growth objective for the period between nowand the end of September. And there's no assurance about that; wenever come out that close. We are not going to have a 3/4 percentagepoint difference in any measurable way. What we will have is asomewhat higher level of borrowing and, therefore, a somewhat higherlevel of the federal funds rate however the aggregates finally comeout. So the bias--well, bias may not be the right word. It sets upan increased probability of a somewhat higher federal funds rate,obviously, the more we reduce the aggregate numbers.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As contrasted to alternative A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, as contrasted to alternative A.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we are trying to walk abalance here because we don't want a perception in the markets thatthere has been a shift in policy. If it does work out that the fedfunds rate is at the floor--that we have to move toward the 8 percentfloor--which I would be willing to live with, particularly combinedwith the intermediate target between "A" and "B," we would be flirtinga little with a possible adverse reaction in the long market. There-42-8/12/80could be a perception of a definite easing. If we go for alternativeA, we might be well advised to keep the funds floor where it is.MR. WALLICH. There has been a great deal of discussion ofthat abroad, a great deal of exploration of that in the market and aninterpretation of our actions. So, I think if they smoked out that weare willing to let the funds rate go to 8 percent on average, thatwould be regarded as a clear signal that we have eased.MR. PARTEE. It would be associated with weak growth in theaggregates.MR. WALLICH. Well, if they understood the process correctly.But since they always look at the interest rate anyway--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would rather [not] lower the floorto 8 percent, Chuck, if we [went with] the compromise.MR. PARTEE. It's such a small issue that I am prepared to goeither way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a question of which way thepreference is. I'll put them both to a vote for preferences. Let metake the compromise first with an 8 percent floor in this case and aninitial borrowing assumption, let's say, of $75 million. We'll takeall of the decisions on the easy side and go.MS. TEETERS. Are they consistent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, anything is consistent. Who knows?MR. GRAMLEY. What goes with this--"A" or "A minus"?MR. PARTEE. "A minus."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is "A minus" or "B plus."MR. GRAMLEY. What's the alternative?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "A."MS. TEETERS. On "A" would you drop the floor to 8 percent,too?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There may be a little argument about that.I'd be willing to, but--. Let me put it this way, just so you havetwo choices in front of you. One is 8 to 14 percent and $75 millionnot interpreted too closely--we're only talking about a $25 milliondifference here--with the numbers halfway between "A" and "B." That'sone choice.MR. ALTMANN. On June to September?MR. PARTEE. It's the same either way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the same, assuming the arithmetictranslation is right. It involves different numbers, but the numbers-43-8/12/80are halfway between those in "A" and "B." That against "A" straight,let me say.MR. PARTEE. With 8-1/2 to 14 percent. Those are our twochoices.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That and $100 million of borrowing.MR. SCHULTZ. It's not a big difference, is it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MR. MORRIS. I find it hard to understand why we have a moreliberal funds range with a more restrictive monetary growth rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it looks a little funny. Theargument is Tony's here, in that he doesn't want to take too much riskof the funds rate going too much lower. So the more we risk it on oneside, the more he wants to block out the risk on the other side.MR. PARTEE. Where are all these people who thought there wasgoing to be explosive growth in the aggregates? I guess they are notrepresented.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My gut feeling is that [growth] is morelikely to be up than down. But that's a feeling.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we never know. So if we aregoing to be perceived as planning our targets on M-1B, and M2 to somedegree, I think it makes some sense to be a little cautious.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take those two choices. Do youunderstand them?MR. WALLICH. It's 8 percent and $75 million on the one and8-1/2 percent and $100 million on the other. We are not offeredanything "better" than that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What can be better than these wonderfuloptions? As a matter of pure preference, it's likely to be 50/50,but let me just try. The first one is the halfway in between with theadjustments that I suggested.SPEAKER(?). Voting members only?MR. ALTMANN. Voting members, please. Five.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That leaves me with straight "A." I'dlike a show of hands to see if everybody is voting. That's five. Ididn't vote. Who else didn't vote?MR. WALLICH. I didn't vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I was afraid of. Wehave exactly [half who voted for each].MR. PARTEE. Do you want to try a straight "A" with 8 to 14percent and $75 million?-44-8/12/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in some sense that's more liberalthan either. What about that one? The trouble is we are going to getmore intense feelings the other way, too. It seems as if these twochoices are going to maximize the vote, and I suspect there is a lotof indifference between them.MR. PARTEE. Why don't you try "can live with" on "A"?MS. TEETERS. We could [all probably] live with either one ofthem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suspect everybody could live with eitherone.MR. PARTEE. Then you can state your preference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I guess it comes really down to mypreference.MR. GRAMLEY. We're giving the Chairman unlimited power!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I guess I'd go with the "B plus" or "Aminus" one, whatever you want to call it.MS. TEETERS. Is it possible to get that sort of peculiarspecification?MR. PARTEE. Sure.MR. MORRIS. The Committee can specify anything.MS. TEETERS. I know, but I'd like to know if it works ornot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in fact, we are expecting the fundsrate to fall well within the [range].MR. PARTEE. Yes, we're just lowering the lower limit on thefunds range; we may not use it at all.MS. TEETERS. Yes, but the way we are setting the policy isto bias the funds rate up.MR. PARTEE. Well, it has plenty of room to go to 14 percent.MR. MORRIS. But we are starting with [borrowing of] only $75million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Secretary points out to me, and he'sprobably right in one sense, that if we go halfway in between, we willhave fractions that we have never used before for quarterly growthrates.MR. SCHULTZ. Take them up one quarter point toward "A" andthat will take care of everybody!MR. PARTEE. Yes, except for the M-1A figure, which we couldleave [at the precise average] of 6-1/2 percent.-45-8/12/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe that is the way to do it. Let metry to modify this again. This comes a little closer to "A," I guess.What would be in the directive is 6-1/2, 9, and 12 percent. I thinkthat does look a little better somehow.MR. ALTMANN. That's for June to September.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's what would appear in thedirective.MS. TEETERS. Again, are those consistent relationships?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, the staff projection of a consistentrelationship has been off by 2 percentage points, I think.MR. SCHULTZ. The staff takes an awful beating!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't say that in any way as criticismof the staff but only of the reality of the uncertainty inherent inthese numbers and the idea that we could project down to the quarterpercentage point. That may be a better [formulation] anyway. Whydon't we vote on that: 6-1/2, 9, and 12 percent in the directive.MS. TEETERS. And the funds range is what--8 to 14 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MS. TEETERS. And what about borrowing?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put $75 to $100 million in there.If you want to say $75 million, that's fine with me. Whatever yousay. When the staff makes that great judgment about how to handle the$3 billion bulge that appears next week, it will be more importantthan whether we have a borrowing assumption of $75 or $100 million,but I think we've given the staff a tone with which to approach thisthat they understand.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If I had a different last name, I'dtell you it was truly Solomonic!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does everyone understand what we arevoting on?MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesPresident Winn YesPresident Balles YesSPEAKER(?). I think you ought to congratulate Henry.-46-8/12/80 -47-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich will have a concurringstatement. September 16 is the date of the next meeting and we willdiscuss the future calendar at that meeting on the basis of somememorandum I will send you before then.END OF MEETING