Meeting of Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 8-9, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, January 8, 1980, at 3:30 p.m.and continuing on Wednesday, January 9, 1980, at 9:15 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. ColdwellMr. KimbrelMr. MayoMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Baughman, Eastburn, and Willes, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas,Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, 1/ General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Axilrod, EconomistMr. Holmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Brandt, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Keran,Kichline, Parthemos, Scheld, and Truman,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domesticpolicy directive.1/8-9/80Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Kalchbrenner and Prell, AssociateDirectors, Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beck and Simpson, 2/ Senior Economists,Banking Section, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. McIntosh, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of BostonMessrs. Balbach, Burns, Corrigan, J. Davis, T. Davis,Eisenmenger, and Fousek, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, NewYork, Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, and New York,respectivelyMessrs. Danforth and Mullineaux, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis andPhiladelphia, respectivelyMr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York2/ Attended Tuesday session only.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJanuary 8-9, 1980January 8, 1980--Afternoon SessionMR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [That was the change in System holdings ofsecurities] since when?MR. STERNLIGHT. That was for all of '79.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve, if you want to add something thatbears upon the nature of the operations, this is probably as good atime as any to do it.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have some tables we could passout, which are somewhat similar to the ones that we made available tothe Committee at the last meeting and which might be helpful inconsidering how and whether to proceed with these techniques. Thesetables are designed to elaborate the numbers that underlie Mr.Sternlight's operations. As you can see, they are divided into twocolumns. On the thought that the Committee wouldn't want to get toofar off its path for any sustained period, we divided this period--theseven-week intermeeting period--into a four-week interval and a three-week interval. The three-week period ends tomorrow. The tables[exhibit] all the perils of lagged reserve accounting, which makes therelation between reserves and money in the short run not as close asone might hope. [Operations] were designed to attempt to attain agrowth rate in M1 in the September-to-December period of a little over4 percent and in the November-to-December period of something like 5percent. In the event, as you saw in the Bluebook, we were a bitshort on the growth rate in M1 and also in M2; but I think within anyreasonable margin of error we were not really very far short.If you focus on the last column, which [covers] the mostrecent three-week period, you can see that the monetary base turnedout about $379 million short of the original path we set. And you cansee that total reserves turned out about $218 million short of theadjusted path. As will be clear shortly, the adjustments were only $4million. So it really is about $220 million short of the originalpath; there was a currency shortfall involved. With total reservesrunning short, the Manager added roughly $150 million to the originalnonborrowed path. That is shown in the third panel, where you seeadjustments of $146 million. That simply is the $150 million addedminus the $4 million, which was a decline in the original totalreserve path. So that is the added adjustment to nonborrowed reservesbecause total reserves were running short of what seemed consistentwith this money stock figure, again recognizing the looseness inlinkages because of lagged reserve accounting. Thus, to translatethat into borrowings, you can see that the original path based on theCommittee's decision in November, which was to assume borrowings at$1.7 billion, would be subtracted from total reserves to give [thelevel of nonborrowed reserves] the Manager would aim for initially.After the $150 million adjustment, that would get us down to $1,550million in borrowings; and given the weakness in total reservesdemanded relative to what was projected as needed to get the [desiredgrowth in the] aggregates, actual borrowings, of course, fell short1/8-9/80even of that. So the deviation of $218 million from the [assumedlevel of] borrowing turned out to be exactly the same as the deviationfrom the adjusted total reserve path of $218 million. That's justsimply arithmetic.The source of some of the problems we were having is shown onthe next page; they are inherent in this kind of targeting procedure.Again, I'd say that thus far I think we've been fairly lucky in comingup with growth in money that was pretty consistent with what theCommittee wanted. As you can see, on the original total reserve pathwe were off $222 million from [the path] we first constructed.Adjustments came later. They really involved two components, and theywent in opposite directions. One was excess reserves, which actuallyturned out to be $166 million higher than we had built into theoriginal path; that is line B in the last column. And in terms of theuses of total reserves, required reserves were running $388 millionweaker. So, simply taking total reserves as the sum of excess andrequired reserves, total reserves were running [below by] $222million. Thinking of it from the sources side, we just didn't supplythat much reserves. With lagged reserve accounting, to do so we wouldhave had to pile in a lot more excess reserves than even the bankswere willing to hold. I don't know how much that would have amountedto because we would have had to run down borrowings to begin with.Now, the bulk of the shortfall in required reserves was inthe type of liabilities requiring reserves that didn't enter intoeither M1 or M2. As you can see, there were shortfalls relative toexpectations of $80 million in large CDs, $90 million in U.S.government deposits, and $167 million in the marginal reserves, whichare connected with the shortfall in large CDs. That's essentiallybecause bank credit ran a lot weaker than we expected and banks simplywere not borrowing in the market in order to meet those creditdemands. Thus, we adjusted the path, really, so that the Managerwouldn't supply those reserves. We hadn't made any adjustments topath since October 6th until this past three weeks. And we had suchlarge consistent shortfalls in these items that it seemed that wewould get too much money unless we adjusted the path, so the Managerin effect absorbed the reserves released by the decline in thesedeposits. Of course there was a shortfall in currency relative toexpectations, as shown in the third line, line E. And in terms ofreserve requirements, that meant we would have had to add $30 millionto total reserves to compensate for the shortfall in currency.However, that was more than made up, as you can see, by the sharp dropin required reserves behind large negotiable CDs, U.S. governmentdeposits, and marginal reserves. Those minuses much more thancompensated for the added reserves needed for the shortfall incurrency. That is, simply put, the drop in negotiable CDs releasedreserves that could be used to expand the deposits needed to make upfor the shortfall in currency. So, netting through all those things,we ended up reducing the total reserve path by $175 million, as youcan see in line F, to reflect changes in deposit mix and in currencyflows. It's a rather rough net that won't add up exactly, but it goesin the direction that all items listed under D and E would suggest on[balance]. On the other hand, because excess reserves were runningextremely [high], we felt we had to add reserves because banks'behavior with regard to excess reserves was totally different in termsof magnitude from what we had expected. So in the end, as Petermentioned, because banks kept holding more excess reserves than we1/8-9/80were expecting every week, somewhat belatedly we added $171 million.So, those adjustments net out to virtually nothing. If you took thatminus $4 million and related it to the $222 million, you get this $218million, which is the deviation from the adjusted path. In general,this time it seemed very reasonable to make these adjustments to thepath. In the previous periods we did not because we didn't seeextremely large sustained movements; the movements we did see in theearlier periods were more toward rapid expansion in CDs and in bankcredit, things that we assumed the Committee wanted to hold down.However, this time it was toward very weak bank credit; and we assumedthat the Committee did not want that very weak bank credit to bereflected in excessive expansion in Ml, so we made some offsettingadjustments. Of course, with lagged reserve accounting, the impactson Ml are not related one-for-one to what we do this week. One has towait for some time to come. But in any event, by the time all thiswas done, we still ended up with weak total reserves because wecouldn't provide enough nonborrowed reserves to bring total reservesup to path within this three-week period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure that's crystal clear! So, Ithink it's time to raise questions--not just on the details of Peter'soperations, but questions that bear upon the operating techniquesgenerally. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, just a comment. I think I understood thedirection of your adjustments, Steve, as you went through this. But Icertainly don't understand it from this table on the second page. Ican't make out the magnitude of the adjustments. The arithmetic justdoesn't work very well, at least as I was trying to follow what yousaid, although I understand the direction of change. The otherquestion I have is on the very last comment you made, which was thateven after these adjustments you fell short of the desired adjustedreserve path because you just couldn't supply the nonborrowedreserves. Would you explain why it is that you couldn't get in thenonborrowed reserves?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He couldn't get in the total reserves.MR. AXILROD. We fell short on total reserves, not on thenonborrowed.MR. PARTEE. Well, one of the things that is disturbing me--about the whole period really but particularly the last month or so--is that we don't seem to be getting any market impact. We have tohave feed-through if this process is going to work. And yet,regardless of the shortfall in reserves and the shortfall in money andthe fact that borrowings were coming down, we held the funds rate atabout 14 percent all the way through. It looks as if somebody else isdetermining the funds rate. My question is: Under thosecircumstances, since we weren't anywhere close to the bottom level ofthe funds rate range that was specified, why didn't you put in morenonborrowed reserves in order to try to get this process of adjustmentin the market going more strongly than it did?MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Partee, that's certainly a veryfair question. It has always been an issue, so far as I understandthe procedures. My understanding of the original Committee decisionwas that we would put more weight on nonborrowed reserves than on1/8-9/80total reserves, but still the Manager would have freedom when therewas clear cause. The staff would have the freedom to adjust the totalreserves but the Manager would have the freedom to adjust thenonborrowed reserves when there was clear cause for there being ashortfall. So, early in the three-week period, we did add $150million to nonborrowed when it appeared that the gap between the totalreserves path and total reserves demanded was something on the orderof $450 million. And then in each successive week that gap of $450million kept getting narrower as required reserves began revising upfrom what we had [projected]. The money supply [growth] estimate forDecember when we made this adjustment was on the order of 3-1/2percent or so, I think; it has now ended up at 5-1/2 percent. So asthat gap narrowed, I think--Peter can speak for himself--we were alittle reluctant to make any further adjustment because we were goingin the right direction and we were on the nonborrowed path. Now, itdid seem to us that the funds rate ought to drop as member bankborrowing dropped from $1.7 billion to the $1.2 to $1.3 billion area.In the event, now that bank borrowings in the last past three dayshave been running $600 or $700 million and the funds rate still hasnot dropped, there seems to have been a change in the demand forborrowing function, so to speak. That is, member banks, who had beenvery willing borrowers in late October and over the course ofNovember--they had high borrowing at a funds rate that's lower than itis now--have backed away from the window. It's quite possible that wehave been late in catching up with that and that in some sense thenonborrowed path ought to have been set higher because of this changein member banks' borrowing patterns. And as Mr. Sternlight mentionedin his briefing, this week in effect he's adding more to thenonborrowed path than is indicated even in this table becauseborrowing is running so low. If that's the case, then the $1.7billion of borrowing that was set originally was way too high toachieve those particular targets, and the downward adjustments in themare coming, in a sense, with a lag.MR. PARTEE. There may be a fair [amount of] instability inthat demand. You may remember a month ago, or seven weeks ago orwhenever [the meeting] was, we thought there had been an increase inthe demand for borrowings compared with earlier in the experience whenthere wasn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What plausible reason do you have for thefunds rate staying as high as it has with borrowings as low as theyare?MR. AXILROD. I don't have any very good reason at $600 or$700 million, but at $1.2 and $1.3 billion I think that's returningmore to the historical pattern. When we evaluate the spread of thefunds rate over the discount rate, $1.2 or $1.3 billion of borrowingisn't unreasonable. What was out of the historical pattern wasNovember and late October when we had much higher borrowing at aspread that was even less than we have now. That was what was [off]the historical pattern. What we had up until three days ago is closerto the historical pattern. Now we have much less borrowing than onewould expect historically, and I would assume borrowing is going tojump back up.MR. STERNLIGHT. If I can interject, these last few days seemdifficult to explain; the rather low level of borrowing is just not1/8-9/80what one would associate with a funds rate of around 2 percent overthe discount rate. And, as Steve mentioned, because of that we madean interim adjustment in what we were aiming for in nonborrowedreserves, feeling that to try to press nonborrowed reserves down tothe path level in this current week would have meant going into themarket and extracting reserves when the funds rate was around 13-3/4or 14 percent. That obviously didn't make sense; and in effect we'vebeen running this week with an assumption that an adjustment of about$500 to $600 million should be added to the nonborrowed or taken awayfrom the [borrowed] reserves.MR. PARTEE. I know it's awfully early, but what bothers meabout this whole experiment so far, Paul, is that I don't get anysense of dynamics working. That is, we had a very nice outcome takingthe quarter as a whole. I think everybody around the table wouldagree that the money number calmed down and the markets have beenbetter and all that. But that all could have been an adjustment tothe one-time change in conditions that occurred early in October, withmuch higher rates and the availability constraint and that kind ofthing. Since then I haven't had much sense of dynamics in the processthat would lead to, say, restoration of a higher growth rate in moneyif it were lower than what we wanted. And it has tended to be lowerthan we wanted. Perhaps it's just too early, but I don't see it.That's what bothers me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have seen what you are talkingabout if the funds rate had seemed to reflect this low level ofborrowing.MR. PARTEE. I think that's probably right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.MR. COLDWELL. Steve, for my simple-minded, poor mathematicalabilities, tell me if I can make this statement and say it'sreasonably accurate: That the things that threw you off were thedemand for excess reserves and the shortfall in borrowing. The latterwas being made up by an enlarged nonborrowed path and the former--coupled with a currency shortfall, I guess--brought you to theshortfall in the total required reserves path. Is that reasonablyclose or not?MR. AXILROD. [Yes], in looking at the uses of totalreserves. But if you really make it tough for yourself and analyzethis by looking at the sources of total reserves, as I think oneshould--if you think you're on a total reserve target, which theCommittee has not clearly said it's on, having said it's much more ona nonborrowed target--you would say that we fell short on the totalreserves in this three-week period simply because we didn't put inenough nonborrowed reserves to push up the total reserves to target.Of course, if we had put in nonborrowed reserves--given the requiredreserves, which aren't going to change that fast--borrowings wouldhave dropped, one for one. Then eventually we would have had to addto the excess reserves, which were running [about] $400 or $500million, and we would have ended up with $700 million or so in excessreserves--that would have been the mechanism--and very close to zeroborrowing to attain this. The funds rate very likely would havedropped well below the bottom of the range. I would say--and I don't-5-1/8-9/80know if Mr. Sternlight would put it in the same way--that if youthought we were on a total reserve target, the reason we fell shortwas that we didn't push out the nonborrowed reserves aggressivelyenough and push up excess reserves--which is all we can push aroundwith required reserves fixed--sufficiently to get the total reserves.And what would have stopped us would have been the bottom of the fundsrate range. We'd clearly have gone below that.What in practice stopped us, I think, was that the pattern wesaw developing was not out of keeping with what in effect had beenplanned at the time of the Committee meeting and, judging from theCommittee's discussion, what the Committee would have foundacceptable. That is, at the time of the Committee meeting we had aNovember rate of growth in M1 of 1.9 percent, and for December--it wasjust after the meeting when we had the revisions--Ml growth of 7.9percent. Midway through the period we were looking at growth inNovember of 1 percent and in December of 3.8 percent. That was aroundmid-December. Then [our estimates changed] as we got to the end ofDecember, and now we are looking at [M1 growth in] November of 1percent and in December of 5.7 percent. So it began to look to usthat growth was moving up. That's what I was explaining to GovernorPartee. Required reserves were coming up and as the period went on--in the last two or three weeks--our shortfall against total reserveswas becoming less; it appeared that we were moving in the properdirection. And since we were right on the nonborrowed adjusted path,which was already $150 million above what was originally set, itdidn't seem reasonable in that context to take a more aggressiveaction to chase the total reserves in this very short period. I don'tknow whether I'm being extremely clear, but I think that's the trueanswer.MR. WALLICH. We're back in 1937.MR. PARTEE. Well, we still haven't found out whether thereare any dynamics here that will work or not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's true. But I also thinkwe're giving this an unfair test in assuming that we can be within 1percent of whatever the money supply [target] is.MR. AXILROD. I was going to say, Mr. Chairman, if I may,that I don't know what the test of success is, but if the Committeewas aiming at 4.2 percent in M1 and achieved 3 percent, by my measurethat's success.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By all past [measures]. Governor Wallich.SPEAKER(?). If it wasn't a coincidence, it's wonderful.[CHAIRMAN VOLCKER]. If it was far off, the staff would sayit was a coincidence!MR. SCHULTZ. The Chairman giveth and the Chairman takethaway!MR. WALLICH. The mechanism described just now must have somesimilarity with what went on during the '30s when [the FOMC] foundthat it could not generate the money supply it wanted. Well, I don't1/8-9/80know what [the FOMC at the time] wanted, but at any rate most of theexpansion they did engage in, mostly through gold purchases notsecurity purchases, went into excess reserves. But this is a veryfaint effect here, which would not worry me a great deal. What doesworry me is that I now encounter, not only here but abroad, acriticism of our procedures that in effect says we're back to theprocedures of the 1920s when borrowing was regarded as contractionary;the more borrowed reserves you had, the more contractionary effect youwere setting up. Banks were trying to get out of debt, so to push thebanks into debt was the way to tighten credit; that is sometimesassociated with Riefler's name. As I say, I have heard this commentthat our procedures now are very similar to that. We push the banksinto rediscount, by operating on nonborrowed reserves; the lessnonborrowed reserves we supply, the more they have to borrow; andthat, we say, lowers monetary expansion. It does so presumably bydriving up the funds rate and driving up other rates, and that reducesthe demand for money. Now, I wouldn't say that this is a badmechanism. And I wouldn't say that borrowing is expansionary as someof our critics say in the sense that more reserves, of course, is moreexpansionary than less reserves. I would say that we aim at a givenvolume of reserves and that the composition of that volume of reservesmakes a difference. If they're all nonborrowed, it's moreexpansionary than if a higher percentage of them is borrowed. Thatseems to me a reasonable approach.In support of a rejection of this criticism I would arguethat some of the things we experienced here all do point in somewhatthe same direction. We got low borrowing at a given interest rate.That would suggest that there is greater reluctance to be in debt nowthan there was in the past and that there is a true reluctance to bein debt that causes banks to restrain their [credit] expansion.Second, we get high excess reserves. Well, that seems to be the samephenomenon of caution on the part of the banks. They don't want toget into debt; they'd rather have excess reserves. And, finally, thefunds rate remains high and doesn't go down as one would expect.Well, again, they're bidding for funds in order to have liquidity, inorder to be safe. I could visualize that this is simply happeningbecause we're in a transition period and they are learning the ropes.And after a while the willingness [to hold] excess reserves will wearoff and the reluctance to borrow may wear off. But for the timebeing, it seems to me that this criticism that I hear--and as I say Iwas surprised to hear it in Switzerland--is not justified. I'd liketo hear what Peter and Steve have to say about this.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think you sorted out those pointsvery well, Governor Wallich. Borrowing has always had this kind ofdual role. It's a source of reserves, but it's a source of reserveswith a string on it and is certainly less expansionary than if thosereserves came from open market purchases or even from float or someother factor beyond our control. We've found ourselves having to makeadjustments for the possible change in attitudes of banks toward thewindow. I alluded to one just now. We are not sure--and anyconclusion drawn from the last few days would be very preliminary--butto the extent that there may be something to it, we have made aninterim adjustment to allow for that greater reluctance to use thewindow these last few days and have been willing to provide morenonborrowed reserves accordingly.1/8-9/80MR. SCHULTZ. They differentiate that much between buyingmoney and borrowing it?MS. TEETERS. But why would they change in mid-course? Youseemed to be right on track in the first four-week period and thensomething changed and they became more reluctant [to borrow] in thepast three weeks.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we're puzzled, particularly becauseduring the first two weeks of this last [period], as Steve said, itlooked as if banks might be getting back to a more normal relationshipof borrowing and the discount rate. And this current week just seemsto be a little world of its own; I think it is really too [early] todraw any conclusion from it.MR. PARTEE. You didn't comment on the excess reserves, but Idon't suppose that can go all that far.MR. STERNLIGHT. I tend to associate that with the year-endpressures to a considerable extent, perhaps more than the newoperating techniques because, after all, they didn't jump to hold highexcess reserves right after October 6th.MS. TEETERS. The funds rate was also volatile in the earlierperiod. It just seems to have been almost cemented in the last two orthree weeks.MR. STERNLIGHT. It has been surprisingly stable, yes.MS. TEETERS. It seems to me that they would have been morecautious at first--in the post-October 6th period--than currently.MR. AXILROD. Exactly. That's what's so puzzling, GovernorTeeters. One would have expected a response of a bigger demand forreserves--that is, wanting less borrowing and more excess reserves--earlier and then getting used to it later. And what we're seeing nowis an increased demand for free reserves in the last three or fourweeks relative to what was the case earlier. In some sense for anygiven amount of nonborrowed that we provide, if there's a biggerdemand for free reserves, we're going to get less expansion for them[as they] go into excess or into reduced borrowing.MS. TEETERS. And much less volatility in the funds rate.MR. AXILROD. Well, that may depend on certain other factorslike the attitudes of people in the funds market and how [they react]to the volatility.[CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.]MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll just make twobrief comments. I'll start out by saying that I don't pretend tounderstand the procedures, so my comments are probably way off themark. But the discussion fascinates me. It strikes me very much likethe discussion one reads in the paper each morning where people areexplaining what happened in the stock market. They always have somespecific reason for why the stock market did what it did. I don'tthink we really know how all these demand functions--for excess1/8-9/80reserves, borrowed reserves, nonborrowed reserves--are changing in theshort run. I just don't think [we know] anything that can make usreach very comfortable judgments on why things are doing what they'redoing. Going back to Henry's comments, at times borrowings are insome sense restrictive and at times they're not; it all depends. Ithink the banking system can have a net borrowed position for a longtime and not feel constrained at all, depending on an array of variousfactors. So, I just feel very uncomfortable with the procedure thatwe seem to be getting into where we're modifying paths and makingadjustments and so on because presumably we are able to identifyshifts of a kind that I don't see how we can identify. Now, I don'tknow what the alternative to that is. But somehow it seems to me thatwe've got to work our way to a position where we figure out which ofthese things really matters most--nonborrowed reserves, totalreserves, the base, or whatever it is--and set the dial on that andthen just let it run for a while. And if we see the dynamics that weought to see, that's fine; if we don't, then we have to go back andfind something else. I feel very [un]comfortable with the situationwhere we think we can operate on a reserves basis the same way we wereoperating on a federal funds rate basis. I think the two are verydifferent kinds of procedures; we can't move from a federal fundstarget to a reserves target and make all these very refinedcalculations and adjustments.MR. AXILROD. If I may, Mr. Chairman, the staff feels thesame reluctance you do about modifying any paths, President Willes.In this three-week period it was the first time we did it in anyconsistent way during the twelve weeks this experiment has beenrunning. And it was only, of course, because it seemed that we had avery clear movement of factors. That's a partial answer to GovernorPartee. We did [the adjustment of] $175 million early in the period,and as these factors got bigger or smaller we didn't want to adjustfor small changes because, after all, then we would end up chasing it--going up one week, down the next, and we wouldn't know. So we tryto [adjust] as infrequently as possible just on the grounds that youmentioned, because things would tend to average out. However, whenthere was a very clear change, it began to look as if we had verylittle alternative. But it was only because of very, very clearchanges, we thought.MR. ROOS. I wonder if some of the lack of dynamism or someof the sluggishness in this whole process might not be a reflection ofthe fact that large segments of the markets aren't quite sure exactlywhat we're doing. That leads me to the question that I would directto Steve or Peter: What would happen if we specifically and publiclydescribed what our paths are--or at least some of our paths--so thatthe markets could adjust to what they know our game plan really isinstead of feeling that there's some vague thing going on that they'renot sure of. Their reluctance or lack of reaction may be due in partto the fact that people don't want to stick their necks out in themarkets until they really know what our reserve path is or what ourmonetary base path is. What are the negatives to defining thosethings publicly?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there is some appeal to that,President Roos, except that in a period like this where we felt therewas an overriding reason for making these adjustments in the path, Iwould wonder if in this whole dialogue to the public announcing a path-9-1/8-9/80and then having to modify it could lead to considerably moreuncertainty and confusion than if we could have some understandingthat we have to exercise some flexibility as we apply this procedure.MR. ROOS. As this process goes on, Peter, and as we become alittle more comfortable and confident in the process, would youanticipate that we would describe more publicly and more specificallywhat we're doing? Obviously, if unforeseen circumstances cause us tochange, we could certainly explain why we're changing.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I would certainly hope that we can getto the point where we can explain more to the public about the generalmethodology and how we formulate these paths and carry them out. Atwhat point we might want to or be able to post the path on the wallwhile we're going through a period, I don't know. I feel it's tooearly to reach a judgment on that.MR. AXILROD. [I'd make] two other points regarding [theissue] you raised, President Roos. I don't think publishing a reservepath will make the relationship between reserves and deposits any morepredictable. I doubt that public relations [efforts] would work inthe direction of making that relationship more predictable because Ithink that depends on other things. We may want to publish a long-runreserve path, but I think it would have to be for other reasons.Secondly, though, if we [publish] a short-run reserve path--say forthree months--I think we're going to generate in the markets the sameeffect that is generated by the money supply publication. Every timewe come out with our reserves number, which we publish once a week,markets are going to see [where it is] in relation to the path andthen start arguing with themselves [about what] that means. Theymight say it means that we're going to lower reserves next week andthat means the funds rate is going to go up next week, which may ormay not be true because we may have a pattern in mind very differentfrom theirs. And it might generate unnecessary movements in themarket. While that's not fatal to anything, it's an unnecessaryimpediment to the smooth carrying out of operations. Those are theother two points I would add to what Mr. Sternlight said.MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I must say that as a formerdiscount officer I find my views very sympathetic to those of GovernorWallich. I'm reminded of the fall of either 1966 or 1969, when therewas a good deal of discussion as to why the funds rate was so low. Inmy mind the explanation that fall was that under some program of easyaccess to the discount window related to business loan restraint,was borrowing $1 billion for about three or fourstraight weeks. And the funds rate slipped, much to the consternationof the people at the Desk. But [the reason] was rather simple: Therewas an additional supply there against a rather constant demand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You didn't talk to the people at the Desk,did you?MR. TIMLEN. Yes, I did. Spence Marsh and I went throughthat; I think it was in 1966. Yes, we have had some problems.MR. PARTEE. They got an extra billion dollars?-10-1/8-9/80MR. TIMLEN. Yes, they did. I think Governor Mitchell hadsome kind of program involving access to the window if a bank promisedto be a good fellow in terms of not being aggressive and makingbusiness loans. I think the rate may have stayed high this past weekbecause banks for some reason or other--maybe the reason Henry cited--have not borrowed. So there was a supply/demand factor here; thesupply of reserves in totality was less, so the demand in the fundsmarket was proportionally great and the rate stayed where it was.It's a question of the chicken and the egg every once in a while. I'mnot sure which is the chicken and which is the egg in this preciseperiod of two or three weeks.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, going back to October 6th, I thinkyou wisely recommended to us that we not put all our eggs in onebasket in terms of operating on a reserves target but that weexperiment for a while with multiple targets. Now we not only havemultiple operating targets, we have multiple intermediate targets inthe various Ms. I wonder after three months of experience how thestaff feels--I guess I would like to ask both Steve and Peter--aboutwhether it's now time to make some provisional judgments on whetherthis three-pronged set of reserves that you're tracking is proving tobe useful or if you'd rather have one single target. Another part ofthe question, going back to your remarks on lagged reserve accounting,Steve, and how it is complicating--I guess that's the word for it--your job, is whether in your mind any case is shaping up for a movetoward contemporaneous reserve accounting to make the monetary policyimplementation more expeditious.MR. AXILROD. Well, there may be some differences [of view]among the staff on the issues you raised, President Balles. I'llrespond to two of your points. I have not thought for the ten tofifteen years I've thought about it that there was ever any use tolagged reserve accounting, and this experience of the past threemonths reinforces me in that judgment. However, I also have notthought that doing away with a two-week lag is miraculously going tomake it easy to achieve the monetary aggregates targets. So, while Ithink lagged reserve accounting is not a plus in targeting monetaryaggregates through reserves, doing away with it isn't going to meanthat we're going to do better than hitting 3 percent when we're aimingat 4.2 percent. We could continue, in an unbiased way, sometimeshitting 5.4 percent when we're aiming at 4.2 percent--getting withinplus or minus a percentage point [or so] over a three-month period.In my own mind, and maybe I'm wrong on it, I think that was a fairlygood result from the Committee's point of view.Secondly, I've become more convinced--this goes back foryears because I remember I spent some [time] years [ago] trying totalk President Morris out of total reserves--that in practice totalreserves is the more appropriate guide in the short run, namelybecause of this fatal flaw of trying to decide what is the properlevel of borrowing. It's very hard to decide that. And, therefore,while I know we can't hit a total reserve [target] even without laggedreserve accounting in the short run--because the banks can repayborrowing faster or things like that--this experience indicates to methat it's a somewhat better guide. But using [total reserves] more asa guide automatically introduces even more interest rate volatilitythan putting emphasis on nonborrowed reserves. So there's somethingof a tradeoff. Those are the two things---11-1/8-9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How are you going to use total reserves asa guide without making some judgments about borrowing?MR. AXILROD. Well, we're inevitably going to have to makethe judgments one way or another. But, for example, if banks aren'tborrowing and we're on a nonborrowed target, we're going to fall shorton total. If we're on a total reserves target and they are notborrowing, we automatically sort of have to put in more nonborrowedreserves and we would come up to our total target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they are not borrowing.MR. AXILROD. If they are not borrowing. It's simply likethat. We, of course, will always have these kinds of judgments tomake.MR. BALLES. Steve, do I assume your absence of any commentson the base to mean that you haven't really been paying all that muchattention to it?MR. AXILROD. To be perfectly frank, we've paid no attentionto the base in the process but we've paid attention to currency.That's because if currency were falling short persistently as it didlast time--if it fell short $500 million, then that would mean to menot to put in $500 million more of reserves because doing so wouldproduce a multiple in deposits and way too much money. The way wewould do it is that we'd say currency is falling short $500 million,16 percent is the marginal reserve requirement on demand deposits, andthat means to make up for that we would have to put in $80 millionmore total reserves. If that were happening persistently, we'd haveto adjust our path for total reserves up by $80 million to make up forit. So, while not really paying any attention to the base in anoperating sense, we are trying to pay attention to currency as well asnon-member deposits to see that our total reserve path is properlyadjusted to come close to what the Committee wants for money growth.MR. PARTEE. You'd want to substitute $500 million indeposits for the $500 million shortfall in currency.MR. AXILROD. Right, so we'd use a fraction of the reserves.MR. MORRIS. Well, I'd point out that our debate about totalreserves dates back to 1969, which tells you how long we've beenthrashing around this problem. But we shouldn't be too impatient withthis. We have a lot to learn about how to run this system. Icertainly don't feel the way Mark does that the adjustments to thenonborrowed path were wrong. I think it would have been wrong to havepermitted an even greater deviation of total reserves from the pathneeded to produce [the desired growth in] the aggregates. And just aswe are learning, the commercial banks are going through a learningphase now. I think that $600 million of borrowing is an aberration,which we are not going to find in future periods once the moneymanagers of the banks have adapted themselves to this new operatingprocedure. I met with a group of them a couple of weeks ago and Ifound them in a great state of confusion as to how they ought tomanage their affairs in this new regime. So we're both in a learningphase; and I think we can get back to more predictable commercial bank-12-1/8-9/80behavior once the money managers begin to learn how others behave inthis new regime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to make some decision and wemight as well dispose of it now, if we can, as to how to proceed atleast until the next meeting, but I would presume it is going to befor beyond the next meeting. We are clearly open to modifications ofthe precise technique. Unless we want to argue otherwise, I thinkimplicitly we will proceed with something like the present techniqueuntil [we decide to] change, assuming the general technique hassupport. There are certainly aspects of it that have to be looked at.I think it's literally true that only in the last week or so can wereally begin questioning why the market didn't respond in a way onemight have expected. And that's much too short a period to have anyvery [strong] judgments. I also think there must be some element ofcoincidence in our coming as close as we came [to our money supplyobjectives] in the sense that even if these techniques are better thanI think they are, I doubt that each quarter we're going to be within 1percent or even, as with the December figure, off by not much morethan 1 percent of what we finally--MR. AXILROD. That's right. Well, maybe lagged reserveaccounting isn't the impediment I think it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we hadn't had a nice little bulge inthe money supply in the last published figure, December would havebeen a lot below [our objective], but I don't think it was entirelyour good management that produced that bulge at that particular time.MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I don't have any problems withcontinuing on the procedure. I do think there's some question as towhether the Committee would wish to leave with the Manager and whoeverelse is guiding this the right to change the nonborrowed path byexceptionally large amounts. The amount it was changed this timedoesn't bother me, but I can see a possibility where the shortfallmight be a half billion to a billion dollars. It seems to me thatshould be the Committee's decision, not a Desk decision.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me return to that. On the verygeneral question, leaving aside modifications of the kind you'reproposing, I just want to be explicit about whether we want tocontinue this general type of procedure. Obviously, we're on it andit has worked; on the surface, anyway, it has worked. The results aremore or less in line with what was intended. And I think it continuesto have some of the advantages that were foreseen originally. Whilewe still worry about what the federal funds rate is doing when itdoesn't go according to our preconception, we at least avoid making aconcrete decision--MR. PARTEE. We haven't [moved the funds rate], anyway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. We haven't done it in anydirect way. I'm not sure how many people are convinced they know justwhere the federal funds rate should be now. Anyway, we avoid thatexplicitly. On the other hand, I would remind you that nothing thathas happened--or that I've observed recently--makes the money/GNPrelationship any clearer or more stable than before. Having gonethrough all these redefinition problems, one recognizes how arbitrary-13-1/8-9/80some of this is. It depends upon how you define [money]. And thetechnique does, I think, make it a little more difficult in some ways,to say the least, to reconcile some conflicting short-run objectiveswe have regarding the domestic or international [economy] or moneysupply against interest rates, or whatever. There may be a time whenwe really want to see interest rates lower or higher and they may notbe behaving that way, and they may continue not to do so for weeks andweeks and months on end with this technique. So, there are argumentson both sides. I just want to see whether we have a consensus that wewill continue on this until further notice anyway. We need to makethat explicit judgment.MR. MAYO. I don't see that we have any alternative. Nothingseems to have been suggested as a clear alternative to continuing thisand monitoring it awfully closely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, at the extreme, obviously we can goright back to what we were doing before. But I think it's fair tosay, and I don't want to push it that cleanly, that there's acompromise every place along the line--on where we set the interestrate limits, on where we're operating, and on how much exercise ofjudgment we put into this even in making the kinds of adjustments thatwere made in the most recent period, which obviously were influencedby the fact that the money supply and interest rates weren't goingexactly the way we might have expected. So, there is not absolutepurity on either side of this, and we can make various compromises.But as a broad thrust, I think the question is whether or not tocontinue basically what we've been doing.MR. PARTEE. Shifting back from a very successful experimentcertainly would be hard to explain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question.MR. MORRIS. The reaction would be devastating.MR. PARTEE. It surely would.MR. BALLES. Unthinkable.MR. WALLICH. Well, I'd like to make one general comment.The experiment in terms of results has worked very well. I have noquarrel with that, certainly. But I think it continues to lay us opento the risks of unexpected and unexplainable declines in interestrates that can give us great trouble internationally. Now, we canalways say that that is appropriate--that we're going into arecession, inflation is coming down, and it is fully appropriate.Nevertheless, as the Chairman has pointed out--he gets this questionagain and again and we get the same thing in the press and incriticisms at home and abroad--that by sticking to a firm money growthpath and therefore a firm reserve path we can get unpredictableinterest rate results. In fact, they may even be predictable in thesense that rates become very low when the demand for money lets up.And we may or may not want that. So, I do think we need to build insomething at the lower end.MR. MORRIS. The alternative is that we go back tounpredictable changes in the money supply.-14-1/8-9/80MR. WALLICH. Well, that bothers me less.MR. MORRIS. I think one of the two has to be unpredictable.MR. WALLICH. That is very true. But the greater danger ison the interest rate side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They both would be [unpredictable] invarying combinations.MS. TEETERS. But, Henry, when we adopted this procedure wewere all perfectly aware of the fact that interest rates could declineunder it and that they would be determined by market factors. I thinkit's more a problem of your educating your foreign compatriots aboutthe procedure.MR. WALLICH. Well, we're working hard at that. Every speechcontains the same things that I said just now. And sometimes I almostbelieve them! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think this is absolutelyblack and white. For purposes of moving ahead at the moment, [let'sassume we will do] something like what we've been doing and let's getto Phil's question and maybe some others. But in the broader sense, Itake it there's a consensus at the moment.SEVERAL. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, I don't know whether we want to dealwith Phil's particular question. It's a matter of judgment as towhether or not a big enough adjustment is being made that it should bebrought back to the Committee. I wouldn't anticipate adjustments asbig as you're suggesting. If we're going to meet as frequently aswe've been meeting, because the Committee is [conversant] with theprecise techniques we've been using, we can express some judgment whenwe're meeting. I suppose it's theoretically possible--and I don'tknow whether you have any answer other than to leave it to my judgmentessentially--to say that when the confusion gets great enough we wouldwant a Committee meeting.MR. PARTEE. Well, we could have limits similar to what we doon foreign currency [operations].MR. COLDWELL. Similar to the international.MR. PARTEE. The only trouble is that I don't have any senseat this point of what those limits ought to be; and I think it wouldtake a staff paper to indicate what might be the tendencies.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could be very arbitrary and saythat in some basic sense we are interested in something like totalreserves now but the operating [variable] tends to be nonborrowedreserves. We can make a path for nonborrowed reserves at the time ofthe Committee meeting and say we can't deviate from it by more than"x" without [further consultation]. I don't know whether you want todo that.MR. PARTEE. What's a reasonable "x"?-15-1/8-9/80MS. TEETERS. But with nonborrowed it's zero. The bigdeviation is in borrowing and--MR. COLDWELL. No, nonborrowed is zero after they've made anadjustment.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think the solution is that theCommittee's directive should be on the basis of total reserves, andthe Manager should be allowed to vary the nonborrowed objective inorder to achieve the total reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's basically the way I interpret itnow. That is the presumption under which we're operating but, ofcourse, the total reserves are not very controllable and thenonborrowed reserves are. The question is how much we should changethe nonborrowed to try to produce the total, which is the basicvariable that affects the money supply.MR. COLDWELL. We could have a situation in which theborrowing reverses its present course and jumps up to $1.8 billion.Then would you cut back on the net borrowed path by $1 billion? Istrongly doubt that the Committee would want to do that right away,but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're making an assumption that theborrowings go up, the reverse of the present [situation], and thatthey go up without interest rates increasing particularly in theprocess. Now they are going down without interest rates decreasing.If borrowings go way up without rates increasing, just reverse thestaff's judgment: They presumably would be moving in the oppositedirection if that literally happened. If we have a big expansion inborrowing, it would decrease pressure on the market; and if the moneysupply were running high, the Desk presumably would make the oppositeadjustment.MR. COLDWELL. I guess you're crossing the bridge that thereis a good explanation as to why the borrowings dropped from $1.7billion down to $800 million. That's a $1 billion drop and I'm not atall sure that the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's not the drop in borrowingsitself. The borrowings would come out where they estimated, assumingthey have a correct estimate of total reserves with lagged reserveaccounting; and [if] they got on the path of nonborrowed reserves,eventually the borrowings would be forced up. But the borrowings wererunning low with a high federal funds rate. That's the confusing--MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, we've gone three months and onlyhad problems in the last month. Like Governor Partee, I have no ideawhat the limit should be. I suggest we go another month, to the nextFOMC meeting, see what we encounter and get some idea of how much thevariation is going to be.SPEAKER(?). Yes, I'd do that too, but we still don't knowwhat the limits are. I don't think we know the magnitude of theproblems yet and at what point the problems become a policy decisionrather than a technical adjustment.-16-1/8-9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with you. Well, is that asatisfactory way to proceed? I do think that we ought to put on thetable, if not now--and this is under continuing review--any ideasabout it. It's all within the present technique, but we might changethe technique a bit. It's quite possible.MR. AXILROD. I would point out, Mr. Chairman, that theelement of luck and coincidence in here has a lot to do with laggedreserve accounting. I may be safeguarding the staff's view becausewhat happens to deposits this week does not have an awful lot to dowith what we do with reserves this week. It has something to do withinterest rates this week, so there is that element of luck andcoincidence. If we didn't have lagged reserve accounting, we'd havemore real problems that might emerge.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably the staff, despite Mr.Axilrod's predilections, is busily working in a neutral and unbiasedway to present us with some recommendations on lagged reserveaccounting. That will be before the next meeting or about the time ofthe next meeting.MR. AXILROD. [The issue] will be before the Board beforethis month is out.MR. WILLES. I'd just like to indicate that I have a lot ofsympathy for what Governor Coldwell was saying. I think we need totry to get a feel for what the limits are; and the only way to do thatis somehow to decide which of the reserve targets is really relevant.If you think total reserves is the relevant reserve target, then thetolerance limit on that ought to be essentially zero and we can adjustthe others however we want to in order to get--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it can't be. The dilemma is that therelevant target is total reserves but it's not operational.MR. MORRIS. It is operational, but it's not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not in the short run. It's operational ina larger sense, but we can't make that zero because we don't controlit to zero.MR. WILLES. Well, we don't control it because of the waythings are apparently set up. We can change things and set it up sowe can control it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd have to shut the discount window;then it's controllable.MR. WILLES. Well, I don't think that's right at all. AllI'm trying to say, though, is that there is no arithmetic exercisethat one can go through to figure out these limits. One has to[understand] the dynamics of the system and what we really want to tryto fix and what we're willing to adjust in order to keep the otherthings fixed. That's all I'm trying to say.MR. WALLICH. Even if we did close the window, we still couldbe thrown off by currency or by float.-17-1/8-9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's operational factors plusclosing the window that make reserves--MR. COLDWELL. Yes, but it makes a whole lot of difference interms of where we come out, not just in the period between [meetingsof] the Open Market Committee but beyond, how much nonborrowed isthrown into that package. And if the staff, or you, or whoever elseis guiding this operation is throwing an extra billion dollars in thepath, the Committee is faced with a fait accompli at the next meeting.That's all I'm saying. If the Committee wishes to concede that to youand the staff, it ought to do so; otherwise it's wide open.MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, it simply implies, does it not, thattotal reserves is our overriding target? And if that's true, then itseems to me that it doesn't present any great problem to accept aresponse by the staff on nonborrowed for the purpose of trying to movetoward what we want on total reserves.MR. COLDWELL. But I'm saying that if [the staff is] going toenlarge the nonborrowed path because of a shortfall on the borrowingside, some money will have been put in that at the next Open MarketCommittee meeting we're not likely to get out.MR. AXILROD. Governor Coldwell, the effective constraint onthat--the way it's structured now--is the funds rate. That is, thefunds rate constraint stops us. In my view Mr. Sternlight probablycouldn't have raised the total reserves in this last [period beyond]that $400 million [in] nonborrowed because he would have been stoppedby the funds rate constraint. So the Committee--MR. COLDWELL. In the sense of the bottom end of theconstraint?MR. AXILROD. Or the top, either way. You could interpretthe present directive as the Committee's saying: "Here's where theconstraint is; it's on the funds rate." Now, that might [not] besufficient for you. But that is how it is at the moment.MR. COLDWELL. I would doubt strongly that Peter couldn'thave put in another $400 million in this period if he had fed it inslowly.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't know if you're speaking of thewhole period or just this current week.MR. COLDWELL. Yes, I'm talking about the whole period, anintermeeting period of a month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't know because Steve issaying that if he had, slowly or fast, the funds rate would have beendown at the lower limit.MR. COLDWELL. I doubt that.MR. AXILROD. Well, that may or may not [have happened] butthat is the effective constraint that stops us at some point.MR. COLDWELL. Well, it stops you at some point, but [where]?-18-1/8-9/80MR. AXILROD. I assume that expresses the Committee's will.If the Committee wants to express itself in another way, that is ofcourse its privilege. But at the moment that seems to me how theCommittee expresses its will with regard to how much the Manager isfree to do.MR. PARTEE. I don't mean to disagree with you, Phil; I thinkit's something that has to be looked into. I would disagree with you,Ernie, in that I think we are concerned about nonborrowed as well astotal because we have preconditions [bearing on how the operationsaffect] the circumstances for the next meeting. But that all has tobe worked out.MR. MAYO. Peter, would you have done anything differently ifwe had had a 10 to 17 percent funds rate range for this past week?MR. STERNLIGHT. Not in this recent period.MR. MAYO. I thought that would be your answer.MR. AXILROD. I guess there are always divergent views amongthe staff; I would have given a somewhat different answer to be frankabout it. We discuss these things all the time. And [my] answerwould be that if the Committee were willing to see the funds rate dropas much as that, I woud have been tempted to put in even morenonborrowed reserves. On the other hand, once I saw that the requiredreserves were rising against that, I don't think I would have made anyfurther adjustments, because I realize the Committee wasn't intent onreally forcing money out like mad to get a 3 percent growth rate.Chances are you might get more later. It's that kind of judgment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the physicists have always had arather neat way of dealing with problems such as this by saying:Well, that's an engineering problem. In a sense, I think there's agood parallel here in that the Committee decides what rate of growthit wants in the aggregates--that's the problem for the physicists--andthen it's an engineering problem to translate that it into the volumeof reserves. So, I would come out very close to where Frank Morrisdid on that in suggesting that the staff ought to allow for thesethings in absorbing the least reserves to make their best estimate ofwhat volume we need out there to support the rates of growth in theaggregates that we have chosen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously will be returning tothe engineering problems as well as those of the physicists from timeto time. I think we have an understanding on how to proceed in therest of the discussion.MR. BLACK. Well, our engineers will be working on theproblem continously, and I didn't mean to suggest otherwise.MR. SCHULTZ. I thought you were going to quote theHeisenberg [uncertainty] principle. That merely states that if youobserve it, you automatically change it by the act of observation and,therefore, you can't possibly know what it actually is.-19-1/8-9/80MR. BALLES. Catch-22.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Let's turn] to the question of the newmonetary aggregates, on which a memorandum has been distributed. Mr.Axilrod, I presume, is prepared to make a few summary remarks on thesubject, including telling us why the different measures have moresubstantial deviations from each other in the past than in theprojections for the future.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I might add that Mr. Simpson, whois well versed in these measures, is here and is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You probably were going to say this, butlet me just make one introductory comment. We ended up with the M-1Aand M-1B [measures] to allow for [negotiable order of withdrawal] NOWaccounts and [automatic transfer services] ATS. As it turns out, inthe current estimates there isn't very much difference. But we stillanticipate that there will be substantially more difference ifCongress goes ahead and straightforwardly authorizes NOW accounts.The theory here is that ATS, which has been legal for a year, has kindof run out of steam in terms of making any difference, but NOWaccounts may well not have. So, whatever we decide upon for the long-range targets next month, we probably are going to have to go back andreadjust if Congress does permit nationwide NOW accounts. We'll haveto adjust both M-1A and M-1B, presumably in opposite directions. Wecan do that, I think, consistent with the substance of whatever wedecide. By the time we announce them, Congress probably will haveacted anyway.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure that I have anythingextremely helpful to add to this statistical material before theCommittee. I was going to point out particularly tables 4 and 5 onpages 6 and 7 of the material that we sent out earlier. Theremarkable thing to me was that the numbers for the new aggregatescame out within reasonable ranges. That is, they are not numbers thatare going to appear strange to the public; once the Committee beginstargeting on the new definitions, the rates of growth that are goingto have to be adopted will be reasonable relative to the currentaggregates. For example, on page 4, looking over the recent 10-yearperiod from 1970 to 1979, the rate of growth of the new M2 of 9.95, oralmost 10 percent, is very close to the current M3 growth of 10.28percent, which is its nearest counterpart. And the rate of growth inthe new M3 of 11.08 percent is very close to the 10.64 percent rate ofgrowth in M5, which is its nearest counterpart. Now, the new M3 isrunning faster than the current M3 because it has in it relative tothe current M3 large negotiable CDs, money market funds, and RPs. Butthat higher rate of growth for a new concept is not so out of keepingwith the rates of growth of the current M3 as to make for considerableconfusion on the part of the public.Similarly, on table 5 on velocity, you can see that thecurrent and new measures are not behaving very strangely vis-a-viseach other. That is, if you look at the Mls, for the new M-1B, whichis again a somewhat different concept than the current M1, the trendof velocity is the same. That is, there appears to be a consistentupward trend in velocity in the current Ml; if you compare the peak-to-trough numbers in the middle panel for the current M1, they getlarger in each one [unintelligible], so the trend is toward higher-20-1/8-9/80rates of growth in velocity. We see a similar development in the newM-1B, even though savings accounts are in there. That may change abit for the new M-1B if we get nationwide NOWs because we may get alot of savings in there and that would involve a temporary drop in thevelocity of that measure as we get a one-time transfer of savings aswell as checking account funds into the NOW accounts. But, again, Idon't think these numbers are strange relative to the old numbers.So, [I've come to the view] that the transition to the new numbers isnot going to be as difficult a public [perception] problem as Ioriginally thought it might be before I saw all these numbers laidout.Another problem the Committee may want to consider, when thetransition is made, is to what extent it wishes to operate on M-1A,M-1B, M2, and M3 on the new definitions. At least until there arenationwide NOW accounts, I would think you would want to keepoperations most focused on the aggregate that is most controllablethrough the reserve technique, if the Committee's going to continueusing the reserve technique. That seems to me to argue mostly forM-1A or M-1B. But when NOW accounts become very important, M-1B willbe distorted as will M-1A. And in that case one might have to fallback to a degree more on M2 and possibly M3. But I would assume atleast starting in Feruary that M-1A and M-1B would tend to be anindex, unless the Committee really wants to change how we've beendoing it.MR. COLDWELL. Will you weigh the two of them equally?MR. AXILROD. Well, under the current system, I think M-1Awould get the same weight that M1 now gets. That's how I would tendto interpret it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Every time we discuss this, I get verynervous about this great targeting. Is this all comprehensible? Dowe have comments or [questions]?MR. MORRIS. I have one question on M2. I presume, Steve,that in setting your compatible ranges for M2 for 1980, you'reassuming that short-term rates will not get down low enough to produceany great reflow of funds into the thrifts?MR. AXILROD. Exactly. That's right.MR. MORRIS. If you look at 1975, say, which was a year ofrecession, a year comparable to 1980 [as projected], M2 went up by12.3 percent even though I think our 1975 policy was not tooexpansionary.MR. AXILROD. I think we still have short rates and evenshort coupons high relative to the fixed rate ceilings on deposits, sowe'll still be getting the funds into these alternatives mainly in thefluctuating rate ceiling deposits. We're not assuming substantiallydifferent behavior for now--some increase, but it would be verymodest.MR. PARTEE. But of course in '75 [rates] fell below thefixed rate ceilings. So even the passbook rate was affected. Thatobviously is not in the projection; it couldn't be.-21-1/8-9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I just wanted to say, Mr. Chairman, since I wasone of those who was rather unhappy with the then-proposed M2 the lasttime we met and discussed this subject, that I think the newly adoptedM2 is a great improvement. Certainly, the inclusion of small timedeposits, which are now incorporated into the new M2, is going to havea great advantage, as I see it, of reducing the interest ratesensitivity [of M2] over the business cycle. That's largely becausethe money market certificates that are included have offset thereduction that otherwise has been occurring in small time deposits.And I feel pretty optimistic, as a matter of fact, because if we lookdown the road I think at some point we're going to get a furtherrelaxation or abandonment--the sooner the better as far as I'mconcerned--of the Regulation Q ceilings. That ought to make theredefined M2 even less interest sensitive than it is now. So, I forone am quite happy with the outcome and I thought I ought to make thatclear, having raised objections to the earlier proposal.MR. BLACK. For similar reasons you would object verystrenuously to M3.MR. BALLES. That's right.MR. MAYO. Well, Mr. Chairman, just to start this part of thediscussion going, it seems to me--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it was just finishing!MR. MAYO. --that we're better advised this time around withthese new measures coming out to settle on, say, M-1B and adjust it ifnecessary later on rather than try to straddle an average of M-1B andM2 because we don't know about nationwide NOW accounts. I think itwould be cleaner and easier to explain if we just settled on one[measure], even though we recognize that we might have to make someadjustments to it later on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that is the reason thatwe're straddling. We're not looking at an average. It's just that wepresumed at the time that NOW accounts would be enacted and that thatwould produce a strikingly high M-1B figure as it's now defined, whichwould have been very difficult to explain. Indeed, from our ownstandpoint, we didn't know quite what its significance would bebecause a lot of [the NOW account funds] will come out of savingsaccounts. So it provides us with both an easier explanation publicly,although it looks more confusing, and lets us know a little more aboutwhat's going on ourselves.MR. MAYO. Well, I think that's true. But I'm arguing alittle different point: That if we get into placing a lot of relianceon M2, a considerable part of which we would have no control over, itwill give the wrong public image, too.MR. PARTEE. I think it's more M-1A and M-1B that we'recomparing, Bob. The bigger the growth of NOW account-type deposits,some of which will be drained from M-1A and some from M2--maybesomething like 50-50--the bigger the divergence between M-1A and M-1B,so we thought we needed both. The one, M-1A, will be running too low-22-1/8-9/80to reflect reality; and the other, M-1B, will be running too high toreflect reality until this stock adjustment process is over.MR. MAYO. That may be all right. Certainly no one in thepreceding discussion has suggested that we average nonborrowedreserves with total reserves. I'm just arguing that we ought to getaway from this averaging regardless of which--MR. PARTEE. Old M1 with M2?MR. MAYO. Or M-lA with M-1B. What does that mean?MR. COLDWELL. Do we even have all the data now to[calculate] M-1B?MR. AXILROD. I'd like Mr. Darwin Beck to answer that.MR. BECK. M-1B? We have [some of the data] in process; theyare not yet flowing in. We have the historical monthly data but weare in the process [of putting together] quarterly data and weeklydata.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will have them at the end of the month,right?MR. BECK. That is the schedule. As far as we know we willhave them at the end of the month, yes.MR. COLDWELL. Well, I was just pointing out that there is aproblem knowing what M-1B is going to be. If we have a shortfall ofdata, we may be sitting here next month wondering what M-1B was.MR. PARTEE. You won't have M-1B as quickly for Deskoperations, will you, Darwin? M-1B will not become available asspeedily as M-1A.MR. BECK. There may be a somewhat greater delay, hopefulynot too much greater.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But when the stock adjustment falls out,presumably we will drop M-1A.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. AXILROD. When we start publishing this, which presumablywill be shortly after the next meeting, we are planning to publishM-1A and M-1B weekly but not M2 and M3. They will be monthly [data].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But M-1A and M-1B will be published on thesame time schedule.MR. ROOS. Are we planning to go public with the nomenclatureM-lA and M-1B? Isn't that going to get us some laughs? In otherwords, I think either M-1A or M-1B would be a very acceptableaggregate, but can't we rename the baby M1 again and explain it? Ithink every columnist in the world is going to write that youeconomists are fuzzing this up again. Is that a problem or not?-23-1/8-9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It probably is a problem, and our onlydefense is that reality is complicated.MR. COLDWELL. If you had your druthers, Steve, M-1B is whatyou'd focus on now?MR. AXILROD. It doesn't really much matter, GovernorColdwell, because NOW accounts are such a small proportion. But Ihave a feeling--don't make the obvious retort, please--that I knowmore about M-1A than I do about M-1B. And until M-1A declines into amuch smaller proportion of the world than it now is, I would tend toprefer M-1A. All our models, such as they are, are built on M-1A andhistorical experience; I just know more about it and feel a littlemore comfortable with it myself. So, I really thought it was a goodsolution, which emerged out of the Board discussions, [to use bothmeasures for a while].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd get a very funny M-1B if we got a bignationwide movement to convert savings accounts into NOW accounts.MR. COLDWELL. Yes, but that's down the road.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, down the road 3 months from now.MR. COLDWELL. It may not be very far, but we don't know--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they don't enact that [legislation],then there's no difference between them, basically.MS. TEETERS. Don't you have a problem of not being able toseasonally adjust these measures because you don't have the data [onthe components that account for] the difference between M-1A and M-1B?MR. SIMPSON. That's right. Thus far we feel that we don'thave enough historical experience to seasonally adjust the othertransactions balances that go into M-1B.MS. TEETERS. Basically, the quality of M-1B is going to besomewhat uncertain for a while until we have more experience with it.MR. MORRIS. Well, we've had a number of years of NOW accountexperience in New England; I doubt that our seasonal is that muchdifferent from the rest of the country.MR. PARTEE. It's much colder! [Laughter]MR. BLACK. But lately they don't get as much snow.MR. AXILROD. When there are nationwide NOW accounts, what wewon't know about M-lB is the extent to which and how fast its velocityis going to revise downward, as people shift savings into NOWs ratherthan just demand deposits. We simply aren't going to know that.Similarly, we're not going to know very much about how much is goingto go out of M-1A. But I feel more comfortable in the sense that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think a proportion of savings depositsmoved in the present Ml--after M1 got squeezed so much.-24-1/8-9/80MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to argue forfocusing on M-1A until we get a nationwide NOW account bill.MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, no. I think the way it's going towork out may be slightly different. If we don't have a nationwide NOWaccount bill, it's not going to make much difference. As the staffshows in its estimate here, [growth in M-1A and M-1B] are within 1/2percentage point. If we get the nationwide NOW account bill, theremay be a period of a year when M-1B is a little tough to interpretbecause we won't know how much is coming out of saving accounts.MS. TEETERS. So will M-1A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So will M-1A, but I would guess to alesser extent.MR. BLACK. Until [the shifting] disappears.MR. COLDWELL. But we can't seasonally adjust M-1B. How canwe use that right now?MR. AXILROD. I don't think the seasonal factor is that badbecause NOW accounts are a fairly small proportion of the total. Now,if they were 1/2 or 1/3 of the total--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The more we discuss this, the more I hateto say we have a target for either one of them. Maybe that is a noteupon which to stop.MR. GUFFEY. Maybe I shouldn't say anything, but would it bepossible in this transition period to publish M-lA and to use M-1B asa memorandum item with a notation that, indeed, M-1A will be replacedby M-1B when the transition period is completed?MR. AXILROD. Well, we were planning to publish M-1A and M-1Bright next to each other. I really don't believe large problems willcome from that. Then we'd show a couple of other items, the RPs andthe money market funds and go on to M2, which will include the RPs andmoney market funds. The difference in level between M-1A and M-1B isnot going to be vast until we get the nationwide NOWs. And I reallywouldn't anticipate any--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't anticipate that there will be toomuch trouble with that. But it is complex. I think the complexity ofthis is inherent in the facts and the circumstances.MR. GUFFEY. But it's particularly important when theCommittee expresses its view in the directive to the Desk as towhether or not equal weight is to be given or what we're focusing on.Thus, it would [reasonable] to put M-1B in the public domain but as amemorandum item, initially at least, so that the public and themarkets can track it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just don't know how worthwhile it is totry to guess whether it's better in a memorandum item or the table.We may have the problem that M-1A will look very low. And would we-25-1/8-9/80want to keep publishing a figure that looks very low without having afigure along side it that looks relatively high? I don't know how wecan outguess all this.MR. PARTEE. Besides, Paul, it's additive. M-1A plus thecomponents make M-1B, which then goes into M2. So it's logical justto extend it along the columns.MR. WILLES. I'm fascinated by what Steve just said in termsof the table for publication. Can you go through that again?MR. AXILROD. As I understand it, the first column would beM-1A, the second column M-1B, the third column overnight RPs andovernight Eurodollars, which would just be Cayman Islands Eurodollars,and the fourth column would be money market funds. The fifth columnwould be M2, which would include the first, third, and fourth columnsas components.MR. WILLES. So people could construct any M they want?MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other two are kind of memorandum itemsin a column because they have some characteristics of a payments--MR. ROOS. But you're not going to publish the differencebetween M-1A and M-1B as such.MR. AXILROD. But we'll have all the components. We'll havea separate table with all the components of all the aggregates aswell. So, that will all be available.MR. GUFFEY. This table that you just described will bepublished monthly and then there will be weekly publications of M-1Aand M-1B?MR. AXILROD. We'll be publishing that table weekly. Therewill be weekly estimates of M-1A and M-1B and of all the commercialbank components of all the Ms, including those in M2 and M3. M2 andM3 will only have monthly figures, but the table will be publishedweekly. M-1A and M-1B will have weekly figures, as will thecommercial bank components [of the broader aggregates].MR. KIMBREL. This may be just a preference, but what werethe main reasons you were reluctant to include overnight RPs andEurodollars in the M1 measure?MR. AXILROD. There was considerable Board discussion onthat; perhaps I should let the Chairman summarize it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd prefer that you do that! [Laughter]Mr. Axilrod is being modest because I remember he was vehemently onone side of the argment, the reasons for which escape me.MR. AXILROD. Many members of the staff, including myself,felt that there was a large investment component to RPs. That is, wefelt that money managers were not viewing RPs--to an extent of 100-26-1/8-9/80percent or [even] 50 percent--as a substitute for demand deposits butwere viewing them as an alternative to investing in 3-month bills or3-month CDs, depending in part on their interest rate expectations.So, therefore, if RPs were somehow outlawed, we felt that only a smallfraction of the money in RPs would be going to demand deposits and therest would go into CDs or Treasury bills or commercial paper.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod felt that way. Governor Rice,as I recall, felt the opposite. It's basically a question of whetherthey are actively or passively managed, I think.MR. AXILROD. Our econometric evidence, I believe, is quitemixed. The staff is well divided on the subject. With the Boarddivided and the staff divided, the Board came up with a very judiciousdecision.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, does the Committee not feel that themarketing or explanatory aspect of this is important? I'm talkingabout the ability to relate to my friendly broker, who busted out ofschool his sophomore year! I'm being facetious, but isn't itimportant to make an effort to be as clear and as simple as possiblein describing this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's an important problem,and one with which we anticipate some real difficulties. I take aliteral exception only to your final point. The effort to be assimple as possible may be misleading. I come back [to my view that]the reality is complex. That is the difficulty we are dealing withduring this transition period. But I think it is a major problem, andwe plan to have press briefings and so forth beforehand so that wegive as good an explanation as possible. Now, as you can see,providing there is no change in the law--if the staff is right and Idon't know whether they are or not--there isn't much differencebetween the two measures, which makes this all look ratherunnecessary. But if they are right and we have nationwide NOWaccounts [authorized by] Congress beginning in March, there's going tobe a significant difference between the two. Therein lies theproblem. We're preparing the way. If the law were going to remainunchanged, I'd say dispense with M-1A or M-1B. We would go one way orthe other and make it simple. But we do anticipate a significantdifference if we have nationwide NOW accounts.MR. ROOS. Would we drop the other if--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if they don't change the law, weprobably can. I'm just talking offhand. If they don't change thelaw, I think that argues very strongly for dropping some of them.MR. COLDWELL. If they change the law, we could drop M-1A.MR. ROOS. Wouldn't you drop M-1A if they change the law?MR. PARTEE. Yes, and we'd drop the M-1B components. Butwe're certainly going to get share [drafts], which are developing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two years from now we'll probably drop itanyway, assuming they have a nice clean law and don't change it withina 2-year period.-27-1/8-9/80MR. AXILROD. I'd just assume, Mr. Chairman, that it would bea useful explanatory device for the Committee, if there happens to bea surge in M-1B, to be able to point to a drop in M-1A so that no onereads too much [into the surge in M-1B].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One can reverse all this and say that byexposing the problems that lie in these figures inherently, we'regoing to be better off in the end and people will understand itbetter. But there is a hump to get over yet. There's no question.MR. COLDWELL. Wouldn't the real problem occur, Steve, if wegot a surge in M-1B and [the funds] didn't come out of demanddeposits? If we got a big jump in share drafts--MR. AXILROD. If M-1B was surging and M-1A was strong, Iassume things would be read into that.MS. TEETERS. But we might have a drop in M2?MR. COLDWELL. Yes. We could have a drop in M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I say, the more we discuss this, themore uneasy it makes me.MR. COLDWELL. I know, but you didn't discuss the size of M2here.MR. BLACK. I think a few people will understand it muchbetter and a lot will undersand it much less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe it's a net advantage if LarryRoos' third grader--his broker--doesn't understand it!MR. MAYO. Did you do well in the market last year, Larry?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we finished with this subject?MR. BALLES. One more question or suggestion, Mr. Chairman,if I may. I think there's a big difference between what we publishand what we target. I certainly have no problems with what isproposed to be published here, for those both inside and outside theSystem who'd like to experiment with different versions or measures ofmoney. I believe we ought to think pretty hard, though, about whetherwe want to continue to target four intermediate variables. In thepast we've had four targets: Ml, M2, M3, and bank credit pro forma.But in practice [our targets] have turned out to be M1 and M2. Inpractice we haven't really tried to control M3, and we have justobserved what goes on in bank credit. The Bluebook again sets forthin the various alternatives four different intermediate targets. Ihave a strong feeling that that's about two too many. I wish somehowwe could find a way of narrowing that down to about two that we reallyuse in practice, no fooling, as far as decisions of this Committee areconcerned. I'm not sure whether--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have L on here do you, Mr.Axilrod? Do you have another table where that appears?-28-1/8-9/80MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm not sure we're going to be up-to-dateon L by February.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we'll publish another [column] onthat table, which is L.MR. BALLES. As an information variable, just like M3 is aninformation variable. I would hope we could have some discussion ofthis tomorrow before we make even provisional decisions on what theranges should be or what magnitude we ought to be talking about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was hoping to have a little discussionthis afternoon on that subject--not necessarily on that aspect but--MR. BALLES. Well, if I had to do it right now, I'd pick M2for one of those versions. I think having two variables asintermediate targets is really about all that is needed and all we canmeaningfully handle.MR. BLACK. Could somebody tell me exactly what theHumphrey-Hawkins Act says? I thought it indicated Ml, M2, M3, andcredit.MR. AXILROD. It just says "monetary and credit aggregates."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But in practice, as we go along week byweek in the future we're going to be on M-lA and M-1B because we won'thave the data for M2 and M3. That doesn't mean we will get an[overlap] at the end of the month. But when we're making some ofthese weekly decisions I suspect we're going to be biased, just by theavailability of data, toward the Mls.MR. WALLICH. Well, the purpose of these measures is not somuch to hit them all at once, which is impossible, but to be warned ifsomething is going off track. The purpose is to have a sense of therelativeness of the things we're mainly aiming at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that can come up in the laterdiscussion. Let's turn to the long-range targets, again not with theintent of reaching any decisions but of having an informal exchange ina preliminary way of what seems to make sense here. The first point Ihad was that, in fact, there's going to be a lot of confusion with thenew numbers. That point has already been made. At a fairly technicallevel, this alternative 1 in the Bluebook is based upon some broadconcept that 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent is supposed to be the same as thecurrent target, which is listed there as 3 to 6 percent. But thatmakes a 1-1/2 percentage point adjustment for ATS and NOW accounts andthat would kind of reverse. In fact, these are not equivalent, if Ithink it through correctly, [because] for reasons I won't attempt toexplain in too much detail the change is small.I do want to raise the question of what we say--again wedon't have to decide now--[for the period] beyond 1980. There arearguments on both sides of this. The extremes are quite clear: Wecould say nothing about beyond 1980 at one extreme or we could laydown a pattern beyond 1980 and say that cross our heart and hope todie we really intend to make it, just like we intend to make the 1980one. There is a strongly held body of opinion--perhaps in both-29-1/8-9/80[Congressional] committees but I know particularly strongly in theHouse Banking and Currency Committee--that we should not only say whatthe targets are beyond 1980 but that they should legislate them. So,I think it's an issue that will come up in testimony one way oranother. And if we say something, we should have some guidance as tohow much it's a hope or how much it's a real expectation or somethingin between. My own feeling is that we probably have to say something;but that leaves a lot of room between expressing it as a general hopeor a solid expectation and intent. We don't have to give an officialFOMC position, but it is an issue that we ought to discuss a bit.Let me just mention a few considerations that occurred to me.Given the position that we're in, for a variety of reasons, I think itcould be hard to come up with targets that are in fact or appear to behigher than those we had for this past year. I'm thinking notprimarily of the fact that the staff, at least, is projecting a lowernominal GNP but that given the psychological and expectational statewe are in, it would be a big decision to have a range of projectionsthat in substance was higher than we have been operating with.Secondly, and I go back to the discussion about the targets we hadjust 3 minutes ago, there is among other factors the arbitrary natureof the targets. More importantly--well, it may not be more importantbut equally important--given the uncertainty that I at least perceivein the economic outlook for a variety of reasons, I think there is aquestion as to how wide a range we want. We have been operating withfairly wide ranges of 3 percent. We have to consider whether we wantto narrow those ranges. There are pretty persuasive reasons, giventhe uncertainties regarding both the definitions and the outlook, whyit's wise to have a significant range. As a part of that issue, thereis a question of what we mean by the range: whether the middle of therange does reflect some central tendency of what we think isappropriate on the basis of what we know now. But there is adifference between attaching some very great significance to themiddle of the range as opposed to saying that in the light of all theuncertainties we may well feel, as the year progresses, that it wouldbe quite reasonable [for growth] to be toward the lower end of therange. That's a decision, obviously, that can be reviewed as we goalong. But how we treat that is of some significance.I did not intend to discuss the economic outlook extensivelyright now, although logically [the agenda] may be in the reverseorder. That will be on the front of the agenda tomorrow when weactually have to make a decision about the short-run ranges. As youknow, for what it's worth, the staff is projecting a 7 percentincrease in nominal GNP [for the year], but [the increase] is rathersmall in the first quarter and then it rises progressively. That'snot a pejorative comment. [Laughter] I indicated my personal view.There is a considerable amount of uncertainty about any economicforecast. But it's interesting that there is in a sense a lull interms of nominal GNP. [GNP growth] is quite low in the first quarter;it's less than 5 percent. And then it's projected to be about--infact precisely--double that for the fourth quarter; it goes from 4.7to 9.4 percent. I'd just note that if we take that as an economicforecast and we attribute importance to historical relationshipsbetween velocity and interest rates and all the rest, if we have asteady growth in money demand the year, it implies a very differentset of money market conditions early in the year as opposed to late inthe year, assuming that those relationships hold true. And there is a-30-1/8-9/80question as to how we want to play any particular target during thecourse of the year in the light of that or other possible patterns ofeconomic activity.In that connection, the Bluebook does suggest--and of courseit bears very directly on the decision tomorrow about the short-runranges--some alternatives [regarding] the question of strategy, whichto some degree we do have to settle tomorrow, certainly for the nextmonth. It can worded in various ways. [The issue is] whether wedeliberately aim for a pattern of monetary growth [this] year thatdeviates on the average--whether we take our risks in variousdirections as the year proceeds--and how that meshes with anyone'sview on the economic outlook, the interest rate outlook, theinternational side of the equation, and I think ultimately, too,fiscal policy considerations. In other words, do we just want to seta dial at one extreme and say aim at the average throughout the yearand see what happens? Or do we consciously want to take some of theseother things into consideration as we see them from month to monthwithin the ranges specified for the year? In terms of the particularsetting that we're dealing with now, to make just a few points, wehave had more strength in economic activity than we anticipatedthroughout the second half of [last] year. Certainly it continuedthrough the fourth quarter as a whole. I don't know what you thinkabout this, Mr. Kichline, but I see that Ms. Courtney Slater, theCommerce Department's chief economist, while she expects a recessionthis year has now decided that GNP grew by 2 to 3 percent in thefourth quarter instead of 1-1/2 percent. I guess she's getting readyto publish a figure fairly soon and I don't know whether that's it.MR. KICHLINE. She controls the staff that puts it together.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When is that preliminary figure due--in afew days? Well, I guess it's due out in a week or more than a week.MR. KICHLINE. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether that [statement byMs. Slater] reflects [the number they will publish] or not. They willget some more information before they publish that number, won't they?Do they get retail sales?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. They will have information later thisweek on the employment situation, and they need inventory numbers.Inventory is important and data are due [to come out] on January 18.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what that reflects, butit's in the same direction we've been seeing of [the economy] havingmore strength than was anticipated. When one looks at the businesspicture one has to say, as reflected in the fact that the figures keepcoming out better than the projections, that in a sense we're prettyclearly off econometric patterns and other patterns. That'sparticularly clear in the saving rate, which has gone below the bottomof anybody's ranges. And that's what makes things quite uncertain aswe look ahead. It seems to me that there are a number of explanationsof why we're off the pattern. It doesn't help much in projecting, butpart of it must be a response to inflationary expectations. And we'vesurely had our share of international disturbances recently thataffect inflation and affect the dollar and are visible in the gold-31-1/8-9/80price, the silver price, and commmodity prices. Obviously, that leadsinto the oil situation, which has a very direct and pronounced effectboth on inflation and what we think about the business outlook. Thatsituation has been highly unstable and I have the feeling myself thatthe next few months will give us--without overdramatizing it--a kindof important last chance to see whether we will get some balance inthe oil market between consumption and production so that there isn'tcontinuing upward pressures on prices that are going to carry us tosome unknown level later this year. So long as the spot price remainsabove whatever the OPEC official decisions are, which are rather mixedin themselves, we will get a very unstable situation. And we don'tknow how far this upward momentum in oil price numbers can go.So far as fiscal policy is concerned, all that I knowindicates that the present Administration is going to hang tough, ifthat's the right phrase, in terms of any sign of a tax [reduction]program at the moment. On the expenditure side, I don't know anythingmore than has been leaked, which is that the total is up around the$615 billion level. We have a higher level of real defense spending.We are projecting some real increase in federal government spendingwhich, if anything, I guess is a little low relative to what theAdministration may be projecting. It's either [about the same] or abit on the low side. But there is no proposal that I'm aware of forany tax reduction. And I don't think there's all that much discussionof it, although that's a little more doubtful given the spate ofreports that will come out on the federal budget and the EconomicReport in a few weeks. I don't think that means that theAdministration is not aware of the case for tax reduction ornecessarily would absolutely rule it out; it depends upon theevolution of the business scene. But I think it does mean thatthey're not going to push it; they're going to resist it and resistdiscussion of it right now. While one has to make one's own judgmentsabout how Congress will respond, that certainly makes [a tax cut] lesslikely at the very least in the short run than if the Administrationwere pushing it.Looking at the period since October: On the one hand, whileall the financial data are within our immediate objectives, I don'tthink we've made as much expectational progress, if I can put it thatway, as conceivably might have been hoped. Indeed, in some sense wehave not made as much progress on interest rates; one might have hopedthat they would be coming down a little more clearly by this time.Looked at from an October point of view, we haven't seen thosedevelopments that might have been anticipated. It's fairly obviouswhy not, given the international turmoil and the lack of more visibleprogress on inflation. In that connection, I might say that ifthere's anything I would feel relatively certain about in the near-term economic and price outlook, it is that the price figures aregoing to look worse rather than better for some months, particularlyin the consumer price index where we will get both the impact of oiland the impact of interest rates from the last three months. Themortgage rate has not been worked into that [set of rates] in anythinglike a full way. So, when we look at expectational factors anddisturbances, whether here or abroad, psychological or real, I thinkwe have a hump to get over for probably three months anyway of higher[rates of increase in the] consumer price index. And in one or two ofthose months I suspect the increases could be significantly higherthan anything we have seen so far. That is the situation with which-32-1/8-9/80we have to live whatever questions we have or whatever we think of thelonger-term prospects for inflation and business [activity].With those general points, let me open the discussion to whatpeople think is relevant with respect to these longer-term targetsboth on the one-year target and at least a little feeling, althoughthat's more of an open question, about what people think we should sayin presumably more general terms about the period beyond 1980. Mr.Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. I'd like to respond in three points: One,we've been talking for three years or so now about our basic strategybeing one of gradually reducing the [growth of the] aggregates. Ithink your points about the business situation and inflationaryexpectations and the image are exactly right. In view of that, itseems to me that our strategy should be one of gradually reducing the[growth of the] aggregates. Rather than alternative one or two, Ilike the formulation on page 11 of the Bluebook, which has the fourstrategies. And of those four, I like number four best because Ithink we probably are going to get a tax cut and should plan a gradualreduction [in the growth] of the aggregates in light of a likely taxcut.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is strategy four?MR. EASTBURN. Strategy four is a progressive reduction in M1growth from 6 percent to 5 percent to 4 percent in successive years,assuming a tax cut of $30 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word here and I'll shutup about it. When I look at these different strategies, all of whichcome off the econometric equation from the base forecast, I must saythat I have great doubts about these adjustments in the econometricequations. I guess you're driven to strategy four because it looks[good] on all the numbers.MR. EASTBURN. I'm not arguing the numbers at all, Paul. I'marguing the basic philosophy of proceeding [with] a gradual reduction.All right, that's the first point. The second point is that I feelstrongly that we should not announce that strategy and specificallythat we should not announce numbers. I think we have a credibilityproblem and I believe expectations hinge basically on policyperformance and not what we say, because nobody will believe what wesay until we perform. So, I think we should have this as ourphilosophy but should not announce any specific numbers. We can talkabout this being our intent.Third, we should reserve flexibility for change in case wewant to change our strategy as circumstances develop. I was struck,for example, at the precision that's incorporated later in theBluebook in the forecast of interest rates, assuming variousalternatives and combinations and permutations. That may be aninteresting exercise but I think its accuracy is greatly in question.What we should do is remain flexible enough so that we can change anddepart from this strategy if and when circumstances require it. Butthat should be the basic idea unless we see reason to change.-33-1/8-9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're now talking about 1980 andbeyond. From your last comment do I infer--I don't want to put wordsin your mouth--that consistent with that you like the idea of notnarrowing the range, anyway, in the short run? By the short run, Imean 1980.MR. EASTBURN. Yes. I didn't address the question of therange, but I think that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any feeling about where therange should be in 1980 as a very tentative [view]?MR. EASTBURN. Well, I think alternative 2 is too sharp areduction from where we are. But around 5 percent is what we ought tohave as a central tendency.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anybody should feel at allwedded to what they tentatively say today. We have another wholemonth before we [need to decide]. Mrs. Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I would support what Dave was saying.Announcing 3-year targets is an invitation to losing all ourcredibility. We have enough problems projecting out 1 year let alone3 years. To box ourselves in by saying we're going to come down tocertain levels by 1982 is an unnecessary restraint and an unnecessarydanger. We may have that intention, but there's enough variability inthis economy that we shouldn't go out on that limb; we should continueto do it by performance. I'm not sure I even want to talk too muchabout what we're going to do in the future--other than [to say wewant] to continue to restrain [money growth]--so that we have theopportunity to change our mind as time goes on. I've probably donemore 5-year projections than anybody else at this table and I speakfrom experience: They're all wrong. You don't come out where yousay you're going to if you go down that line. I strongly oppose anypublication or any commitment to a specific number for future years.I wouldn't narrow the ranges. We have a difficult year ahead of usand I think we will need all the space we can get. For thealternatives, a midpoint somewhere around 5 to 5-1/2 percent isprobably the appropriate way to go.I would like to bring up one thing that bothers me a little.A year ago we were in much the same position. We had the money supplydown--in fact, going negative--and I'm not sure any of us reallyunderstands why the money supply did that between September and March.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was a demand shift! [Laughter]MS. TEETERS. The econometric equations didn't fit. There'sa strong possibility that something is going on that has nothing to dowith our careful reserve management and all the rest. We just may bein the period of the 6 months when the money supply goes down. And[last year] we didn't really have a very good explanation as to why ittook off after the end of March. So, before we pat ourselves toogreatly on the back, let's remember that aspect of it and giveourselves enough leeway to accommodate sudden spurts on a monthly orweekly basis, if we do have them, and still not be outside our range.-34-1/8-9/80MR. SCHULTZ. What would [your view be] if we say on thelong-range issue that we are not going to publish any figures butmerely say that we are on a long-range program to reduce inflation andwe're just going to set money supply [targets] each year that areconsistent with a continued reduction in inflation?MS. TEETERS. Well, that would be fine, Fred, if we were thesole source of the inflation. But it's like playing poker with theother players always pulling all the wild cards. We're playing withOPEC, and we really have no control over oil prices. To say thatwe're consistently going to reduce inflation in a situation where wedon't have control over inflation is, to me, going out on a limb.There may be a time, if this so-called recession turns very deep, whenwe might want to reverse our policies completely. And the risks onthis recession, it seems to me, are basically on the down side. So, Ijust find it very difficult to commit myself to any sort of long-termposition.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we're notgoing to have the privilege of avoiding making some fairly definitecommitment as to what our policy posture will be beyond 1980. There'salso a possibility of getting some positive mileage from taking afairly specific posture as to our plans regarding the orientation ofmonetary policy beyond 1980 because if we're going to be able to makeprogress on the inflation front, we've got to begin to have an effecton long-term contracts. Such contracts have become a fairly commonpart of the economic environment, particularly in the wages sector.So it seems to me that we should be serving up notice to those whoengage in the making of long-term contracts that insofar as themonetary policy environment within which those contracts will be madeor lived through is concerned, it will be a changing part of the[overall] environment. And it will be changing in the direction theVice Chairman has suggested of trying to work toward lower numbers.And, as I believed you mentioned, if we don't say it, there's a fairprobability that the Congress will say it in harder terms than wewould be inclined to say it. So, I think the prospective benefits lierather clearly on the side of saying something [about the period]beyond 1980. And what has to be said is that we will be movinggradually to smaller growth rate numbers both for money and bankcredit, trying to make it sound as credible as possible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying you wouldn't give numbers.MR. BAUGHMAN. I would not give numbers unless in a finalshowdown we have to give numbers to avoid numbers being legislated.But I would go so far as to be rather unequivocal in terms of statingthat we have every intention of having diminishing magnitudes ofmonetary growth rates and credit expansion in each of the succeeding 2or 3 years. If it develops that it is simply not possible to live bythose plans, I think we still might have purchased somethingbeneficial rather than negative on balance. Furthermore, we have theopportunity to make adjustments midstream; if developments come alongwhich are so persuasive that we need to make adjustments midstream,the provision is there for that. But I'd be inclined not to makeadjustments midstream unless the case for doing so were very, very-35-1/8-9/80persuasive--so persuasive that we would appear just not to be in touchwith the real world unless we did make adjustments.Now, on where we come out for 1980, I find your observationpersuasive that we simply cannot appear to be giving higher targetsthan our experience in 1979. With respect to a specific target or arange, my own preference since we started setting targets has been toset a specific target, recognizing that we will never hit a specifictarget but nevertheless having something specific to shoot at. Iwould feel in view of the great uncertainties we're looking at thatthere may be some benefits to a range for 1980. But if we were togive a wider range than we used in 1979, we would lose credibility. Ithink it would be a mistake to widen the range of the target, whatevertarget we select for 1980, from what we had in 1979. That's about allI'll say right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want to say anything about thelevel of the target?MR. BAUGHMAN. I had hoped we would take that up tomorrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not the annual.MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, my inclination would be something on theorder of our experience in '79 with a downward tilt. In other words,if we [adopt] a range, I'd put the midpoint of the range below theexperience in '79. If we pick a specific target, I'd say the highestit should be is the absolute increase in '79.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I approach this from twointeresting bases. Number one, membership of the FOMC will not be thesame three to four years from now. In fact, if my count is correct,we're going to lose at least one-third of the members. I doubt verymuch if we're going to commit anybody out that long. I think it wouldbe a mistake to commit because we'd lose credibility; in fact we maylose a bit this year in [adopting] a set of hard targets. There areenough uncertainties and instabilities in this economy right now thatwe'd better have about as much leeway as we can get. If we followedErnie's path of selecting a particular point, then my aim for a pointwould be something like 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent; [if we set a rangethat would be my] midpoint with a 2 percent margin on either side.But that would obviously widen the range from the 3 percentage pointsthat we've had in the past.As I look at the picture of the alternatives in front of us,new definitions and current definitions, I'm not quite sure Iunderstand all of them, except that the first two seem to be identicaluntil you get to M2. It seems to me that we might fudge a bit hereand maybe use 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent or 3 to 6 percent. We had a5-1/2 percent growth rate for 1979. If we're trying to hold downinflation in 1980 and 1981, I don't see how we could aim for 5-1/2percent; it seems to me that we have to aim for something lower.We've been hitting the tops of the ranges or have been outside them onsome of these aggregates, so my preference would be to put the top ofthe range very close to what I really want to shoot at and then scaledown from there and hope we are able to make some progress. And if-36-1/8-9/80growth came out at the top of the range, we'd have an excuse of aworsening economy or something that would clearly demand more creditthan we had planned. But I do think this economy is so unstable thatit's difficult to know which way to plan. We've already talked aboutrecession for months on end. It isn't here yet, except in theautomobile and housing sectors, and maybe 6 months from now it stillwon't be here except for automobiles and housing. I don't know. It'shard to see how the consumer can continue to fight this. Maybe he isgoing into dissavings, but somehow or other he's keeping up hisexpenditures and may continue to do so for a while. My preferencewould be not to talk about 1981 because I think we're going to getinto a box. I'd like a range of 4 percentage points, but if theCommittee thinks 3 points is the most we can get away with, I'd takethe 3-point range and I'd shade alternative 2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Down?MR. COLDWELL. Down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I start with the experience we've had ofhitting our target on M1 and getting as a result a severe accelerationof inflation plus a much stronger economy. We've been waiting forthis recession now for a year. It was predicted for the early part of'79. So, this leads me to think that there is something about ournumbers that just does not reflect the true concept of money. [Idon't know] whether we're going to capture that by our revisions. Ithink we'll make improvements but not really capture everything thatis happening in the way of rising liquidity, and that makes me leantoward low numbers. I also see that there are very ominous changesgoing on in people's habits and expectations. In the last surge ofinflation, 1974-75, there was a worldwide tendency for saving rates toincrease. That was almost the same in all major countries. I haven'tchecked out what happened in this period, but we see now what happensto us. People have a different attitude. They are less afraid thatthey'll lose their jobs, but they're more convinced that inflationwill go on. That is what the decline in the saving rate seems to meto say.Now, as to action, I share the view that we shouldn't make anumerical commitment because the meaning of that commitment isn'tclear enough, particularly if we had to start with a commitment thatsays 6 to 5 to 4 percent or 5 to 4 to 3 percent. I very much doubtthat we'd hit that because circumstances could force us into a pro-cyclical pattern. We're not going to have the desire or ability tocut off a strong economic expansion, and we'll find ourselves beingpro-cyclical. Therefore, I think we have to start with a low rate ofmoney growth right away. I would say that 3 to 6 percent is a goodstarting point. If we went much higher than that, we'd be inimmediate danger of getting into negative real interest rates withwhat they do to allocation of credit and inflation and the dollar. Onthe other aggregates, I'd like to see more clearly how they are likelyto behave. But I think a fairly narrow [Ml] range like 3 to 6percent, aiming at the midpoint of 4.5 percent and expecting that thatreally is a symbol for much more liquidity than it seems to give us,is the way to start.-37-1/8-9/80MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, Governor Wallich's commentreminded me of a fact that was inadvertently left out of the Bluebook.We showed the actual growth rate of M1 for 1979 of 5.5 percent and Imeant to show also in parentheses, and did not, the growth of M1 as ifthere had been no ATS accounts. One would have had to add 1.3percentage points to that on our latest estimate. So, 6.8 percentwould be the growth if there were no ATS accounts. That same 1.3would be added to M-1A, and its growth would be 6.3 percent if therewere no ATS accounts.MR. WALLICH. Well, that explains a little more why we wereable to finance such a tremendous inflation, but the increase invelocity still remains very large.MR. AXILROD. Other demand shifts may also be occurring.MR. MAYO. Do you consider the 6.3 percent consistent withthe range of 3 to 6 percent, though?MR. AXILROD. No. That would go with a range of 4-1/2 to7-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really don't want to prolong this, butyou say 6.8 percent [without ATS] accounts. Is the implication thatthat's the part that came out of demand deposits?MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you have M-lB, which is the numberwith all of the ATS and NOW accounts, at 7.3 percent. Are you sayingthat most of the NOW accounts came out of demand deposits last year?MR. AXILROD. No, I was referring to M-1A; that would add 1.3to M-1A. I don't have at hand at the moment any additional M1 data.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll explore that another time.Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There are two or threepoints I would like to make. One, on the discussion of whether or notto retain ranges, I think there is comfort in ranges and that we mustretain them for 1980. And I think a spread any narrower than thespread of 3 points that we have had in the past would be ill advised.Secondly, as to the projection of our intentions for 1981 and beyond,I would agree with the comments that it would be perhaps moredestructive to credibility than helpful. If we project for 1981 andbeyond, we would have to do it either [by giving] a set figure ofwhere we project the money supply to be, which takes us out of therange concept, or by saying that we are going to reduce money growth 1percent from the year before, whatever that may be. There is realdanger in trying to project into 1981 and beyond. It seems to mequite appropriate, however, to express what probably would be aconsensus of this Committee that our objective is to move the moneygrowth to a lower level [within] those ranges, [namely around] 5.5percent. That's still a very restrictive monetary policy for 1980 asopposed to 1979. That would be moving from growth of 7 percent in1979 to 5.5 percent in 1980, which I consider to be a fairlyrestrictive policy. I would like to recommend that we look at a range-38-1/8-9/80for 1980 for M1 or M-1A, and I think they are both the same, of 4 to 7percent rather than either alternative 1 or alternative 2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Well, I would take a somewhat different tack. Youtalked about the complexity of reality as we view the Ms and reserves.I think the complexity of the economy with respect to the outlook iseven greater. Second, I think we are boxed in because of the lawsaying we have to do this and do that. If I were doing it, I wouldindicate very clearly what my economic scenario is and then what myrecommendation is in [that context] rather than say that this is ourtarget irrespective of what happens. I suspect that the economicoutlook is going to be far more variable--and I'm not saying on whichside--than any of the projections would indicate, and that makes ourtarget setting even more important. And I would offer to go back toCongress at an appropriate time because of my lack of confidence in mylong-range forecast on the economy. I would surely put my economicscenario out there if I put out any kind of targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I don't quite understand, Willis, isthat you say you would put your scenario out first, but then you sayyou don't know what the scenario is.MR. WINN. Well, that's correct. But [I'd say: Given] thishypothesis, this would be true. For example, Paul, go back to Octoberand look at what you would have projected on the international frontversus what you feel now. That can change far more dramatically in avery short period of time. Let's assume we go to a military draft orassume we get involved militarily; all of these [projections andtargets] would be out the window. On the other hand, if we just takea look at our inflation rate and what that could do, [the recession]may be far deeper than any projection we have if things started tocome unravelled on that score. Then we would have to adjust to thereality as best we see it at the time, rather get into this longerrange kind of set up. You can take the President's economic outlookor any one you want, and say: If that's true, then this would be ourgoal. But because we are not certain about these things we are goingto have to adjust as time goes by and we are willing to come back andreport when we adjust. But to get caught in a longer-range [target],even a year's target at the moment, is really buying ourselves anothertrap. Or else we have to have a wide range because of our uncertaintyabout the reality.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You dismiss entirely the argument that themore firmly we set a range the more we might be influencing thereality?MR. WINN. At this time, yes.MR. SCHULTZ. Do you think we have the luxury to do that,Willis? It seems to me that we are charged with deeper responsbilitythan that.MR. PARTEE. Well, the Board has to [indicate] whatprojection is consistent with the numbers it chooses [for theaggregates]; and that is the scenario.-39-1/8-9/80MR. WINN. That's right; that's what I mean.MR. PARTEE. And that could be wrong.MR. WINN. It could be very wrong. I think the reality isthat we have a much greater [chance] of being wrong this time than hasbeen true in a long time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where would you stick the number today,subject to change tomorrow?MR. WINN. Around 5 or 5-1/2 percent as a midpoint, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel.MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, I guess for different reasons Iwould opt for not going to longer projections. Frankly, there are somany uncertainties that there are enough difficulties with 1980. Andeven there, I would hope that we could relate our longer-run look at1980 to the actual targets that were in place for 1979 and not ourresults or our experience for 1979. I would not be too much forchanging these during the year, even with the chances of recession orOPEC influences. I think [any] changes we are going to make [in theranges] are going to have a rather minimum influence, and I'd beinclined to stick to our longer-run targets. In doing that I have apreference for looking at those associated with alternative 2.Contrary to what some of the others have suggested, I'd be inclined tonarrow the target ranges, maybe still with 4-1/2 to 5 percent as themidpoint, but certainly not wider than 4 to 6 percent if M-1B is whatwe are going to be talking about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I must say I am pleased that thisis only a preliminary discussion of our long-range targets be they for1980 or 1980 and 1981. I am not sure whether I am distracted oroverwhelmed by major external political forces as well as externalfinancial forces. I have no idea how or when they may be wound down;maybe we will have a better idea for the final discussion in February.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] proposing making it forthe last quarter.MR. TIMLEN. Why not? At any rate, I think these externaldevelopments all pose threats on the side of impeding our inflationfighting efforts, and they pose a risk to the strength of the dollarif there's a renewed reason for a flight from [other] currencies.Finally, I would agree with some of the people to my immediate rightthat a recession is upon us. I look at the auto situation and housingand the cost of energy as we go into the winter and the impact onconsumers. For me inflation continues to be the overriding concern.Inflationary expectations are as rampant as ever. The dollarcontinues to be vulnerable in the foreign exchange markets to anyappearance of an easing in our policy, and [market participants] dofocus on interest rates. So my prescription as of this preliminarydiscussion is not to compose another dramatic package like October 6or November 1, but to restate our resolve on inflation and commit theFederal Reserve to a reduced rate of growth in money and credit. I-40-1/8-9/80would avoid any appearance of an easing when we go to the newdefinitions. And we should make such a commitment not only for 1980but also for 1981. I'd say if we need any countercyclical policy weshould look to the Treasury and the fiscal side. I haven't reallystudied the numbers much yet. I would be inclined to go for somethingvery close to alternative 2 on page 8 of the Bluebook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. First, I would use the 3-point ranges that wehave had. As a matter of fact, if I could, I might choose a 4-pointrange as Phil [suggested]. [But] given the fact that we have hadranges of 3 points, I just don't see us broadening them out. I wouldremind you that we fully used the ranges this past year. In fact, wemore than used it in the case of Ml. Now, maybe our new procedureswill make the variations a little less, but I would guess that we mayuse pretty much of the ranges this year. In addition, I think itwould be desirable to borrow a little from tomorrow to have [moneygrowth] on the low side in the first part of the year and on the highside in the second part; therefore, we might want [wider] ranges justfor that purpose. So, I would have 3-point ranges.Secondly, I would not make any 2- or 3-year statementregarding specific reductions in our monetary growth rates becauseit's unrealistic. For example, take this econometric projection. Wewould be saying that after unemployment got to 8.1 percent we wouldreduce the monetary growth rate again and then presumably after it gotto 10.5 percent we would reduce it again. I just don't think that's[realistic]; we're not going to do that. Indeed, I don't think we aregoing to reduce the monetary growth rate a great deal until some ofthe things that are adding to inflation tend to fall off. For thatreason, it's important that we be pretty conservative with 1980because I doubt that we will be able to reduce the ranges much beyondthe 1980 ranges that we set. In fact, I don't think 1980 will be muchof a problem in terms of [growth] being within the ranges becausethere will be enough of a recession that we're probably just sayinghow low we want interest rates to go when we set the ranges for theyear. So, I would say that we ought to center the range on 5 percentfor M1, which would be an improvement over what we experienced [last]year, and that would mean about 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent, [with] alittle more on M-1B and the other ranges in accordance with that. Andthen [we should] hold to it. I might remind you that not only do weface the possibility of recession, but we may be in a semi-war[status] and it will be important, I think, to have a range that isquite explicitly stated to which we can hold.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But when you say "hold to it," you meanconsistent with your first comments about using the range ifnecessary.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's right. And, as I said, I'd drift alittle low in [the range] in the beginning with the view that growthwill be rising within it later on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black. I don't know whether we willget through with everybody today, consistent with getting out at areasonable time. But if it's agreeable, let's go on a little longer.-41-1/8-9/80MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out very close to ErnieBaughman in feeling that we ought to stress our range in 1980 and notindicate specifically what the ranges will be for future years butindicate very clearly that we still hold our oft-stated intention toreduce these ranges gradually over time until we get them down to whatwe hope to be a noninflationary basis. So far as these new aggregatesare concerned, M3 is probably the worst because it seems to be themost interest sensitive. I think M2 is going to be rather interestsensitive, too, because we have taken out of it all the nonnegotiableCDs at weekly reporting banks and all the large CDs--whethernegotiable or nonnegotiable--at the other banks. I would think, John,that would probably more than offset the advantage from [including]the money market funds, but I'm not sure about that. I believe M-1Aleaves out an increasingly important part of the transactionsbalances, so I would settle on M-1B as the best one of all. I wouldfavor narrowing the width of the ranges. We have had 3 pointssuggested at times in the past; we have had 2 points. I would favor 1point for the two Ml ranges and probably 2 points for M2 and M3, whichI don't think we can control that precisely anyway. The main thingthat I want to do is to set these targets below what we achieved in1979. In terms of M-1B, which is what I build all this around, we hada 7.3 percent rate of growth in '79; I'd say 6 percent might be areasonable rate in '80, so [a range of] 5-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent wouldlook about right to me on that one. If we can explain satisfactorilythat M-1A really was not 5 percent as the figure shows but 6.3percent, then maybe 5 to 6 percent would be reasonable for that. ForM2 I'd suggest 6 to 8 percent and for M3 6-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I find myself philosophicallyinterested in the idea of reducing the ranges, but I don't think thisis the time to do it. I think we need all of the flexibility we canhave here. I find myself at least at the moment utterly opposed togoing above 6 percent on the upper end of our range for whatever wecall [narrow money]--Ml, M-1A, M-lB--for psychological reasons. Itwould give a wrong impression abroad regardless of how much we triedto explain it, and to some extent that would be true at home as well.So I come back to the 3 to 6 percent range that we had, not justbecause we had it this [past] year but because I think we haveestablished some modicum of credibility in keeping [actual growth]within the 3 to 6 percent. We're certainly very close to the upperedge, but we still have established a credibility which I have theimpression at least was not achieved even by some of our more austerepartners, Germany included. I feel that this a restrictive policy.Like Willis, I feel that the variability of the outlook iseven greater now than it has been, certainly in my memory as a memberof this Committee. That's one of the reasons I wouldn't narrow therange. I would also urge that we keep our powder dry until we see howthings are moving along six months from now. As to whether we want tochange that range, I certainly wouldn't make [our intent] public, andI certainly wouldn't stick to 3 to 6 percent through, shall we say,hell or high water. I feel very strongly that to use a [number] ofany kind beyond 1980 is foolish. I feel, much as Ernie does, that ifwe state our intention in the present environment as defined by thePresident's messages and so forth and so on, our own analysis andrelated intention to reduce the expansion of money supply further as-42-1/8-9/80long as the inflationary forces rage as strongly as they do is as faras we can go in talking about '81 and '82. I join Nancy [in her viewabout long-term projections]. I'm not going to question whether she'smade even more 5-year projections than I have, but we made the firstone on the budget in the 1971 Economic Report. It was a fine paperexercise, and the way to start is to start. But I would hate to goback and review that now, even with all the adjustments, and realizehow shaky it was at the time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.MR. WILLES. My wife made me promise that I would be moreagreeable in the new year, so I would like to say that I agree witheverything that has been said. I'd like to say it, but the fact isthat I don't agree. But since the hour is late I will be very briefin stating my disagreement. We all agree that the outlook isuncertain. Where we disagree is whether that makes any difference ornot. If we really think that if we knew what the outlook was we couldaffect it in a systematic way, then we end in one side of the[corner]. But some of us have the view that even if we think we knowwhat is going to happen, there is no systematic, predictable,effective way that we can have an impact on it. Because of that, onecan end up with quite different policy implications. I feel perfectlycomfortable in the abstract in saying that, yes, the outlook isuncertain but that policy ought not to be uncertain. Policy ought tobe a given, and by making policy a given we can in fact reduce some ofthe uncertainty of the outlook. The implication of that is that weshould not only decide but should specify in great detail what ourtargets are for the next five years. Unfortunately, we have one minorproblem with that, which is that a change in technology is going on inthe financial markets that makes all the numbers, if not irrelevant,at least highly uncertain. So, since you have given us an extramonth, I would like to wait another month and then be able to comeback and tell you what I think those numbers ought to be. It's clearthat we can't in the current environment spell out any M for the nextthree years because the technology is bound to change in such a waythat it would make any number we specify obsolete. It may be that weare going to have to move to some kind of reserve target and spellthat out for three years. But whatever we do, we need to find a wayto reduce the uncertainty of the outlook that is associated withpolicy. We can't reduce the other uncertainties, but we can reducethat uncertainty. I think that would be a substantial accomplishmentindeed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are not going to offer any numbers?MR. PARTEE. Next month he will.MR. WILLES. Next month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll stay in suspense. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Since the hour is late, Mr. Chairman, and sinceI don't really have any convictions but only tentative leanings at themoment, I'm not sure I will give a number either. But I would like torefresh recollections by going back five years when we didn't have tohave publicly announced ranges. Subsequently, when we did announcethem, we had a very unhappy result [after] proclaiming a long-run-43-1/8-9/80strategy of gradual diminution in monetary growth. That was aboutfour years ago. Psychologically, [targeting] gradual reductions inthe ranges year by year was probably good; the actual outcome was justthe reverse. Nearly every year the actual monetary growth keptaccelerating. Whatever we do, we have to avoid that kind of outcomelike poison, if we give any credibility to our actions of October 6.I think we need to stick to that long-run strategy and really make itwork this time. We need to diminish gradually the rate of moneygrowth, however defined, and it's going to be more difficult as we getinto these new definitions.So, with respect to the different alternatives that areoutlined here, with the risk of making a pest of myself, I'm going tocome back to the theme of whether we need all four [variables]. Ithink we are getting the cart before the horse in a way, by trying toset numbers for four [measures] when we haven't really decided whetherwe need or in fact can control all four. When I think of the newcontent of M2 and the huge amount of savings deposits at nonbankdepository institutions--deposits that really aren't under our reserveinfluence--and when I think of the volume of money market mutual fundsshares and so forth, like you, I begin to have some doubts aboutwhether we really can control M2. It might be important informationfor us on which to base our other actions. But if I were forced togive a provisional number for M-1A or M-1B as of today, I would leanto a midpoint of about 1 percent. I'd like to reserve for a moredefinitive--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A midpoint of 1 percent?MR. BALLES. I'm sorry. As you can see, I'm getting punchy;the hour is late. Please don't record that. I agree with your[suggestion of] a midpoint in the general area of 5 percent for eitherM-1A or M-1B. I think the important thing is to demonstrate withinthe context of how serious this recession may turn out to be that,while we may have to depart temporarily from the reduction mode duringthe depth of the recession, the minute we get beyond that it is ourlonger-run plan to continue this gradual diminution [in money growth]in view of the strength of inflationary pressures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm torn here between the hour andhaving only three more names left. I'd rather like to get through thethree names if we can do it with great dispatch. Mr. Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't see how we can lookmuch beyond 1980. As a matter of fact, I would prefer not to lookbeyond the next 3 months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'll have that opportunity tomorrow.MR. RICE. But since we have to look at 1980, I would favorsome moderate reduction in the rate of monetary growth for 1980.Since the M1 range we would be reducing from is 4-1/2 to 7-1/2percent, [whose midpoint is] roughly equivalent to the rate of growthin the target for 1979, 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent would be an acceptablerange to me. I think the range should be kept fairly narrow, at 3points. So, 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent would be acceptable. I'd beprepared to see perhaps a slightly higher range up to 7 percent, say,4 to 7 percent. But I could certainly live with 3-1/2 to 6-1/2-44-1/8-9/80percent with a midpoint of 5 percent. I know we are supposed todiscuss the 3-month target tomorrow, but what happens in the next 3months is of great importance right now. And I think over the next 3months is a good time to lean rather heavily on monetary growth ascompared to over the year as a whole. It would have good credibilityvalue and I think it can be done without much harm.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By "leaning on it," you mean down?MR. RICE. Down. I think it can be done without much harm.It will be a period when unemployment is still relatively low. So, Iwould argue for more restraint, or a rate of growth toward the lowerend of the range over the next 3 months with the understanding as theyear unfolds that higher rates of growth would be tolerable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris, are you feeling brief?MR. MORRIS. Very brief, sir. I think we ought to be able toshow a substantial reduction in our guidelines for [this] year, simplybecause it is [likely to be] a year of recession. It's a year whenthe demand for money is going to be down. And it's only in recessionyears, in my judgment, that we are going to be able to reduce theguidelines. I can't see us reducing them in '81 from the levels weset for [this] year if the economy is expanding. As a theoreticalproposition I'd like to see [growth] go from 5 percent to 4 to 3 to 2;but it seems to me that if we don't cut the ranges back now for '80,we are not likely to cut them back for '81 or '82. Therefore, I wouldgo for the 3 to 6 percent [M-1A] range and try to explain to themarket that it is a reduction. I think we are going to have a hardtime explaining that it is a substantial reduction because everybodyis so confused about the ATS add on and take off and so on that theyare not going to be as impressed with 3 to 6 percent as we are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. First of all, if I may, let me commend the staff.I think the form of this Bluebook is the best I have ever seen. Maybewe will only keep it within our own family, but it enables us to makethese decisions in the context of economic implications instead ofjust looking ahead for 2 or 3 weeks as we sometimes have in the past.I would very much recommend that we announce--or that at least youannounce--as forcibly as possible our intention to lower our growthrates over a 3-year period. I think it's important to recognize thatthere is absolutely no way in the world other than by affectingexpectations to anticipate a reduction in inflation during thecalendar year 1980. The only possibility we have of accomplishinganything along these lines is to make our longer-term intentionssufficiently clear that anticipations and expectations would reactfavorably. It's vitally important in the world in which we live thatour new--and I certainly feel proper--approach to monetarypolicymaking not be pre-judged with the expectation that we will getresults in the year 1980. I think that would cause politicalpressures that would be disastrous. Specifically, I would recommend a5 percent [growth] rate, as shown under the alternative 2 descriptionon page 8, and strategy 3 on page 11 in terms of 1980, 1981, and 1982.Possibly, if it's unpalatable to think of actually putting outnumerical [intentions] to the world--and I'd say in that regard thatour primary responsibility is not to protect our own flank but to come-45-1/8-9/80to grips with inflation and to accomplish these other [objectives]--atleast our determination to reduce money growth over a 3-year periodshould be announced and announced clearly. That's the only way we aregoing to have any effect in anything like a short-term context.That's all I have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz has promised me he canpronounce an interim benediction in 30 seconds.MR. SCHULTZ. It's an uncertain world so we need all theflexibility we can get. We need at least a 3 percentage point range,with a midpoint of 4-1/2 to 5 percent, which would argue foralternative 2 or a half point higher. Longer range I agree that we'dbe absolutely foolish to set specifics. I do think it's necessarythat we say something that indicates some commitment or resolve ofsome kind. We're the only group that has any credibility to do so. Ithink that's absolutely essential for us if we are going to continueto attack the inflationary expectations problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I very much appreciate your staying hereuntil 6:30 p.m. I didn't give you much choice, I guess, but nobodyvocally objected anyway. I think it was very useful to hear thesepreliminary expressions and to get this part of our agenda out of theway. We will proceed with Mr. Kichline's economic outlook when we allreturn tomorrow morning.[Meeting recessed]-46-1/8-9/80January 9, 1980--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I, or we collectively, neglectedto ratify the domestic operations. Is there a motion to ratify thedomestic operations?SEVERAL. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are ratified.While we're in the process of ratifying, why don't we hear aboutforeign currency operations.MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions? Comments?MR. SCHULTZ. What in your opinion is likely to be the effectof the announcement this morning that OPEC is seriously going topursue a basket of currencies?MR. PARDEE. They've been discussing that off and on. Whoannounced it? If it was the Saudis and there's a general agreement,then it could lead to selling of dollars. But if it was the Kuwaitisor some research economist in one of these areas or newspapermen, it'sunlikely to be [more than] a momentary blip in the market.MR. TRUMAN. It was a story that came out yesterdayafternoon, I think, when you were probably still on the plane, Scott.And the Desk reported at that time, although it was on the ticker inthe morning yesterday, that there had been no effect on the market.The nature of the story, as I heard it, was that some Arabian officialhad said that eventually they probably would have to go to [a basketof currencies] or something along those lines, which would suggest achange in the Saudi's position on that particular issue. But it isprobably fair to say that they have been talking about it for so longthat it has been fairly well discounted. Even the psychologicaleffect, in terms of diversification, may not have been a factor in themarket yesterday, according to the Desk.MR. ROOS. According to page 4 of The Wall Street Journal, itwas a West German newspaper reporter quoting Saudi Arabia's oilminister as saying that the currency basket appeared inevitable.MR. TRUMAN. That's the story we got yesterday. We've heardthat before.MR. COLDWELL. Scott, in your Desk operations and yourwanderings abroad, what's your sense of the direction of currencymanagement on the part of the multi-nationals? Are they making anysignificant shifts?MR. PARDEE. No, in fact they have been rather out of themarket. They were a major factor early in December as theytransferred some of their profits and earnings home. During the latepart of the month and early this month, in our conversations withthem, they said they just don't know which way to go. They're verynervous [about the situation] politically as well as with respect to-47-1/8-9/80other elements. But they haven't been moving funds very much. Thereal problem for us in the exchange market, as far as dollar sales,has come from the diversification by the Iranians and perhaps othercentral banks. On the other hand, the risk of talking to corporatetreasurers is that they start warning us that if the dollar begins todecline, they will sell dollars; it's that sort of thing. We have notheard of major shifts by corporations. They're not very optimistic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to ratify the transactions?MS. TEETERS. I move to ratify.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they will be ratified.Do you have any recommendations, Mr. Pardee?MR. PARDEE. Well, we are now getting into the phase ofsecond renewals of swap drawings and I do need authorization. Some ofthe drawings relate to our operations last summer, in July. We haveeight swap drawings in the amount of $335 million that are up forsecond renewal between now and February 14. I would like to recommendthat we roll them over once again, if we haven't had the chance to paythem off before then.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion? Do we have a motion tothat effect?MR. MAYO. I'll move.MR. RICE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection we will approve thatproposal. We turn to Mr. Kichline who has the unenviable job amid allof this uncertainty of giving us a prudent, considered, forceful,accurate view of the economic outlook.MR. BALLES. How about unambiguous? [Laughter]MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I understand you correctly that you'reprojecting domestic energy prices up 60 percent?MR. KICHLINE. That's correct. That refers to crude oilprices--the wellhead prices--not the total energy component.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What were they up in 1979?MR. KICHLINE. Well, substantially less. I think for theyear it was about 45 percent.MR. MAYO. How much of your 8 percent [inflation forecast]would be energy-related then?MR. KICHLINE. Well, it varies. In 1981 it's a little over apercentage point, about 1-1/2 percent, and in 1980 it's about 2percentage points. Let me just say, as it turns out, that domesticwellhead prices in 1979 are estimated to have been up 55 percent. Theprice of domestic crude oil is estimated to have been at $14-1/2 a-48-1/8-9/80barrel in the fourth quarter of last year. Given the decontrolschedule and our OPEC price assumption, by the fourth quarter of 1980the price of oil is expected to go to $23-1/4.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're just talking about domestic crudeoil prices?MR. KICHLINE. Domestic wellhead prices for crude oil. Butthe current decontrol schedule, which is obviously subject to change--the President does have that authority--would by October of 1981 placedomestic crude oil prices at the world price level. So, we're goingin two years from $14-1/2 to $33-1/2 on the price of half our oilsupply.MR. WALLICH. But this still would have very little impact onthe price of gasoline, wouldn't it, barring an increase in taxes?What would be the price of gasoline, would you say, corresponding to aworld level price for crude oil?MR. KICHLINE. We've got all these numbers. Let me just saythat lots of things intervene in getting to the retail price ofgasoline including importantly margins, which we have assumed willshrink a bit. Gasoline prices are estimated to have increased 50percent in 1979; [the estimate for] 1980 is 29 percent and for 1981,15 percent. So the rate of increase is slowing.MR. SCHULTZ. Jim, you have an inflation rate of about 15percent this first quarter, don't you?MR. KICHLINE. For the CPI.MR. SCHULTZ. There was an announcement that the prices ofhomes declined some in November. We've been wrestling with thisquestion of when we will start to see a leveling out of the housingcomponent in the CPI. Are we getting any better feel as to when wewill see some impact? Is it as early as March, or are we going tohave to wait until later before we see any impact?MR. KICHLINE. Well, as you know, there are two importantinfluences on that housing component: One is the price and one ismortgage interest costs. Mortgage interest costs tend to lagcommitment rates by about a quarter. So, what happened in the fourthquarter in mortgage rates would appear in the CPI measure thisquarter. Given our expectations that mortgage rates have peaked andwill be drifting down, we think that by this spring the mortgageinterest component should not have an important influence in driving[the CPI] up. In fact, late in the spring, in June or so, it couldbegin to operate the other way. On house prices, some of the measuresof house prices recently have declined. Unfortunately, that's not theinformation that is directly used in computing the CPI. Our bestguess is that house prices in the CPI will be shown to be risingsomewhat less rapidly through the next several months, but probably ata rate that's still near 10 percent. So, we don't expect measuredinflation in the CPI due to the house price component to be a helpfulfactor in the short run.MR. SCHULTZ. You did mean to say it was multiplicative,didn't you?-49-1/8-9/80MR. KICHLINE. I get into so much trouble when I use thatterm that I decided to avoid it today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why is that different index used?MR. KICHLINE. Well, as I understand it, the index used tomeasure house prices is an FHA series. It's based in effect on FHAloans, which as you know are a small part of the market. It'sdesigned to measure "a representative house." The series that comeout monthly are Census series, which are based upon the turnover ofnew and existing homes. And in those I believe the average price ofhomes declined a little in November. The question is: Was thatattributable to a change in the mix or in fact did "the representativehouse" decline in price? It is assumed at this juncture that peopleopted for lower priced homes and thus the turnover was concentrated insuch homes rather than that house prices were declining.MR. BALLES. I was wondering whether the staff has had anychance to [develop] even a preliminary view on the likely impact oninflation rates of this morning's announcement of the upwardadjustment on the wage/price guidelines.MR. KICHLINE. Well, that was pretty much in line with ourexpectations. We have assumed in the forecast for some time now thatthe wage/price restraint program would reduce compensation by perhaps1/4 percent or so, or a couple of tenths, but not a great deal. Ineffect, part of this is the notion of: Do you experience settlementsthat are well above your guideline or do you move the guideline sothat few fall outside the program? And, that's a bit what is going onhere. It is a flexible guideline, as I understand it, with a 2-pointspread. We expect that the program in practice has been eased fromthe restraints of a year ago and that at best it will have a smalldamping influence, but not [much].MR. PARTEE. Your projection of the average earnings increaseis up into that guideline, isn't it?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we have compensation in total running inthe 9-1/2 percent area, so it's at the top end of that program. Imight also note, though, that this is a fairly heavy bargaining year.We face [labor negotiations by] the steel workers, communicationworkers, some longshoremen, and the aluminum can industry; so 1980 isnot an easy year in terms of major collective bargaining settlements.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I see someplace that nonunion wagesare now rising faster than union wages?MR. KICHLINE. I'm not aware of that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I just picked up the idea.MR. COLDWELL. In effect, Jim, what you've done by therevisions this time is to push the recession into 1980; 1979 is nolonger a recession year. What are the chances of [a recession] beingdeferred another six months?MR. PARTEE. That's not his projection.-50-1/8-9/80MR. KICHLINE. Well, as you know, [those chances] are clearlythere. If you look back, we had assumed in the staff forecast that arecession or a downturn in economic activity would take place in thethird quarter of 1979. We were a bit late in coming to the recessionview and, as it turned out, obviously not late enough. It is possiblethat we will be surprised. The outlook hinges importantly on consumerbehavior; that by no stretch of the imagination is the big surprise inthe fourth quarter, if the numbers hold up. I do believe that theability of consumers to rely on reducing their saving rate for acouple of quarters to below, let's say, the 3-1/2 percent level beginsto be a possibility, but it's very unlikely. I also think that wehave in place now a clear downturn in the housing sector and weaknessin business fixed investment, and those factors will tend to drive upthe unemployment rate and provide somewhat less income growth. So, Ithink the probability is now higher that economic activity isdeclining, but I would not rule out the possibility that we will besurprised.MR. COLDWELL. Well, Table I-10 in Part I of the Greenbookseems to indicate that you're forecasting a six-quarter decline inpersonal consumption expenditures, heavily concentrated in the goodssector--in fact, all in the goods sector--with services continuing torise on a real basis. You're forecasting very heavy declines [intotal consumer spending] in the first three quarters, tapering offuntil you get a positive figure finally in the fourth quarter of 1981.What does history tell us about this kind of pattern? Is thisconsistent with, say, the 1974-75 pattern?MR. KICHLINE. No. What we have had often in the past is asharper slowdown, particularly in goods, but nothing that hasstretched out for six quarters. What is unusual about this is not somuch the size, but the duration--that is, six consecutive quarters ofdeclining real personal consumption expenditures. I would associate agood deal of that with the fact that this expansion and projectedrecession have very different characteristics than past history. Forthe extended period ahead one of the key differences relates to policyassumptions, both monetary policy and, very importantly, fiscalpolicy. There are no discretionary fiscal actions in our forecast--infact there are tax increases--during the downturn. So we would[attribute] a good deal of it to that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was going to ask a question later butit's timely to ask [now]. You have a prolonged recession or sluggishperiod here and you have no fiscal action assumed. You make someassumptions about monetary policy. Would you like to comment about anappropriate policy mix over this period, looking six to eighteenmonths ahead?MR. KICHLINE. Sure. In my own view, I think a posture ofmonetary restraint indexed by a rate of growth of the Ms that is nohigher, and perhaps somewhat less, than we had in the last year wouldbe appropriate. I also believe, however, that action should be takenon the fiscal side. [I'd note] two important aspects there. Onewould be to roll back the social security tax increases scheduled in1981. It seems to me, in some way or other, that is not consistentwith trying to gain control over inflation. However, something like$18 billion in federal revenues are generated out of that, so that byitself would mean about an $18 billion tax cut. I also think some tax1/8-9/80reduction that would affect the corporate sector by trying to providebusiness investment incentives would be appropriate. Realistically,it seems to me that such a package would be in the $30 billion area.But when one thinks of having tax cuts in an election year period thatdo nothing for the consumer sector, that seems to me rather unlikely.So, probably when we are talking about a tax cut, we would be talkingabout a bigger number rather than a smaller one.MS. TEETERS. What about the timing on that, Jim? Justrolling back the social security tax is no tax increase rather than anactual tax cut. Isn't there a possibility that a tax cut in thepayroll tax, say in mid-1980, would be appropriate timing?MR. KICHLINE. That's quite conceivable. That would mean wecould avoid part of the increase that would be coming along this yearbecause as of January 1 we did have about a $4,000 increase in thesocial security tax base and effectively for consumers that will comeinto play largely in the second half of this year. So, that's right.If you are talking about this, you do not think in terms of doingsomething eighteen months ahead but rather around mid-1980. That iswhen one would want to have this [lower tax become] effective.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have given us a scenario here of an$18 billion tax cut in social security taxes and something forbusiness and you say, realistically, something for consumers, too. SoI don't know how much above $30 billion you are.MR. KICHLINE. Well, I didn't recommend that. I said I thinkthat's one of the facts of life. The number may go higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would bother you if it were higher,right?MS. TEETERS. Don't forget the $18 billion so-called tax cutis just not a tax increase. It's a funny tax cut.MR. WALLICH. That should be offset or compensated for by arise in the personal income tax, shouldn't it?MS. TEETERS. Pardon?MR. WALLICH. We're talking about a shift of the socialsecurity financing from the payroll tax to personal income tax. So wewould have to anticipate the rise in the personal income tax as we cutback on the social security tax increase, if we didn't want toincrease the deficit.MS. TEETERS. Well, given the size of the full employmentsurplus as shown, it doesn't bother me at all to have an increase inthe deficit. By the end of '80 it's shown as being 4 percent of GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your budget deficit for 1981 is what?MR. KICHLINE. $30 billion. The Administration, weunderstand, is trying to hold the number in its budget message toaround $15 billion. But we have a different economic situation. Ithink that's right that [the deficit] is an upward constraint because-52-1/8-9/80if we have a tax cut [this year], it seems to me that in fiscal year1981 the deficit could easily be in the $60 to $70 billion range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does the 50 cent gasoline tax do tothe consumer presently?MR. KICHLINE. It's about 2-1/2 percent under a directmeasure.MR. PARTEE. On the level of the index or--?MR. KICHLINE. No, if inflation were rising at 10 percentbefore, it would rise at 12-1/2 percent for a year.MR. PARTEE. For a year. So it raises the level of priceincreases by 2-1/2 percent?MR. KICHLINE. Right. The percentage change goes up by 2-1/2points.MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I would like to go back to thisforecast of personal consumption expenditures because I think it's animportant point. You have forecast an increase in unemployment ofroughly 1/2 point per quarter in this period ahead, at least for 1980,and industrial production is only going down about 2.3 percent [in thefirst quarter] and 6 or 7 percent, roughly, for the full year. So,one wonders a little whether these are consistent with the decline youhave forecast in personal consumption. If the goods part of thisconsumption is going down at more than 7 percent in the first twoquarters and 6 percent in the third quarter, isn't that likely to havea greater impact on industrial production?MR. KICHLINE. Well, one of the important points here is thatindustrial production is only a part of this; what has been drivingthe changes in industrial production recently has been autos. And weexpect that to spread. When you talk about the unemployment rate andIP, you are talking about the bulk of employment outside themanufacturing sector. The strong growth recently has been in tradeand services. We expect that employment in manufacturing will dropbut we also are going to get much slower employment growth in thetrade and services area. Combined, that is likely to drive up theunemployment rate relative to changes in industrial production. Idon't think they're inconsistent. What we are talking about here isour view that we will have employment adjustments in the short runonce businesses become convinced that their sales picture has changed.And labor markets today are still quite tight in many areas,particularly for skilled labor. Businesses are unwilling to give upskilled labor resources unless they are convinced that, in fact, thepicture has changed for them.MR. COLDWELL. Presumably they get convinced by the end ofthe second quarter with a two percent reduction in goods sales.MR. KICHLINE. I think that would be convincing evidence,assuming that our forecast is right.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think the emphasis on the consumer iscertainly appropriate here. I would point out, Phil, that in nominal-53-1/8-9/80terms goods expenditures rise every quarter, which I think makes thepoint that consumers are being pressed not only by taxes but also byinflation, particularly the inflation in oil prices which doesn'treally have a personal income counterpart in it. The saving ratebehavior is extraordinarily interesting. I calculate that in '78 andthe first half of '79 the personal saving rate averaged a bit above 5percent, fluctuating up and down but never getting much below 5percent and being above it in some quarters. That was a period ofrapid increases in installment debt, which reduces the saving rate ofcourse from what it would otherwise be since it's a reduction fromgross savings. Then in the third quarter of '79 it dropped to 4.3percent with a lesser rise in installment debt; and in the fourthquarter it apparently dropped below 4 percent to maybe 3-1/2 percentor something like that with a still further decline in the rise ininstallment debt. So the question is: In terms of components, whatis moving that saving rate so strongly downward? I suppose one couldargue that if people are moving from cash to goods, the financialsaving is falling off. That would be one indicator. If, on the otherhand, there is a generalized sort of squeeze so that people don't haveenough income to cover [their expenditures] and there's an attritionin saving that results, that's a different kind of story. If it's thefirst case, we could have a continued high level of consumption. Butthat doesn't seem to me consistent with the reduction in installmentcredit. If it's the second case, we would have a very substantialdecline in real consumption. You probably don't have much informationon the components of the saving change, but do you have a view on whatis happening there?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I have a view that in fact the economyhas not been generating much real disposable personal income. [Itsgrowth] peaked out in December of 1978. In terms of the monthlyfigures, it bounced around but in the second half of last year, forexample, real disposable personal income is estimated to have gone upless than 1/2 of one percent. And yet we are getting expenditures,which we estimate, for example, in the final quarter of the year tohave been at 3 percent. Clearly, in our view, it's a strong attemptby consumers to maintain their spending patterns despite adversefactors in growth of real disposable personal income. So, it is thatsort of issue. It's true that the issue is wrapped up with whether ornot we are getting durable goods purchases [from] savings, and thatwould tend to drive the [saving] rate down in a given quarter.MR. PARTEE. There couldn't have been much of an increase incar sales in that period; they probably declined. Were other durablesstrong?MR. KICHLINE. Well, some appliance sales had been strong,but consumers were generating installment debt increases of around 10percent.MR. WALLICH. This change in consumer behavior, as I saidyesterday, strikes me as very significant. If, now, in a period ofaccelerating inflation people don't save more but save less, theremust have been some change in their evaluation of the situation. Themost plausible guess, it seems to me, is that in '74 people weregenuinely scared. They didn't know where the economy was going andwhether they were going to have a job, so they cut back on average.Now with a more moderate recession predicted, there seems to be less-54-1/8-9/80of that fear. On the other hand, there's a more rational attitudethat if they buy now they save 13 percent. They are buying; they didbuy cars, which was perhaps the first wave of that. Now they arebuying something else. You are quite right that [consumer spending]seems to go from one thing to another. But I would argue also inlooking at consumer debt, which has risen relative to income, that theconsumer probably looks at it in relation to future income. So, withfuture nominal income rising, the debt ratio to him appears less thanit is.My main comment is on the nature of our staff's forecast. Itis in a sense a formal exercise because you don't give weight to thepolitical probability of a tax cut. So this [forecast] is what wouldhappen if the things that are already planned and decided were tohappen. The Board staff's forecast is under those of forecasters whoare not bound by that constraint; I think those forecasters generallyaccept and expect a substantial tax cut sometime this year.Therefore, the shape of their recession is different. Their recessionis shorter than ours and its end is different; instead of sauceringout very flat, it comes up more V-shaped. And their inflationexpectations--although I don't know this for a fact, but it seemslogical from these differences in their view of the income pattern--should be higher than ours. Can you say anything about outsideforecasts and the like?MR. KICHLINE. I think your description of those forecasts isquite correct; most major models do have a somewhat deeper or perhapsthe same decline, though shorter in duration, and a much strongerrecovery. DRI is one example and that's clearly their forecast. Onthe inflation side, curiously enough, the Board staff's forecast wouldbe in the upper range of inflation rates of outside forecasts thatI've seen for 1981. In part that's attributable to the fact that manyof the outside forecasts with a stronger recovery generate moreproductivity and they've incorporated a tax cut that removes thesocial security [tax] aspects. But I think the conditionalassumptions here are very different from those being used by mostoutside forecasters.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your assumption of the impact of thatsocial security tax increase on prices was what in 1981?MR. KICHLINE. Well, we think it will be close to 1 percentwithout a constraint on the time horizon. We think it's probablycloser to 2/3 of a percentage point or something like that in 1981.Compensation goes up by 3/4 of a percent because of that effect and weassume it will be fairly quickly passed through in the form of higherprices.MS. TEETERS. What sort of a monetary interest rateprojection do you have underlying this forecast, Jim?MR. KICHLINE. We have a moderate decline in rates beginningin the spring and going on; the 3-month Treasury bill rate we assumewill [drop to] around 10 percent in the spring [and will drop a bitmore through] the third quarter and rise slightly thereafter to 11percent in the second half of 1981.-55-1/8-9/80MS. TEETERS. So it's basically a very restrictive monetaryand fiscal policy.MR. KICHLINE. Oh, yes.MR. PARTEE. That's based on what--6 percent Ml growth?MR. KICHLINE. Right.MR. PARTEE. Is that M-1A or M-1B?MR. KICHLINE. It's M-1A, but I'm not sure we would want toforecast a great deal of difference in interest rates on the basis ofM-1A and M-1B.MR. BLACK. Jim, I was a little surprised about the magnitudeof the announced increase in real GNP for the fourth quarter. Wherewould you guess that will end up after the final revisions are in?MR. KICHLINE. We don't have any additional information; infact, I'm not sure that the Commerce Department has anything in theway of hard evidence right now. All of the data for December areessentially missing, including retail sales. The obvious assumptionwould have to be that consumer expenditures are even stronger than wehave now in our forecast. [We have] a bit higher federal expendituresthan Commerce had, a little higher exports, and our inventories were alittle higher, I believe. So the major source of the difference isconsumer spending. Our information, for what it's worth, wouldsuggest to us that real consumer purchases in December were not thatstrong. We had built into our forecast an increase of about onepercent in nominal retail sales increases in December, excludingautos, so it's virtually no increase. And if [Christmas] turned outto be a strong season, that 2 or 2-1/2 percent kind of number couldwell come out. I would be very surprised if it were 3 percent orhigher. But a 2 percent number seems to me to be perfectly plausibleat this point.MR. PARTEE. 2 percent for what?MR. KICHLINE. Real GNP in the fourth quarter.MR. PARTEE. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. Jim, first a question: I assume that theseprojections were glued together before the President's grain embargostatement was issued and therefore do not reflect either thesuspension of additional exports to Russia nor the promise by thegovernment for grain storage, whatever that may mean. Have you had achance to evaluate what adjustment there might be to your forecastbecause of these twin factors?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we've looked at that. There are a numberof uncertainties at this point. We don't think it will have much ofan impact on real GNP. It will change the internal mechanics ofaccounting for it, namely about $2-1/2 billion less in agriculturalexports. And that would show up in farm inventories or government-56-1/8-9/80purchases. But, in fact, for real GNP we don't think it will havemuch of an effect. The issue really is what price effect it mighthave and whether over the longer run that does change domestic andforeign exports as well as domestic production. And that's unclear.It had seemed to us that it might well in the short run lead to higherprices; but I notice prices seem to be falling, so we had that onewrong. It seems to us that the price effect is more important and wedon't have a good fix on that right now.MR. MAYO. Of course, there's also the question of whathappens to the grain. It can't be stored indefinitely.MR. KICHLINE. That's right.MR. MAYO. My other point is an observation. It seems to methat one of the factors making consumers spend much more is that, forbetter or for worse, they have had such an increase in the equity intheir homes that they consider that their kitty. That could be verydangerous if there is a prolonged slowing in [housing prices]. But Iknow of instances involving personal friends who feel much moreprosperous and are willing to spend more of their disposable incomejust because they have a house that they think has gone up in value by50 percent in the last couple of years.MR. PARTEE. Although there was a decline in the saving ratein the second half of the year, do you mean they suddenly recognizedtheir wealth?MR. MAYO. Yes. Well, don't try to get me to predict thetiming of some of these things; it just comes in waves. As we said,the product--whether they're buying automobiles or refrigerators orwhatever the composition is--is elusive here. But [the rise in homeprices] seems to me to be an important factor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.MR. WILLES. Following along your question and GovernorWallich's comments, I'd like to ask Jim a question and then reservethe right to comment on what I think his answer will be. The Chairmanforced you into a policy recommendation on fiscal policy. Would youindicate--you've got to have some idea in mind since you gave thatstatement--what that would do to your own forecast? Would you bewilling to spell that out?MR. KICHLINE. Well, in terms of price behavior, we haveperformed some exercises with our quarterly econometric model to getsome notion of the impact of something like a mid-1980 tax cut in arange of about $30 to $35 billion. We think that by 1981 thatprobably would result in a reduction in the rate of increase in thedeflator by about 3/4 of a percentage point from what it otherwisewould have been, and [a larger decline] over a longer time horizon.At the same time, it would have small impacts on real GNP; we thinkreal GNP might be up by 1/2 percentage point or so.MR. WILLES. The tax cut would lead to a reduction in thedeflator?-57-1/8-9/80MR. KICHLINE. That's because it's oriented toward socialsecurity and business fixed investment and not toward generatingadditional direct consumer expenditures. So, I gave you an answerthat was different than you thought.MR. WILLES. But in a way even better.MR. AXILROD. President Willes, that tax package isessentially the difference between Strategy 3 and Strategy 4 on page11 [of the Bluebook].MR. WILLES. That's what I thought. Well, we've been havinga lot of discussion about tax cuts and responding to recession and soon, which is a conversation that is similar to those we've been havingfor the last 10 years. And the only comment I would make is that wedo that based on models that have proved to be off track almost everyyear for the last 10 years. That suggests to me that we havesomething misspecified. Of course, some of us think we know what thatis. And I just think now is a time when we're going to have to bevery cautious about what we think we really can do to try to have animpact in a systematic way on real variables. I think we all agreethat we can have an impact on inflation; but it's not at all clear,based on the Fed's model--or any other model--that we have had torevise virtually every year because it went off track, [that we canhave an impact on real variables]. Our view is that the model hasgone off track because it's misspecified; and it's misspecified insuch a way that it does not make it a reliable tool to use to do thesekinds of exercises. I think we play a very dangerous game if we thinkwe can say with very much precision that we're going to have an impacton these real variables by cutting taxes $30 billion or $50 billion orwhatever it is when the best guess at the moment, as far as I cantell, is that all it will do is have an impact on inflation and havepractically no impact on unemployment or real GNP or any of theseother things that we really would like to get a handle on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just see if I understand whatyou're saying. You're saying that a tax reduction of any sort willhave an adverse impact on inflation and not too much impact on thereal economy, you suspect.MR. WILLES. I think at the moment that's the best guess.MR. PARTEE. There's no impact on real activity throughgovernment policy?MR. WILLES. No, I didn't say that. Clearly tax policy,monetary policy, and lots of things can have an impact on realeconomic activity. But as far as we know it can't have a predictableimpact. We're going to change lots of things. Any time tax policychanges it's going to change things. It changes incentives, itchanges functions, and so on. The question is: Can we predict in afairly reliable way what that impact will be? And I don't seeanything that suggests that we can because all the models that we haveused to try to make those predictions have proved to be misspecified.And there's no reason to suppose that they are any better specifiednow than they were ten years ago.-58-1/8-9/80MR. WALLICH. Are you simply saying that the variance aroundthe forecast is wider? Or are you saying that the forecast is--?MR. WILLES. It's not a question of variance. It's the factthat the parameters are unstable and will respond, in our view ofcourse, to expectations. Therefore, by failing to factor expectationsin, we've completely misspecified the shape of the economy. Ten yearsago that would have sounded like an absolutely absurd assumption. Ithink now the evidence is rather considerably on that side. I justwant to point out one thing. I think people as they've heard me talkabout it have said: Well, he was a monetarist and this is just onemode of monetarism. The theories that we're talking about wereprimarily developed by Keynesians. In fact, the people around ourplace who have done the most work on it originally came to us to workon optimal control theory and used a model like the Fed model todevelop optimal control techniques. So, it's not as if it's just themonetarists who think they've found a new tool to play with. I thinkit's a very serious challenge to the bases we've been looking for interms of making the kinds of decisions--MR. SCHULTZ. But don't you think, even though one could viewthis as very imprecise in terms of the numbers we come out with, thatwe can predict the direction? Isn't that really the more crucialquestion?MR. WILLES. Well, the best guess that we can make, if we tryto make adjustments--and one can't do this in a very precise way, ofcourse, except in a very simple model--is that, yes, we can predictthe direction fairly precisely. But the extent we can predict whatwould happen to real output is essentially zero.MR. PARTEE. Then you are saying that we can't affectaggregate activity through government policies.MR. WILLES. Yes, on average.MR. PARTEE. This is very, very [specific].MR. WILLES. Yes, it is. There's no question about it. Butthe evidence--I'm not sure I'm happy to say it but I will--isincreasingly consistent with that view.MR. COLDWELL. Jim, in your forecast you said you used 6percent monetary growth as a base. Did you play around with this totake into account some alternatives to the Bluebook with the idea ofmaybe 3 percent for the first half and 6 or 8 percent in the secondhalf?MR. KICHLINE. No, we did not. The exercises that we did,using the model, are presented in broad form in the Bluebook. We didnot for this meeting go into any other alternatives, of which thereare an infinite number of possibilities.MR. COLDWELL. Could you say what, let us say, 4 percentacross the board would be?MR. KICHLINE. Well, we took 4-1/2 percent and 7-1/2 percent.And the results for the year are shown in the Bluebook. We did not-59-1/8-9/80use alternative paths that would have something like slow money growthand then fast money growth within the years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. I get lost in the fiscal forest. For a number ofyears we had budget results in which expenditures fell belowappropriations. To what extent is this going to be reversed? Plusthe fact is that there is no reason why one can't anticipate nextyear's appropriations; orders [and] expenditures come later. And Idon't quite know what you assume on those off-balance sheet activitiessuch as Chrysler and other things. To what extent might we get a realsurprise on the expenditure side or the orders side, as contrastedwith this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just add to Willis' question. Whatare you assuming about special government measures or Home Loan Bankmeasures or whatever?MR. KICHLINE. We have built into the forecast governmentsubsidized [housing] units of 300,000, which is pretty much in linewith what the Administration talked about. That's 50,000 more than inthe last fiscal year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't mean, then, that they arecranking up the tandem plan?MR. KICHLINE(?). Well, that's part of it, but it's not amajor cranking up of the tandem plan. As you know, the budgetaryimpact there is quite variable; it depends on when the governmentsells those mortgages. It's an interest [subsidy] that ultimatelyshows up in the federal expenditures. On the authorizations, that's adifficult question because we have built in a significant increase indefense expenditures along the lines of the Administration'sproposals. That could well go higher. A good deal of what theAdministration is proposing we have assumed will result inauthorizations, but not expenditures, particularly not in the shortrun. To the extent that the defense sector is geared up more rapidly,there is a bigger increase in actual federal outlays. I think that'sconceivable, and it would obviously feed into the real side forecast,particularly in 1981. So, we've assumed a good deal of lag betweenauthorizations and expenditures. I might note that defense orderinghas in fact picked up a good deal. And in the fourth quarter, one ofthe factors--not the main one--leading to a significant increase infederal outlays was a pickup in real defense expenditures.MR. WINN. I'm somewhat amazed at the amount of money that'ssuddenly showing up in Cleveland. I don't know if that's the subjectof charity coming home or what but the money seems to be coming out ofthe woodwork for that sort of thing. I'm gathering that this isreally going to mean that this year we're not going to have anyappropriations that weren't spent.SPEAKER(?). That could [mean] a very big difference in thefederal spending.MR. MAYO. One of the aspects of this that is important, too,is the extent to which there is excess capacity in the defense-60-1/8-9/80industry that could take up a significant increase in defensespending. We learned again in the Vietnam conflict that we couldn'tspend as fast as was budgeted because the factory wasn't there; theyhad to tool up and so forth. It takes a much longer time to acquire asophisticated product. But that is one of the considerations thatperhaps--MR. WINN. Related to that is the fact that inventories arerather tight and [are being carefully] watched in most of thesespecial sectors. If we get any change in that area, we're going tosee explosive prices and people scrambling for the short supply.My final comment is that I'm struck by the number of peoplewho tell me they're now pricing for inflation. They tell me theytried a price increase in midyear but it didn't go because theircompetitors didn't meet it. They tried a price increase in Decemberand not only did their competitors meet it within 48 hours but they[moved] ahead of them in terms of the prices themselves. There seemsto be an explosive development related to the inventory shortage inthis area.MR. KICHLINE. I'd like to correct the response I gaveGovernor Coldwell. We did not assume a flat 6 percent quarterly moneypath. It's 6 percent QIV 1979 to QIV 1980; but in fact we have builtinto our current forecast about 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent growth in Ml inthe first half of '80 and about 6-1/2 percent or so in the secondhalf.MR. COLDWELL. But you didn't do any alternative scenarios?MR. KICHLINE. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any further comments on thebusiness situation? If not, we'll turn to the decision we have tomake. Just by way of background, and summarizing yesterday'sdiscussion, I thought there was a good deal of skepticism expressedaround the table about the idea of seeming too precise much beyond1980. I do have some concern myself about the point Mr. Baughman madethat it may be a little hard to escape when [we are pressed for] somenotion of what we're going to do after 1980. But the advice in sumseemed to me to be cautious on that side. There seems to be a prettystrong consensus that a range of a few percentage points [for thegrowth of the aggregates] is about right. As to possibilities withinthat kind of range, I don't want to prejudge where people are comingout on annual policy itself. There was a fair amount of [sentiment]for [growth] between 4-1/2 and 5 percent; there were some for a littleabove 5 up to 5-1/2 percent. I think virtually everybody was sayinggrowth probably ought to be lower than what it was last year by somedefinition of what it was last year. So I think we are in thatgeneral area; it does affect what we do in the short range to someextent. It may be graduated in our individual minds anyway. Itshould be. That kind of background is useful to our short-rundiscussion. Why don't you introduce that subject, Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In turning to this matter, let me justmention a couple of things. As Mr. Roos said yesterday, given the new-61-1/8-9/80technique we are using and all the complications of an annual and ashort-term horizon, the Bluebook was put together admirably in myview. It does take a quarter's time horizon for this particulardecision. That's arbitrary, and we debated as to what the right timeperspective was. If anybody has any comment on that, they could offerit.MR. PARTEE. The Committee on the Directive tried valiantlyto get that put in a year ago without success. So we're happy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it could be longer or it could beshorter, but it seems to be a tentative compromise anyway.MS. TEETERS. Is it going to roll forward?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, presumably. I don't know whether wethought this all through, but I guess the presumption would be that inFebruary we will have the next three months, if we continue in thisframework. Now, that's--MR. AXILROD. But it would be related to the path. Youwouldn't lose sight of the longer-run path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will always be related against the--MR. AXILROD. We would continue to present the growth ratesfor the whole year as we go on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We thought of doing it for six months, butit's an arbitrary decision.MR. COLDWELL. The three months is starting January 1stthrough March 31st?MR. PARTEE. December.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. December to March is the way you calculateit.MR. AXILROD. I presented December to March, and we have inthe text the quarterly average growth rates that are roughlyconsistent with it.MR. COLDWELL. Does it include December or does it not?MR. AXILROD. December is the base. It's essentially thegrowth rates in January and February and March averaged.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the difference? I didn't pick upon that. All these numbers you were giving here are the December-to-March figures. If you have 5 percent growth December to March, whatdoes that make the quarterly average?MR. AXILROD. The quarterly average is 4-1/2 percent.They're running about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a little lower.-62-1/8-9/80MR. AXILROD. Just a little lower this time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In Steve's comments he raised the questionrepeatedly about whether the Committee, in effect, has any preferenceas to how interest rates evolve during this period. You can havedifferent points of view on that: That you don't care or that it's avery important question. I would think comments on that point arerelevant, if you think they're relevant. The only other point--I putthese points down here earlier--is that I think the most certain thingabout the economic forecast is that during this particular 3-monthperiod we are very likely to have a higher consumer price index, forall that means in terms of expectations and problems of various sorts.So with that, we'll proceed. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I am concerned about what youalluded to as a thread that ran throughout Steve's comments indicatinga continued concern about interest rates because interest ratemovements would affect output one way or another. It seems to me--andI don't say this critically in your direction, Steve--that we didadopt and publicly announce a new program whereby, within broadlimits, we were going to permit interest rates to fluctuate freely inorder to concentrate on the control and gradual reduction of moneygrowth. I think we will frustrate our whole purpose and thepossibility of succeeding in this new approach if we have tuckedbehind in our minds all the time the view that a primary, or at leastvery important, aspect of what we're doing is somehow continuing alongthe path that we were on of trying to control interest rates and hopethat in this process we can achieve some [reduction of] money growth.I don't think we can have it both ways. I would ask Steve: Is thestaff still imbued with a real concern about interest rates?MR. AXILROD. The staff believes, I think--and I can't talkfor everyone--that decisionmaking in the economy is affected by thelevel of interest rates and credit availability. On the other hand,the staff believes, or at least I do, that it's difficult for theCommittee to make a priori decisions about the proper level ofinterest rates. That's why a money supply target is important becausethen those decisions come out of the market to a great extent.However, because we believe that decisionmaking by businessmen takesinto account credit costs and availability, it seems important to tryto suggest what the pattern of interest rates might be in the courseof the year, and that's what I was trying to say. If the Committeeadopted a pattern of money growth in the course of the year because itwas chasing a long-run target and got way ahead of it early in theyear and then wanted to catch up for credibility reasons late in theyear, that might imply a very high interest rate. You may not wantthat, so you may want to give up on your long-run target, which couldbe one credibility problem. If we have very high interest rates, Ibelieve it would have effects on economic activity in 1981. If weentered the year with 15 percent, I think economic activity in 1981would be slower than we've been projecting. I've asked Mr. Kichlinefor verification of that.MR. ROOS. Let me just ask this. There has been referencemade to the possibility that interest rates would drop. I noted withinterest and with admiration the fact that the Chairman in a recentspeech said publicly to the world: Don't be concerned if interestrates drop because under our new practices interest rates could-63-1/8-9/80conceivably drop and not signal any easing of policy. Now, isn't itpossible, through the utterances of the Chairman and others, to saythat we have somewhat of a new ball game? We're doing thisdifferently and people should stop thinking along the lines they havebeen accustomed to thinking over the last 10 years because the last 10years certainly didn't bring the desired results. I'm fearful thatwe're just letting ourselves be a little bit pregnant and running allover the lot.MR. AXILROD. But, President Roos, to be very brief, I wassimply addressing myself to the question--raising it for the Committee--of whether you want low growth of M1 in the first half and highgrowth in the second half or [vice versa] because the Committee has tomake that decision, and there are certain implications. That's what Iwas trying to get to.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may say in this connection, Mr. Roos,I think we've got a spectrum over which we can operate. We used tooperate with very tiny changes in federal funds rates from time totime, or between meetings certainly, and not very large ones even at ameeting. There is no doubt that we have changed; in my opinion, theemphasis is quite different now. But in some people's minds it may bedifferent than in other people's minds. That does not excludenecessarily some predilection about which way to bias this in theshort run. People may have some druthers one way or another withoutat all implying that we're controlling the federal funds rate the waywe did before. But one might want to lean in one direction oranother. Maybe other people wouldn't want to lean in one direction oranother. But we don't have to make it a choice between dismissingfrom the minds of everybody around this table any concern aboutinterest rates and going back to what we were doing before, which wasa very close focus on the federal funds rate within a quarterpercentage point. It's just that we've got to make some decision.The decision is made in terms of the money supply, but that decisionat any particular meeting may be biased in some people's minds by someguess, anyway, as to where they would prefer the interest rate musicto accompany it--the treble to accompany the base or whatever that[expression] is.MR. PARTEE. You don't have to recant in the presence of--MR. WALLICH. If I may follow up on this. The purpose of amoney supply target presumably is to force wider swings in interestrates. If we stick to the same rate of money growth through expansionand recession, we'll get very wide swings of rates, wider than we'vebeen willing to impose by acting a priori, as Steve said, on theinterest rate. But to me that doesn't mean that it is logical to moveto severely negative real interest rates because we have a recession.There are considerations of having a positive or a negative realinterest rate, and to my view the ability to swing widely toward a lowinterest rate is limited by that. It should not become severelynegative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps we could combine comments on thisconceptual and theoretical point with practical comments on where weshould put the money supply target in the next month. Mr. Eastburn.-64-1/8-9/80MR. EASTBURN. Well, I would like to respond to Steve'scomments about the path of money growth. I think where we go on thisdepends on how smart we are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not assuming too much on that?MR. EASTBURN. My conclusion from listening to the discussionbefore is that we're really not all that smart as to be able to dothat. And that forces me into the position that if we have as a long-range strategy a gradual reduction of money growth, we ought to figureout where we want to start and pretty well stick to that. That putsme, since I came out yesterday at about 5 percent for 1980, withalternative B. I don't mean hold to that inflexibly if unexpectedthings develop, but I just don't think we're able to do the kind offine-tuning that is suggested by the Bluebook in terms of frontloading or rear end loading or whatever. I'd just put down 5 percentand stick to it until we decide we have to make some kind of a change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Coldwell.MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that thedirection we're working on here is to lower the [growth in the]monetary aggregates. I would accept alternative C, for which you havegrowth of 4 percent. I'd be willing to accept a range around that,although I'm not sure how this is all working out with single pointsversus ranges in the short run. But I'd be perfectly willing toaccept, say, 3-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent or something like that. Mypresent predilection would be to accept a lower level in the firsthalf and see what the second half brings. Because my primaryobjective is to try to get some impact on the price level, I'm notsure that I totally agree--in fact, I'm fairly sure I don't agree--with what the staff is saying, which is that we can't have some impacton prices here. I doubt very much if this long-range low growthsaucer forecast is really a reasonable one over a long period of time;things will change. A recession is likely in the next year; it'stiming is uncertain. And I'm reasonably sure that something will comeup and destroy that lovely little package over the next 8 quarters.The complex of political as well as economic and foreign factors issuch that I would opt for a lower level in the range, particularlysince we got something in the 3-1/2 to 4 percent area in the fourthquarter, as I recall, Steve, rather than the 4-1/2 percent we were[expecting].MR. AXILROD. We got 3 percent from September to December and4.9 percent, I think, for the quarterly average.MR. COLDWELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just for purposes of clarification,Governor Coldwell, when you began talking about a range, is thatmerely a reflection of our frailties in achieving the number or do youhave something in your mind about interest rates, let's say?MR. COLDWELL. Well, I was coming to that, Mr. Chairman. Therange I put down was partly because of our frailties in achieving anumber, and I'd give the Desk a little guidance rather than just leaveit to the Manager to make some ad hoc decisions on it. But it alsoreflects some interest in the interest rate package. Contrary to Mr.-65-1/8-9/80Roos, I think interest rates are an important element of the impactboth on expectations and on consumer and capital expenditures. So,I'm unwilling just to wash my hands of interest rates and say "Gowhere you want to go." I don't think it's likely [to have no impact]internally, and I think it's even less likely to have no impactexternally in our relationships with other countries.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. As I indicated yesterday, Mr. Chairman, mypreference on the long-run targets would be to go mainly with M-1B.It increased at a 7.3 percent rate last year and I think 6 percent isa reasonable rate for [this year]. If the relationships set forthover the next year between the old M1 and M-1B hold in the future,this would suggest that the appropriate long-run range for M1 would beabout 5-1/2 percent. Against this background, I think we ought to beworking down our target growth rates and I would favor alternative B.Now, that does specify rates that are below what I've indicated Ithought was probable for M1 and M-1B, but I would be prepared tosupport that for three reasons. One is that I think we still have avery serious credibility gap. I find few people in the financialmarkets who really believe that we're going to stick with the policywe announced October 6th. So, I think we need some low growth ratesvery quickly in order to better establish our credibility. The secondreason why I would favor being somewhat lower in the beginning is thepoint that Frank Morris made yesterday: This seems to be about theonly time we can get the growth rates down. That may be in partbecause the market used to determine to a greater degree how muchmoney it got than it presumably will under this new system, butthere's still an element of that in there. And then, third, pastexperience has shown that we usually get bursts in the aggregates inthe second and third quarters. While that may have stemmed from badseasonal adjustments or the old methodology, I'm still suspicious thatit might happen [again]; so I would like to get some pretty lowfigures under our belt before it does happen, if in fact it does. Sofar as the range for federal funds is concerned, philosophically I'dlike very wide ranges and would be tempted on purely philosophicalgrounds to widen that range, particularly at the low end. But this isnot a time to stand on pure philosophical preferences because it'sundoubtedly true that foreigners and people in this market, too, arepaying a great deal of attention to what interest rates are doing.So, I think it's important that we not let the rate go below 11-1/2percent, and I would put that as a floor until such time as we havebetter credibility than I think we now have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I'm pretty sympathetic with Dave Eastburn'scomments. I think fine-tuning is difficult in practice, and I wouldpoint out that the main misses that we've had have been large misses.That is, it really isn't that we expect 5 percent and get 4 percent.We expect 5 percent in a month and get zero or a minus; or we expect 5percent and get 10. That has been the nature of the chunkiness ofthat demand function for money, and I think that demand function isthere just as it always was. The question now is: What kind ofresponse will a sudden change in the growth rate of money bring interms of policy? I guess I would say that under our new procedures itwould bring a very abrupt and considerable change in interest rates,-66-1/8-9/80either up or down. So, without fine-tuning I rather like the 5percent on the old definition. I guess we're talking about currentdefinitions, aren't we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. PARTEE. We would specify it in current terms. I likethe 5 percent of alternative B, partly because that would give us4-1/2 percent for the quarter which, if we get it, will be on themoderate side from the standpoint of the ranges that we choose for theyear. I would be willing to tolerate a little shortfall from that 5percent, say, to 4 percent. But if it comes in significantly weakerthan that, I think we would want to be supplying the reserves and wewould want to be seeing interest rates move. There is something towhat Larry says, although he perhaps overstated it a little, that wehave to be prepared to see interest rates move in response to a need.I would like to see us take the alternative A specifications of 7-1/2and 8 percent for M2 and M3 rather than those in alternative B. Wedon't really know what success that new [floating rate] certificate isgoing to have. It's being advertised very strongly by the thriftinstitutions and I wouldn't want to see us tighten up because ithappened that the thrift institutions had a good inflow from thepromotion of the 2-1/2 year certificate. [On the funds rate,] I thinkwe're a long way from either 11-1/2 or 15-1/2 percent and I don't seehow we could get to 11-1/2 percent without taking action on thediscount rate. So I would leave that range right where it is at11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel.MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, I continue to be concerned aboutthe expectations and realities of our price level and about thepossibility of the influence we can have on our exchange ratefrailties at the moment. I'd be very anxious to reaffirm our posture,a posture that would indicate a continuing steady move to a generalreduction of the growth rate [of money]. I recognize that this mightvery well contribute to interest rate changes, but [with] some moreflexibility. But in the real world we simply have to be a littleattentive to the level of [unintelligible]. I think we cannot movequite that abruptly. All of that leads me to feel that I'd be rathercomfortable with the numbers associated with alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I want to make a couple of points.First of all, I want to agree with Dave Eastburn's philosophy of notmonkeying around with fine-tuning among the quarters. This makes usthink we are smarter than we are, among other things, to use hislanguage. The purpose here is to set a long-term range and, unless wesee some rather dramatic reason for changing it, to make our quarterly[objectives] basically consistent with that, subject to some smallvariations--and I mean small--that Steve may feel he has to introduceinto the staff projection. I feel also, although we have made a giantstep forward in moving [from 2-month horizons] to September-to-December and now December-to-March [time periods], that we need tomake one more refinement of that in the interest of not being toooverwhelmed by monthly changes [in the growth of money]. It would bemuch better if for the current quarter, or the decision which is being-67-1/8-9/80made today, on January 9, to use the month of January as our centermonth and in effect take the fourth quarter of 1979 and go to thequarter centered on the current date. That means comparing theaverage for the fourth quarter with the average for December, January,February. Next month we would do January, February, March; in otherwords, it would be literally fourth quarter-to-first quarter. I thinkthat makes a lot more sense and gets us over part of our hangup wherewe spend, it seems on occasion, an interminable amount of time tryingto explore the seasonal adjustment deficiencies of a given month.Granted that going to three months is in the right direction, I wouldurge strongly that the Committee consider going from quarter toquarter. It may look awkward because in the first instance in effectwe have to have December at both ends of our equation. But as we moveon out, of course, that overlap would not occur. It's just a neaterproposition and would help in the smoothing of this. Again, the pointis--and I think Dave made it effectively--that we can do a better jobthat way.I would add that I prefer alternative B partly because I likethe 3 to 6 percent long range and the 3 to 6 percent short range,which yields a midpoint--whether by coincidence or not--of 4-1/2percent for the quarter-to-quarter change. I guess that is for thefourth quarter to the first quarter literally, Steve. I don't knowwhat it would be for December, January, February; maybe it doesn'tmake much difference. I feel very strongly that the answer to thequestion of "Do we pay attention to interest rates?" is that, ofcourse, we pay attention to interest rates. We pay attention tointerest rates just like we pay attention to real GNP, unemployment,and an awful lot of factors. In my mind we shifted in the October 6thpackage from a primary public emphasis on interest rates to a primarypublic emphasis on the aggregates, with the targets going throughreserves. We have not abandoned all of our secondary emphases. Weemphasize plenty of things, one of which has to be interest ratesbecause we live in the real world and the execution of monetary policymust be through a market that pays attention to interest rates.There's no substitute for that; at least I've never heard of one inour type of society.One other point: I think the Federal Reserve System would bemaking a serious mistake to publish M-1A and M-1B and M2 and M3 and Land say to the world, in effect: We don't know which of these isright; take your choice. Now, I'm perhaps overstating. I would pickM-1B myself and call it Ml, drop the B. And if we have to qualify thedescription of it because of NOW accounts or other changes, we shouldqualify it. But we are being almost too research oriented, too muchstudents of this rather than decisive leaders. If we can't determinewhich one we think is better, with some qualifications and so forth,nobody can. And I think our leadership role depends in large part onour ability to go through this whole redefinition of the aggregatesand to avoid coming out with a definition that looks like the mousehas really squeaked by coming up with M-1A. I would recommendstrongly that we publicize M-lB as Ml. We can handle theconsequences. End of speech.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the targetsset out in alternative C have a good probability of coming pretty-68-1/8-9/80close to serving the needs of the environment as they unfold in thenext couple of months or so. I've been rather impressed with theobservation through time and in conversations here that we can't havemuch influence on how the expansion in money and credit is allocatedbetween production and prices. The indication is that the structureof the economy and expectations are tending to allocate it more andmore to prices and less and less to production, which leaves us in anawkward situation of simply embracing or accepting it or seekinggreater slack in the economy--and probably for a fairly long period oftime--in order to make some increased impact on the inflation problem.But it seems to me that the inflation problem must be given priorityin part because the darn thing just keeps getting worse and worse.I'd be prepared to accept pretty much whatever interest rate patternevolved during the appropriate time period as a result of pursuingthese quantitative targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, I want to ask a question first. Youreconomic forecast is based on a 6 percent rate of [money] growth. Ifyou take the rate of growth of money down another full percentagepoint, what does that do to real growth and to the unemployment rate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You did assume that the rate of growth inmoney would be slower in the first half of the year?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. The staff forecast is based upon themoney path of alternative 1 on page 15 in the Bluebook, which is 6percent for the year. It's slower in the first half--I think it'saround 5-1/2 percent and then 6-1/2 percent in the second half--butthe short-run path consistent with that is alternative B.MS. TEETERS. What happens if you reduce that path by a fullpercentage point?MR. KICHLINE. Do you mean for the long-run target or theshort-run target? In the short run, if you stuck to the 6 percenttarget mentioned and simply altered the money path for one quarter andthen picked it up the next quarter, it really wouldn't have asignificant impact on inflation or real GNP.MR. AXILROD. Governor Teeters, there's a degree of fine-tuning in the numbers here that has to be taken with a grain of salt.But on page 25 in appendix C, if you reduce that 5 percent to 4percent and still aim at something like 6 percent M1 growth, which iswhat Jim's assumption is--that's the third column under alternative C--you'd end up in the fourth quarter with a somewhat lower funds ratethan under his basic assumption to make up for the greater restraintnow. That's in essence what that would tend to lead to. Similarly,if you had a 5-1/2 percent long-run growth, which we have not shownhere, the funds rate in the fourth quarter would probably be somewhatlower under a short-run alternative C path than under short-runalternative B path.MS. TEETERS. I'm not sure I got a [complete] answer. Myinclination is that if we cut [money growth] below the 6 percentthat's in the forecast for the year, we'll have a more severerecession on our hands as we keep the interest rates up. I have a-69-1/8-9/80great deal of sympathy with Dave Eastburn's point of view that weshould stick to a number and let the interest rates fluctuate. WhereI come out is that I'd like to see a 5-1/2 percent growth rate for theyear as a whole and I'd set a target of approximately 5 percent forthe quarter to give us a little range to meet the needs at the end ofthe year. I don't think, frankly, that we can undertake a policy for3 years of consistently reducing the rate of growth of money supply.I just don't think that's in the cards for us in terms of what's goingto happen in the economy. We've brought the rate of growth downconsistently now for 3 years, but there's a certain minimum to whichwe can get and I don't think it's 3 or 4 percent. We are going to getourselves into a position of setting a target which is so much too lowthat it's either going to have severe impacts on the real growth ofthe economy or we're not going to meet our targets. Realistically,we're going to [have to] come down to a plateau for growth of themoney supply and try to hold it there rather than reduce it apercentage point year after year; and a rate of growth in the moneysupply of about 5-1/2 percent strikes me as about where that minimumis, given the other things that are going on in the economy. So, Ican buy alternative B for the quarter, but I do have a higher targetfor the year as a whole.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.MR. TIMLEN. My preference, Mr. Chairman, is for alternativeC. I think it's consistent with efforts to reduce the growth in theaggregates over the year 1980 and also consistent with the [view] thatthe basic economy may be slowing in the first quarter. I think itwould have an important impact on inflationary expectations and helpour credibility. It will also [add] strongly to the message conveyedin terms of the relevant interest rates in the foreign exchangemarkets, where I must say the emphasis is on interest rate levels asopposed to the movements against reserve targets. I don't have astrong feeling on what the federal funds range should be, whether itshould be 11-1/2 to 16 percent or 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent. I'd justas soon stay with the existing range of 11-1/2 to 15-1/2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I continue to think that the economymoves on interest rates. If I rely on the money supply, it's becausein [a period of] inflation I think that's a better way to get theright interest rates than to try to do it outright. But I don'tregard the money supply as a black box where I have to accepteverything that comes out. So if an unreasonable interest rate comesout, I reserve the [option] to evaluate that on its own terms. AsNancy said, we have reduced the growth of the money supply for 3 yearsrunning and have brought inflation from about 7 percent to 13 percentin doing so.MR. PARTEE. With able help.MR. WALLICH. With able help from various--MS. TEETERS. We really brought the real rate of inflationfrom about 7 percent to 10 or 11 percent, Henry.-70-1/8-9/80MR. WALLICH. Well, we can argue about the numbers, but[inflation] has gone up while the growth of the money supply as wedefine it has gone down. So I lean toward the tighter side for thelong term, alternative II. And within that framework I lean towardalternative C in terms of the old definitions of money. I don't carewhether we use the old or the new definitions, just so we don'tmisunderstand. I would go with the numbers that are in the Bluebookunder alternative C: 4 percent for M1; 6.5 percent for M2; and 7percent for M3. I would raise the lower end of the funds rate from11-1/2 to 12 percent and make the top 16 percent. I agree with Chuckthat before the rate got to 11-1/2 percent we would probably findourselves making a decision about the discount rate anyway.MR. BLACK. Henry, did you say you would change the top ofthe funds range to 16 percent?MR. WALLICH. To 16, yes. And the bottom to 12.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's amazing to me howI can have such a fundamentally different view about how the worldworks than Chuck Partee and yet find that he stated my policy positionmuch more eloquently than I could ever state it. Whatever you wrotedown for Dave Eastburn and Chuck Partee, write down for me and thatwould be great. I would just say that on Bob Mayo's point, it's notclear to me that a bad decision is better than no decision at all; Ithink we ought to publish all the numbers and let people help us findout--MR. MAYO. I'm not arguing against that, but I think weshould indicate a dominant preference.MR. WILLES. I don't think we have enough information.MR. PARTEE. We will [indicate our preference] in the PolicyRecord, certainly.MR. MAYO. We are forced to do it. Let's be proud and carrythe flag and not say we don't know but maybe this is the better of thetwo. I see us being too academically sound, if I can put it that way,rather than carrying leadership for a figure. And if we can't carrythat leadership, nobody can.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think alternative B looks good,even though I came out yesterday for a 4-1/2 percent midpoint. I feelthat if we are going to bias the flow during the year, it ought to bethe opposite of what most people have been saying. I think the rateof growth in the early part of the year ought to be greater and therate of growth in the latter part of the year less because I think wewill be better off with a saucer-shaped recession than a V-shaped one.So, to the extent that we can obtain these [rates of growth], it'ssuch a weak economy that it should help to cushion the extent of thedecline and hopefully produce a more saucer-shaped than V-shapedrecession.-71-1/8-9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You hope to produce a more saucer-shapedthan V-shaped one [and would] increase the money supply more rapidlyin the first part of the year and less rapidly in the second part.MR. MORRIS. Right. Traditionally, following our earlierpolicies, we have supplied very little monetary growth in the earlypart of a recession. We have encouraged a sharper decline in theeconomy thereby. We lagged in reducing interest rates and then whenthe unemployment rate got really high, we turned around and producedvery rapid rates of growth in the money supply. That led to very bigswings in the economy, which I think are counterproductive in the longrun to controlling inflation.MR. RICE. May I interrupt, sir? Don't you think the shapeor the depth of the recession is already determined now?MR. MORRIS. It probably is, largely. I'm not suggestingthat we can--MR. RICE. So what we do now--MR. MORRIS. It's just that to the extent we have to make adecision, it ought to be biased in this direction. But I'm not underany illusions that we can fine-tune this thing.MR. RICE. I don't believe that anything we do today is goingto make the recession more saucer-shaped or more V-shaped.MR. PARTEE. Well, the second part of it could affect thecharacter of the recovery.MR. COLDWELL. It might prolong it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're on, Mr. Rice. It's just that youhave to expand on your comment because you are next on the list.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, given the forecast for nominal GNPfor this quarter which I believe is 5 percent and is, of course, veryweak, and given the forecast for the inflation rate which I understandis 15 percent for this quarter, I would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The consumer price index.MR. RICE. The consumer price index, yes. I think this is agood quarter to try to keep the rate of growth in money at the low endof the 1980 range. That would give us leeway to allow it to expand ata faster rate later on in the year if that appears desirable, and Ithink it will appear desirable. So for this quarter I would favoralternative C; I would be comfortable with a 4 percent rate of growthfor the next 3 months. Also, I think this is not the time to accept asharp reduction in interest rates, and alternative C will assure thatinterest rates will not fall significantly. So my preference at thistime would be for alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, as a number of people around thetable have already noted, 1979 was a nonrecession year. It's a bit of-72-1/8-9/80a humbling experience in terms of our ability not only to fine-tunebut to forecast. As I recall your statements on the subject, I thinkit's to your credit that you spoke out and said that you weren't surewe were in a recession despite announcements coming from other highplaces that the recession began a couple of months ago and was alreadyhalf over. That's an interesting commentary on the state of the artof forecasting. In any event, given that uncertainty about ourability not only to fine-tune but to forecast, it seems to me thatinflation does remain the key threat to the longer-term health of theeconomy--to economic growth, employment growth, a sound dollar, and soon. For all those reasons and without going into any more detail, I,too, would come out at this time in favor of alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, would opt foralternative C, taking advantage of what would appear to be fairly slowgrowth in money that we are focusing on in the first quarter. I wouldnote that historically--in recent history at least--we haven't hadvery much growth in money in the first quarter and, quite likely, thathistory will be duplicated this year. To get somewhat of a head starton our longer-run targets it seems to me that we ought to accept thatslow growth in the first quarter; and as a result alternative C wouldbe attractive. I would also note that if you focus on Ml, its growtheven under alternative C is greater in the first quarter than we hadin the fourth quarter, which turned out to be a fairly strong quarter.I don't know what that implies except that it just reinforces mythought that we quite likely will get very slow growth in the firstquarter and ought to tolerate it whether it is below 4 percent or not.The interest rates are an important factor both domestically andinternationally and we shouldn't lose sight of that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I would like to be listed under the alternative Bteam. I think there is a possibility that "C" would represent toodrastic a reduction from a higher level of money growth to a lowerlevel of money growth, and that could have recessionary implications.So, I would opt for "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn, would you like to say something?MR. WINN. I guess I was shaken by last year's experiencewith money growth, so I am suspicious of almost any number we put onthese things, frankly. I remind you that any number we pick is fine-tuning of a degree, and I'm not sure the numbers differ that much interms of the fine-tuning aspect. I suppose because of last year'sexperience and the concern as to what will happen in the money demandarea, I would probably stay with "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz, you're left; you are notvolunteering.MR. SCHULTZ. I'm just very uncertain about where thiseconomy is going to go, particularly in this quarter. I can foresee asituation in which growth of 6 percent could be very restrictive andgrowth of 3 percent could be very loose, depending upon what happens.So I come out between "B" and "C" and I would hope that there's some-73-1/8-9/80real flexibility for us to react as we see what actually is going tooccur this quarter. I do have some concern about interest rates. I'dlike to see them slowly come down as we go through the year. It wouldworry me if we had a sharp drop in interest rates in this quarter whenwe show very high inflation rates. That could be disastrous in theforeign exchange markets and I don't think it would give a very goodimpression to the country as a whole. I come out somewhere betweenthe B and C alternatives.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we seem to have some differences ofopinion, but they are not enormous. So let's ruminate a few minutesand drink some coffee and see whether we can bring this to aconclusion.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Gentlemen, ladies. After great Solomonicperusal of the preferences expressed by the members of the Committeeand others, and evaluation of those qualitative comments that weremade--the acute ones and I discarded the others--let me make a generalcomment. I think, as a number of people have mentioned, that we havean image problem or an opportunity--I don't know which to call it--that is perhaps as important as the numerology at the moment. I havesympathy for the comments that said we have to appear to be quitecautious during this period, particularly until the market gets alittle more settled down in terms of interpreting our actions.Substantively, I personally would not mind seeing some decline ininterest rates; in fact, I think it would be desirable on the domesticside if we can get by with it on the international side. It may be alittle inconsistent with the energy problem, and this is where thecompromise has to be struck. Everybody was between "B" and "C" in oneway or the other basically. There are probably a few more on theCommittee for "C", but [the margin] is very narrow, and for the non-voting members it is a bit the other way.Nobody talked much about the interest rate range. I wouldsay, consistent with the desire not to have a misinterpretation of ouractions, since there is not very strong reason to change the interestrate parameters anyway, let's just leave the range the same. In thatrespect we can say when this [directive] is published that there canbe no misunderstanding about whether any change was made with regardto the interest rate parameters. I'm not sure that the bottom or topof any of the [proposed] ranges is going to be relevant during thisperiod, as a number of people have indicated, so I don't think thereis a strong reason to change the range. I would propose leaving it asis. It was also implicit in the comments that primary, but notexclusive, emphasis is to be placed on M1. That is the measurebasically used to construct the paths; we don't ignore [M2], but it'snot exactly a 50-50 weighting proposition. I'm not going to suggestwhat weight it has in any numerical terms. I think the primaryemphasis will tend to be on M1, but we will keep a weather eye cockedon the M2 figure.In terms of the range [for Ml], as I said, everybody was [forgrowth] between 4 and 5 percent, and I would propose that we juststate it in the directive as "between 4 and 5 percent," which I thinkis consistent with the atmospherics of the [situation]. That is opento an interpretation that I personally would not resist, but we would-74-1/8-9/80draw a path on the basis of 4-1/2 percent consistent with that openingstance. But let me say that we would be more concerned about asituation where [growth] was tending toward the lower side, 4 percentor below--we can't control these things that closely--and interestrates were rising; we would tend to get aggressive more quickly,providing more reserves. And if it went in the other direction whereit was drifting high, if interest rates were falling out of bed andgiving us trouble on the international side we would be prompter aboutgetting it back in the range, in terms of attitudes and judgmentsabout the kind of path shifts that we have to make in the reservenumbers in the period. But we would start out with 4-1/2 percent.MR. COLDWELL. I'm not quite sure you said what you wanted tosay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I may have said it wrong, but Ithink you--MR. COLDWELL. You mean we should react more rapidly if M1growth goes up with the interest rates falling than if M1 growth wentdown and interest rates were rising.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, either way. In other words, if M1[growth] were low and interest rates were also low, we would be slowabout changing. But if it were low and interest rates were high, wewould change more quickly. It's how quickly we move to make thejudgment, which might have to be made. It's just this judgmentalissue, which we went through at least once, of changing the path inthe view of what is happening.Well, Mr. Altmann just wrote [suggested wording for] thedirective which says "between 4 and 5 percent for M1 and on the orderof 7 percent for M2." The latter happens to be the alternative Bnumber. It's another way of saying something around 7 percent. Sothat's what I would propose for your consideration. Operationally,the question arises as to what that means in technically constructinga path. I suggest that it means 4-1/2 percent for the arithmetic ofit, but we have to make this borrowing assumption in constructing thepath. That seemed to be an easier decision before last week thanafter this week. This week has been somewhat of an aberration, wherewe had a high funds rate consistent with an exceptionally low--inexplicably low--borrowing level. All I can say--and I think we haveto be prepared to look at it again after another week or two ofevidence to see if this aberration seems to be continuing or if itseems to be reverting to the earlier pattern--is that I have a niceround number to suggest to you; that it is a round number may be itsonly virtue. But it falls between the earlier experience and thepresent experience, and the number is $1 billion of borrowing. Now,that is lower than anything we have been dealing with up until thispast week. The latest information on the money supply, as nearly as Ican gather--I hate even to put this in your mind in a way, but havingopened the issue I will put it in your mind--is that the tea leaves wehave on the number for next week's publication would show fairlysignificant growth. It's not inconsistent with this 4 to 5 percentrange but, if anything, it is a bit toward the upper side of thatrange for January.-75-1/8-9/80MR. AXILROD. A stronger number, Mr. Chairman, is for [theweek] we are not [yet] going to publish.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not the number we are going topublish this week but the number we would publish next week. It's avery unreliable indication, but for what it's worth, it is notinconsistent with this kind of range. But it doesn't suggest thatthere is great danger of [Ml] falling way down in the range inJanuary. That's if that number means anything.MR. AXILROD. We would be projecting a 5 percent rate ofgrowth in January instead of 3-1/2 percent, if that number held up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So the proposal is for: 11-1/2 to 15-1/2percent, or unchanged on interest rates; between 4 and 5 percent on M1with the understanding that I suggested about 7 percent in M2; andstarting out--but looking at that very hard in a week or two in thelight of this recent aberration--with something like $1 billion ofborrowing.MR. PARTEE. One cosmetic thing. Would it be better to say"about" 4 to 5 instead of "between" 4 and 5? It sounds very specific,as if we expect it to come between the numbers. I realize that's whatwe mean, but we won't accomplish it. So maybe if we said "about" 4 to5 percent--.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The sentence] says "seeks". I don't knowhow--MR. PARTEE. And "on the order of" is what you have for thesecond part.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "On the order of" is what I have for thesecond part. I have the slight feeling that maybe "between" is alittle better cosmetically, but it's no big deal. Henry.MR. WALLICH. Well, I have a couple of points of uneasiness.One, it seems to me that we may be biasing this in the direction oflower interest rates by the low borrowing assumption. What happens ifborrowing is higher? Then, presumably, until the nonborrowed reservepath is adjusted, total reserves would be higher than we thought. Sothe low borrowing assumption does have some implication for the totalreserves we anticipate and for interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure that's right, Henry.We are getting into this darn lagged reserve accounting again. But inthe immediate future, which is going to be relevant for judging this,we will know what the level of reserves is. We are just judging thenonborrowed reserve path, saying we are putting the nonborrowedreserve path at $1 billion below what we know reserves will be nextweek. That's for the first week anyway. Now, it depends--and this isthe uncertainty--but that would be tighter than last week in terms ofborrowing when we had the market quite tight with a lower level ofborrowing. We just don't know the significance to attach to that.You might be right, but it's not in accordance with the most recentexperience.MR. WALLICH. Not the very recent experience.-76-1/8-9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. Basically the $1 billionwas arrived at--other than that it's a round number--by being halfwaybetween the experience of the last week and the previous week.MR. MORRIS. It would seem to me a lot more sensible if theCommittee instructed the Manager to seek a total reserve path thatwould be compatible with these [Ml and M2 growth rates] rather thanhave the FOMC try to estimate what the [appropriate] level ofborrowing is. I think we could eliminate that from our agenda withoutany loss, and probably some gain, before--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are going to have an argument, Isuspect, with Governor Coldwell. Let me repeat. I think what we aredoing is that we are aiming at a total reserve path and it's 4-1/2percent [Ml growth] under this version. The instrument that we affectis nonborrowed reserves. What we don't quite know how to do is [howto determine] what level of borrowed reserves is consistent with thetotal reserves path that is really the objective. That's engineeringin Mr. Roos' terms, I guess. But I'm telling you what I propose forthat element of engineering.MR. ROOS. If we worked with a monetary base--and I know thatis a dirty word--we'd obviate all these problems, I think.MR. WALLICH. It does make a difference what the source ofreserves is, and we should not ignore that. It may be a refinement,but borrowed reserves are not quite the same thing as owned ornonborrowed reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From my standpoint, I suppose I'd beperfectly happy with what you suggested, Frank--just leaving it to theengineers, as Larry said--but I'm not sure the Committee as a whole iswilling to leave it entirely to the engineers.MR. AXILROD. President Morris, if you did that, some of thestaff could sit around and make a decision and say: Well, we thinkborrowing ought to be zero. And the funds rate would be dropping verysharply immediately. We wouldn't make such a callous arbitrarydecision, but you would be leaving that possibility open.MR. MORRIS. I don't really understand that.MR. AXILROD. Well, it's because we know required reservesfor next week, and the Desk has to make the choice of whether thoserequired reserves will be met by borrowing at the discount window orthrough the Desk's provision of nonborrowed reserves. If thoserequired reserves happen to equal the total reserves that seem proper,the Manager still has to make that decision.MR. WILLES. But you can't [play] that game for a quarter.You can do it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but that is always the position we arein for any particular week. Even looking beyond the week for which weknow the reserve number, we know what level of total reserves we wantto aim for to [support] 4-1/2 percent or whatever the number is. Whatwe really don't know in a sense is how to get there, because we don'tcontrol one element in the reserve base.-77-1/8-9/80MR. MORRIS. And, therefore, I don't think it makes any sensefor the Committee to tell the Manager to follow a nonborrowed targetunless we also tell him not to pay attention to total reserves. Now,in the last month he had to change the nonborrowed target. I thinkthat was the correct thing to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if I understand the comment madeyesterday and this is combined with your comment, we have to get somekind of compromise. We are interested in total reserves. Our successor lack of success in reaching that target will depend upon, over aperiod of time, how much banks borrow and how much we put in asnonborrowed reserves. Taken together it will depend on both of thosethings. It is not an indifferent decision in looking at the outlookwhether they borrow or whether we put in the reserves. Frankly, Ithink we have to leave some room to the staff--or Mr. Sternlight, Mr.Axilrod and myself--in making those judgments as time passes.Governor Coldwell yesterday raised the question as to whether, if wemake a big change in assumption, the Committee [wants] to look a bitat the engineering, in Mr. Roos' term. Now, I don't know at whatpoint you want to do that, if at all. All I'm suggesting by throwingout this figure is that this is at least a chance to look at theinitial [borrowing] assumption that goes in--we meet again only 4weeks from now or whatever--and maybe that's enough. But there was aquestion about that yesterday. You don't even have to look at theinitial assumption if you want to leave it to us. But it's a matter--MR. MORRIS. I really think it's meaningless. But if peopleget some solace from it, maybe it's all right.MR. COLDWELL. If you are willing to convert everything fromborrowing to nonborrowed reserves, sure, you can call it meaningless.I don't believe it is meaningless. I think it's quite meaningful ifwe shift from $1.5 billion of borrowing to zero borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The staff presumably would only reach thatjudgment in the light of their own assessment as to whether it'sconsistent with the total reserve path. They have that constraint.And if they keep being off the total reserve path, presumably we willget a new staff or something because they are making the wrongjudgments. But that is an inevitable matter of judgment inherent inthe discount window that somebody has to make. It's a question ofprocedure as to how much the Committee wants to get into thatjudgment. I tend to agree with you, Frank, that the answer is "nottoo much." But at least initially, when we're meeting anyway, it's aquestion of how much we want to--MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out right where Frank did.It's not only the matter of borrowing, it's a matter of whatliabilities the banks use up or [whether they] release reserves thatare not part of the money supply. All those things have to beestimated and there are a lot of them. To me borrowing involves thesame sort of problem. I see it just the way Frank does.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you want to proceed this way, Iwill tell you instead of asking you in a sense--and permit you toobject--that the staff is planning to seek borrowing of $1 billioninitially and they will use their best judgment as time passes. Ifyou want to object to that, object, but it doesn't have to be part of-78-1/8-9/80the decision in any formal sense. I don't think we need to prolongthis unless somebody really wants to object to that Solomoniccompromise between the experience of last week and the earlierexperience.MR. AXILROD. You mentioned the staff and the departure ofthe staff if we are off the total reserve path. In that regard theCommittee should remember that with lagged reserve accounting, ifdeposits turn out to be strong, borrowing will rise and there is noway in the world to get back on a total reserve path in as short aperiod as 4 weeks; we are going to have to wait longer for the--MR. MORRIS. But it will dictate because we have a 3-month--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Whatever we start with, if nothingelse goes wrong and we are moving above path, the immediatemanifestation of that is a rise in borrowing; if we are moving belowpath, the immediate manifestation is a decline in borrowing. That'swhat happens.MR. EASTBURN. I don't want to prolong this either, but Ihave some confusion on a related point and that is the role of thediscount rate. I had been under the impression that the philosophy[at the Board] was that, given lagged reserve accounting, thedifferential between market and discount rates was not an effectivefactor in encouraging or reducing borrowing. However, in the Bluebookthere is a comment in paragraph 18 on page 17 about what will happenif the discount rate isn't changed under certain circumstances and theinfluence of that on borrowing. Has there been further thought [atthe Board] about that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say that the question of laggedreserve requirements, which keeps coming up here, and the discountwindow posture, which bears upon this question, are under review.Within the next month or so I think we have to put both of thesematters, certainly the reserve requirement issue, on the agenda. Arewe going to be ready in time for the next meeting?MR. AXILROD. That lagged reserve requirement [study] will beready within a couple of weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What about the discount window?MR. AXILROD. That will not be ready in that time frame.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not before the next meeting?MR. AXILROD. I doubt it. It could be accelerated, but Idon't think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The point I am making is mainly that anycomment at the moment is tentative depending upon where we go on that.But given the way we are now operating--the way I look at it anyway--the amount of borrowing presumably will affect the level of marketrates relative to the discount rate. A couple of comments were madethis morning. Let's suppose borrowings [have to go] way down toachieve this path. For a while at least the discount rate is going toconstrain how far [the funds rate] can go down, so long as the banks-79-1/8-9/80are borrowing. Now, once they stop borrowing, it can go below thediscount rate; but so long as they are borrowing significantly,presumably market rates will not go appreciably below the discountrate. If it went the other way and borrowings tended to increase, onewould expect interest rates to go up given this level of the discountrate. In theory, I suppose, we could reduce the discount rate inthose circumstances and at the same level of borrowing we might getlower market rates in the short run anyway than we otherwise wouldhave. So the discount rate fairly directly affects the market rate,all other things being equal.MR. EASTBURN. The practical aspect, as far as those of us atthe Reserve Banks are concerned, is that we do have our Board meetingsonce every 14 days and they make recommendations on the [discount]rate. With a fairly restrictive directive so far as the aggregatesare concerned, there might be some question one way or the other as towhat happens to this--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That judgment--I think I made this pointbefore--seems to me to be more important than it used to be. That'sbecause if you propose either an increase or a decrease in thediscount rate, we can basically say that the message, if we're allinterpreting it the same way, is that we want market rates higher orlower. We're not really saying we want borrowing to be greater orless, although that may be the ultimate implication over a period oftime. But the immediate effect would be to change market rates ratherthan borrowing. Ultimately, [a new discount rate] obviously mayaffect borrowing because it has affected the climate in financialmarkets. But the short view, as I look at it anyway, is that ifyou're sending the Board a message about the discount rate, you'resending us a message on where you think market rates should be, allother things equal. Of course, this is why we didn't act in Octoberand November when market rates were up wherever they were--14 or 15percent on the federal funds rate--and a lot of people said we shouldraise the discount rate to close the gap. It was our judgment that,at least in the short run, it wasn't going to close the gap but wasjust going to put the market rates up further. So it was a questionof whether or not we wanted market rates to go up further. I thinkall that changes if we open up the discount window. If we didn't havea natural restraint on borrowing, which we have had ever since thebeginning of the Federal Reserve System, but if we operated [with anattitude of] borrow all you want if you find the rate attractive toyou, then we'd have to manage the discount rate in a different way.MR. PARTEE. I do think that the level of borrowings issomewhat of an index of possible need. That is, if we got a high andrising level of borrowings, that would mean we're exceeding themonetary targets and there would be more indication for a rise inrates than if we got a low and declining level of borrowing; in thelatter case [reserves] probably would be falling below target and thatwould be consistent with the reduction so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In general.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I don't think it really will seem all thatinconsistent over time.-80-1/8-9/80MR. WILLES. Mr. Chairman, could you explain how the discountrate influences--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The market rate?MR. WILLES. That's a little different than I thought.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Axilrod has a nice econometricfunction which hasn't worked so well recently, but nonethelessreflects the theory. Banks are reluctant to borrow. Theirwillingness to overcome their natural reluctance to borrow dependsupon how cheap the discount window is relative to market rates. Witha given reluctance to borrow, they will borrow more if the margin is 4percentage points than if it's 1 percentage point. So, if you put upthe discount rate and change the existing situation in the margins butyou don't change anything else including the amount of borrowing,market rates will go up. And they are going to be forced to borrow $1billion in the current example. In the existing situation that's whatwe say. We can control that in the short run. We know they are goingto borrow $1 billion. We know, if this equation is right, that theywill only borrow $1 billion when the federal funds rate is 1percentage point above the discount rate. So we now raise thediscount rate from 12 to 13 percent; they won't borrow that $1 billionthat we are going to force them to borrow until the federal funds rateis 14 percent.MR. WILLES. Well, that's a very interesting view of theworld.MR. AXILROD. It will hold, President Willes, for 2 weeks;that's certain under lagged reserve requirements.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, the higher interest rates are thengoing to affect everything else, so we begin getting a differentanswer. But in the short run I think that's what happens.MR. BLACK. That's implicitly assuming no change in excessreserves, Mr. Chairman. I don't think that's right.MR. WALLICH. Well, the changes that can occur, such aschanges in excess reserves and changes in total deposits that bankscan bring about, would have to be enormous in order to offset anysignificant shortfall of reserves because the multipliers are so highfor M1. That multiplier is on the order of 10 and for M2 it's on theorder of 20, so banks would have to bring enormous pressure on theirborrowers and the holders of securities in order to make up a givenshortfall in reserves by changing their reservable liabilities.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they change their liabilities, it willultimately affect reserves, and that's what would occur from thehigher level of interest rates. It's not going to affect reserves for2 weeks.MR. WALLICH. I'm trying to say what the difference isbetween lagged and nonlagged reserves. It is a small one, as far asthe [reserve] adjustments go.-81-1/8-9/80MR. PARTEE. Because even with nonlagged you still have thistremendous multiplier. Yes, I agree.MR. WALLICH. That's right.MR. WILLES. Well, I don't want to prolong the discussion,but it makes me very nervous that we would take what in effect is adeterministic, very short-run model and decide the time path forchanges in the discount rate, then market rates. I think that's avery questionable thing to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand quite what you aresaying. It doesn't mean that we can't change the discount rate. Itjust tells us to recognize that if we change the discount rate, theshort-run impact is going to be to put market rates up, which may bewhat you want.MR. WILLES. Well, what's the short run? Is it 2 weeks or 4weeks or 6 weeks? We could get exactly the opposite results if youchange the time horizon by a relatively small amount.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about the small amount. Butthere's no question that if you put up interest rates, the ultimateresult might be to reduce the money supply, which might have all sortsof impacts and produce lower rates over a period of time.MR. WILLES. Fairly quickly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about the immediate impact.MR. PARTEE. Reduce the money supply and get lower interestrates!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't have to wait--MR. COLDWELL. Do you want comments on this compromise orwhat are you going to do? Mr. Chairman, I'd rather have [a range]centered on 4 percent than the 4-1/2 percent you've chosen. The[risks] of 5 percent are too high to me. I think we ought to beaiming for something less than that in this coming quarter to makesure we do not overstimulate at this particular moment, and I'd muchrather we have a 4 percent rate. The range could be 3-1/2 to 4-1/2percent if we want a center point; or for a single point 4 percentwould be my strong preference. With the $1 billion in borrowing Ihave no problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comment?MR. WALLICH. I feel somewhat the same way. Evidently these[choices] do not matter a great deal [individually], but thecombination of what seems to me historically low borrowing, anunchanged lower end of the funds rate, and a somewhat higher rate ofM1 [growth] all cumulates a little in my view.MR. PARTEE. Well, I am on the opposite side. Somebody needsto speak. It looks as if the chances are that we will have somethinglike 5 percent [Ml] growth. I don't think we ought to be deliberatelyfollowing a mechanism that pushes rates up in this quarter, which is-82-1/8-9/80probably a declining quarter in the economy. I'm prepared to have 4to 5 percent to accommodate other members, but I certainly wouldn'twant to center [the range] on 4 percent, which I think does bias it infavor of a rise in interest rates.MS. TEETERS. I also think it's the wrong time to haveinterest rates going up. If the economy slides off, for once weshould be going with it rather than lagging behind it.MR. COLDWELL. Steve, I thought you said alternative C wasconsistent [with the current] rate, not an upward [move in the] rate.MR. AXILROD. Alternative C in the first quarter we assumewould be [consistent with] something like the present interest ratelevel; it might go down a bit, but more likely--MR. COLDWELL. [Down] a bit, but not upward.MR. AXILROD. Not in the first quarter.MS. TEETERS. But it seems to me we want to have someflexibility here. If the economy does slide off, I think we'd want tosee interest rates slide off. If we go to a very stringent monetarypolicy of 4 percent [Ml growth], we are sort of gluing the [funds]rate at 14 percent with a possibility of it going higher. As I say,it would be nice for once to have Fed policy moving in sync with theeconomy. And if the economy doesn't slide off, the interest rate isnot going to come down.MR. SCHULTZ. As I see it, Steve said the best estimate thestaff can make at this time is that January [Ml growth] looks like 5percent. That would mean that if we center it on 4 percent, we'regoing to have to have some additional restraint at this point in time,and I'm not sure that that's that we want.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?MR. BLACK. For once, Mr. Chairman, though Governor Rice andI voted at [opposite] ends of this spectrum, we have agreed thateither of us could accept the other's position.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a pretty fine judgment when youget down to 1/2 percentage point differences. But I would suggest toboth sides that under my interpretation of this the degree ofresistance to either end of the range is somewhat affected by whatdoes happen to interest rates, which I don't think we know. That iswhere the concern is on either side, and the concern is a reasonableone. But I get a little leeway in there. Now, one can argue that M1can be put a little higher or a little lower but if there aren't anyother comments, I guess we can vote. Is this package understandable?MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesGovernor Coldwell YesPresident Kimbrel YesPresident Mayo Yes-83-1/8-9/80Governor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesFirst Vice President Timlen YesGovernor Wallich YesUnanimous, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There were a couple of other things Iwanted to mention, which I'm not sure I remember now.MR. MAYO. Don't mess it up!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, not on [the policy decision]. I justwant to remind you again that both the discount window procedures andlagged reserve accounting are relevant to what we are doing, and if weare really going to stay on this technique, they urgently needexamination. We are not talking about any easy change in either ofthose, if we want to change. While the surface logic seems to say tochange from lagged reserve accounting, I suspect it would not be easyto do that mechanically in the banking system, particularly beforemembership gets resolved. I'm just not sure how easy it is to do. Ifwe are really talking about changing the discount window mechanism tosomething that seems to me logically more consistent with thisoperating technique, again on first blush, I suspect we are talkingabout overthrowing 60 years of Federal Reserve history, which is notan easy thing to do either. So they are not going to be very simplequestions to deal with, but they are inherent in this operatingtechnique.We had an agenda item on release of the FOMC Memoranda ofDiscussion for 1974. I take it this has been read by the staff and--MR. ALTMANN. They have been read and reviewed by the staffand the international parts have been reviewed also by staff at theNew York Bank. The Treasury has been consulted on it as well, all inaccordance with past procedures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we need a vote on this?MR. ALTMANN. Yes.MR. WALLICH. I would like to say that it has been checkedout very carefully. My own feeling, if I were one of the foreigncentral banks, is that I'd rather not have that much reported aboutwhat my representative said at particular meetings. But it has allbeen correctly checked out, as in the past, and there seems to be nouneasiness.MR. PARTEE. The one thing proposed for deletion is the Bankof England's attitude toward support for the institutions operating inLondon. I would have assumed that would be public knowledge by now.MR. WALLICH. You would rather have even more--?-84-1/8-9/80MR. PARTEE. I'm really asking another question, Henry.There is something in a memo of yours, apparently, that is going to bedeleted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As a matter of procedure, these arechecked with the foreign central banks, aren't they?MR. WALLICH. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they requested that this be deleted?MR. TRUMAN. We volunteered to delete it in this case.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they are happier.MR. TRUMAN. To answer Chuck's question: When this lender oflast resort issue was being discussed 5 years ago there were someitems, especially with regard to consortia banks, that were leftfuzzy. Governor Wallich's notes are more explicit on the fuzzy partbut because of the fuzziness there may be some disagreement. [Itconveys more] than the public knows; they sense it but they don't knowit. That and the fact that views are directly attributed in thosenotes is the reason we felt it was wise and consistent with previousprocedures to delete it.MR. PARTEE. My only question, Ted, was that I thought it wasHe happened to be representing the Bank.But if it is more explicit than even current public understandings,then there is a basis for excluding it, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need a motion on this.MR. COLDWELL. So move it.SPEAKER(?). Seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, that shall be released.The next meeting is February 5. I would assume that the discussion onthe long-range targets, having had [this preliminary] discussiontoday, can go reasonably expeditiously. And on that basis I assume wecan do it all in the morning. We do have the lagged reserveaccounting question. We probably will not have a discount windowquestion [to consider] by that point. I would hope to get somethingon the lagged reserve accounting out to all the members of theCommittee before the meeting and that discussion. The meeting timedoesn't necessarily have to be extended at this point. We probablyaren't at a point to make a decision right now.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, in view of yesterday afternoon'sdiscussion, the basic GNP forecast would probably assume an M-1Agrowth rate of something under 6 percent. The staff in its wisdomwill have to decide on somewhere around 5 to 5-1/2 percent to beconsistent with that discussion. In any event, we would have somealternatives to interpolate.-85-1/8-9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a problem. You remind me. Idon't know whether it's particularly useful right now, but a precedentwas created. Perhaps it's a precedent; we could make it a precedentanyway. The last time--was it earlier in the year or at the midyearmeeting--?MS. TEETERS. Mid-July.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the July 1979 meeting a forecast wasgiven by the Board of Governors in the testimony. It was the Board ofGovernors [forecast] of GNP for 1979 and 1980, too.MR. PARTEE. Well, if you read the Humphrey-Hawkins Act,that's what it seems to require.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it technically requiresthat.MR. PARTEE. It says the Board's view of the relationship toor the consistency of the Open Market's Committee decision with theoutlook for the economy.MR. COLDWELL. Consistency with the outlook of theAdministration? Is that it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. PARTEE. I know it's going to be hard to back up on itbecause it was very well received by the Committees. Very littleattention was paid to it, though.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It raises a bit of a question in my mindon whether it is worthwhile polling the Committee on what theireconomic outlook is. We went through that exercise once or twice withMr. Miller. Do people want to be polled on what their economic lookis? Is it a useful exercise?MS. TEETERS. The law requires that the Board--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know. That particular [requirement] isfor the Board, but I have no strong feeling one way or another onthat.MR. PARTEE. We'll be working off the staff projection atthat time and I think an indication of agreement or disagreement orpoints of agreement or disagreement might be helpful.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I might ask you for that next time,but I don't know.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, did I understand that if we havestaff papers on one or more of these studies that you anticipate thosebeing discussed in the morning meeting rather than at an afternoonmeeting?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we also have a request from a memberof the Committee. Willis Winn sent me a letter raising all sorts ofinteresting questions on the international scene--I don't know whether-86-1/8-9/80that letter was distributed other than to the Board members--andsuggested that it might be a good idea to have a general discussion ofthe international scene. Some of the questions are quite profound.That raises the question in my mind whether [to allocate more time fordiscussion]. While I think we can pretty clearly do the work we haveto do in February in the morning, would there be any desire in view ofthat and perhaps a discussion of lagged reserve accounting and inter-related matters to begin the discussion the afternoon before? I'm notsure it would have to be a meeting; it could be a discussion theafternoon before. How do people feel about that?MR. MORRIS. I think it would be a good idea.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no great resistance to coming inthe day before, if I read you right.MS. TEETERS. Could we start earlier in the day--everybodywas here [yesterday] by noon--and end earlier?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure that we will do it, butlet me keep that option open if we have some of these other [issues]to discuss. I don't think it would have to be a meeting, for whatdifference that makes, but it might be worthwhile having an earlyafternoon discussion session. So, let me review that.MR. ROOS. In spite of remaining flexible, the earlier we canget notification the more helpful it would be. Getting travelreservations is a real problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you. I think we are finished.END OF MEETING-87-