Meeting of Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 7, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee washeld on Friday, March 7, 1980. This was a telephone conferencemeeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., exceptas otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following listof those participating.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. Winn(Kansas City)(Boston)(St. Louis)(San Francisco)(Cleveland)Messrs. Baughman (Dallas), Eastburn (Philadelphia),Timlen (New York), and Willes (Minneapolis),Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Balles (San Francisco), and Kimbrel(Atlanta), Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco and Atlanta, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Altmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman(New York), Deputy General CounselAxilrod, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis (New York), Ettin, Keir,Kichline, and Truman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight (New York), Manager forDomestic Operations, System OpenMarket AccountMr. Pardee (New York), Manager for ForeignOperations, System Market Account3/7/80 - 2 -Mr. Allison, Secretary, Office of theSecretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board ofGovernorsMs. Farar, Economist, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMr. Burger (St. Louis), Assistant VicePresident, Federal Reserve Bank ofSt. LouisTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofMarch 7, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I doubt that we have to be here for very long. You know that ingeneral we've been putting pressure on the reserve positions of banks. That is in effect the implicationof carrying out the Committee decision. We're running high on total reserves, which is almostautomatic since we're running high on the money supply. The path of nonborrowed reserves has beenreduced under the circumstances from the tentative path worked out at the time of the Committeemeeting. Interest rates, including the federal funds rate, are up--both because of the pressure andbecause of expectations, I think. We have a wide range between the discount rate and market rates atthe moment. We haven't acted on the discount rate for the reason I've suggested earlier. We have hadto raise the limit on the federal funds rate to 17-1/2 percent, which we did as a tentative decision untilwe had time to confirm it or change it this afternoon.I believe we are at a crucial point in market psychology and the effectiveness of what we aretrying to do. I think people in markets are nervous enough so that policy, maybe for the first time, isbeginning to bite outside the mortgage and consumer loan areas and some other areas where it beganbiting some time ago. It's important that we not give a wrong signal at this point, and in my judgmenta wrong signal would be backing away from market developments in response to the greater pressureon reserve positions. And that's what has required the increase in the federal funds rate. I have nobetter idea than you do--or maybe you have better ideas than I do--as to how long this tension mightlast or how much further it might go. In line with somebody's comment earlier, I think it's importantthat the job get done. We all will be worse off if it doesn't get done now. The side effects are alreadypotentially serious if things don't go right. [The situation] could probably get more serious if there isprocrastination. At the moment I have nothing better to suggest to you than that, at the minimum, we3/7/80maintain the 17-1/2 percent limit [on the top of the funds rate range] and be prepared to raise it if wehave to. Or we can go ahead now and raise it to 18 percent, which will give us a little more leeway.We still may have to raise it afterwards. I think I would, given the state of things and since we'remeeting anyway, provide us with a little margin and go to 18 percent. But we can do it either way. Imight say, too--I don't know whether all of you know it--that in 15 minutes we will be announcing adecline of about $2.5 billion in Ml. Let me have Steve give you the precise figures.MR. AXILROD. We'll be announcing--unless the numbers have changed in the last hour ortwo, which is always possible--a $2.8 billion drop in M-1A from the level of [February] 2 0th. So [thelevel for February] 27th will be down to $374.7 billion. I might add that the prospective figure for[March] 5th, which is highly tentative, suggests another drop of around $900 million. The growth ratefor February will be about 11-1/2 percent at an annual rate. We're projecting growth for March on theorder of zero.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The M2 and M3 figures seem to be running significantly abovetheir targets, even if we combine the months. The implied quarterly figure would be what--2 [points]above [the Committee's path]?MR. AXILROD. That's right. For the period from December 1979 to March 1980, theCommittee's path for M2 was around 6.6 percent and M2 growth is running 8.3 percent--about 1-3/4or almost 2 percentage points above it. For M3 the Committee's path was 7.4 percent, and M3 growthis running 9.5 percent using our projection for March--that is, a March projection with a lower growththan in February. So M3 is running 2 points above [the Committee's target]. I might say that thestrength in M2 is essentially in money market funds. They are stronger than we had estimated, with nocompensating weakness in other time and saving deposits, and that's the essential factor strengtheningthe M2 figure.3/7/80MR. EASTBURN. Steve, do you think that by now the February figure is pretty wellunderstood and discounted by the market?MR. AXILROD. On the money supply?MR. EASTBURN. Yes.MR. AXILROD. I believe so. I don't know whether there will be any market reaction orresponse to [the figures being released] this afternoon but I think it has been clear for a couple ofweeks that February would be a high number. And the market as a whole has adjusted to that, as hasthe funds rate in fact.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say, insofar as bank credit is concerned, that the Januaryfigure was around 13 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes, I just got the bank credit figures earlier, Mr. Chairman. For Januaryour estimate on the total is 12.8 percent, with business loans up 21 percent of which Belridge OilCompany, as I remember, is around 4 percentage points. For February our current estimate for bankcredit growth is around 18 percent, with business loans almost 24 percent and total loans around 19percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Undoubtedly that February figure to some extent [reflects] theanticipatory commitments and borrowing that we know have been going on for the last couple ofweeks.MR. BAUGHMAN. Did I understand you to say, Steve, that the March money growth[projection] is zero?MR. AXILROD. Yes. If this number holds up for the 5th, it will start the month off at avery low level. So, to reach a growth rate as high as zero money would have to grow over the courseof March. If money stayed at or just slightly above the estimated February 27th level or the March 5th3/7/80level, we'd have a negative growth rate. But we've assumed a reasonable pace of growth over thecourse of March, which produces an average level that would be around zero [on the growth rate].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't help but comment that despite the diligence andintelligence of our staff, that estimate is worth about as much as you paid for it, Ernie.SPEAKER(?). We paid quite a bit for it.MR. AXILROD. I'm not quite sure. I haven't figured out that one yet!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [I meant] that he personally paid for it.MS. TEETERS. But it could go negative, couldn't it, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Oh yes.MS. TEETERS. We've had a drop so far in late February and early March and it couldkeep going down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What it means is that if money stayed somewhere around thelevel now projected for the next week that we haven't published yet, we'd have a very low March.MR. AXILROD. I ought to add, President Baughman, even with zero we're getting closerto target. We get a 5.1 percent December-to-March rate as against the 4-1-/2 percent target path forM-1A. It's the broader aggregates, if our projections are right, that seem stronger relative to path thanthe narrow aggregate.MR. SCHULTZ. And we still could have very high bank credit growth.MR. TIMLEN. Paul, do you want a motion on that 17-1/2 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or 18 percent, whichever you prefer.MR. TIMLEN. Paul, I have just a couple of comments. We had a session with about adozen businessmen a week and a half ago and they were very, very optimistic about the businessoutlook for this year. They expressed a great deal of concern, though, about the high levels of interest3/7/80rates and about those high rates being built into the price structure. And they made particularreference to prices being charged by the utilities. I must say that smaller banks are talking to us abouttheir inability to make a profit on new loans that they are putting on. So I would suspect that there is acredit bite coming along now at, say, the medium and smaller size banks in terms of their earnings. Ican't help but add that in New York the earnings situation at savings banks is also a source of muchconcern. Three or four of them actually posted losses in 1979, as you know. There is also a good dealof concern regarding losses on consumer credit cards, but that's news to no one.Getting back to the group of businessmen, there was a great deal of encouragement on theirpart for the Federal Reserve to get into credit controls. But the credit controls they were proposingwere not on their own ability as businessmen to borrow but on the ability of consumers to borrow. Ihave to say that it seems to me that these rates are all going to have to bite pretty soon. They have tobe slowing some people down. I'm most hopeful that the Administration package next week may beseen as a good one so that the Federal Reserve doesn't have to continue carrying all the [burden] on itsside and we can be seen as firm but not prone to overkill on the interest [rate] side. I'd say the movenow to give Peter Sternlight a little room on the up side is fine, whether it's 17-1/2 or 18 percent. Ithink the 17-1/2 is fine. As for the range, though, I would say that with either 17-1/2 or 18 percent Iwould [want] some assurance that we're not going to flip-flop too far down the other way. I can evensee the floor being adjusted at this point, perhaps moving it up to 12-1/2 or 13 as a signal of ourcontinuing resolve--our resolve that rates are not going to go down very far. That's particularlyimportant I think for the Europeans, who in the foreign exchange markets are giving us a good deal ofcredibility as our rates are hanging in there. And our rates are hanging in there, as you know, despitemassive intervention by [officials] in Tokyo and Germany. So basically, I'm all for the 17-1/23/7/80percent. 1 could see being a little stronger or hawkish in that regard by going to 18 percent or evenraising the floor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I hadn't even thought of raising the floor. I doubt thatthat's going to be a binding limit before we meet [on March 18]. But I share much of what you had tosay in substance. Let me just make one point. I worried about building this rate structure into theeconomy, too. But my sense of it both from the institutional standpoint--the strains on the institution--and building a rate structure into the economy, which at this point I think is inflationary if [the ratestructure] doesn't bite, is that we better make sure that what we're doing bites at the moment.MR. TIMLEN. I agree with that.MR. ROOS. Larry Roos here. In order to get something on the floor, I move that we raisethe upper limit to 18 percent. If we don't have to use [the additional leeway] we won't, but it will bethere if the Desk needs it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with Larry and Tom. I think we ought to raise the upper limitto 18. I wouldn't want to raise the lower limit because it seems to me that we're determined to have apolicy here that will produce the aggregates we've said we would produce. Right now this seems tocall for much higher rates. It has called for higher rates and could call for still somewhat higher ratesin the period to come and we ought to have room to move if that's necessary. Looking a little furtherahead, as the financial panic leads to deep recession I think we'll need considerably lower rates and weought to keep open the room for doing that in order to get the aggregates that we've said we weregoing to get.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll strike that last comment--[the "recession"] word in thatlast comment.3/7/80MR. PARTEE. There is a little problem with M2 and M3 because I never thought we hadmuch control over them and I think that's now beginning to be apparent. But I would hope that theother things that were discussed before might help a little in limiting the growth of M2 and M3 so thatlooking over a somewhat longer period those, too, will come down more within the ranges. But Ithink our main emphasis needs to be on our posture vis-a-vis the monetary aggregates. And the Deskought to have the room to move in working toward that goal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we should just go down the list here.Who has not spoken? Mr. Guffey you spoke, didn't you?MR. GUFFEY. No, I haven't spoken, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, Mr. Roos spoke.MR. GUFFEY. [We 're on] the other side of Missouri, Mr.Chairman. I happen to believethat we've come a long way so far and I think now is not the time to hesitate or lose our courage. As aresult, I think we ought to give the Desk whatever latitude seems necessary, and that would suggest an18 percent upper limit. On the other hand, I would [not] agree with Governor Partee. I would like tosee us maintain the 4-point spread on that [funds rate] range. It can be moved, of course, if and whenwe have to [move rates] down and that would suggest that the top [of the range] would come down atthe same time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. I'm not sure what order I have these names in butI'm going with the order that happens to be on the list I have in front of me.MR. ALTMANN. It's alphabetical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's alphabetical I'm told, except with Volcker first.MR. MORRIS. I support the 18 percent, Paul, and I also support raising the lower limit to14 percent. After all, we're only talking about what we're going to do between now and the time of3/7/80the meeting. It's not likely that we would ever use the [whole] range in the next week--that [the fundsrate] would be less than 14 percent. It seems to me that a range of 11-1/2 to 18 percent is verging onthe absurd. So I would vote for 14 to 18 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee spoke. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I would favor raising the [upper] limit to 18 and leaving the lower limit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. I would favor the same thing. [I'd move the] upper limit to 18 and leavethe lower limit alone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I would reluctantly raise [the upper limit] to 18 percent and I certainlywould not raise the lower limit at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen spoke. Governor Wallich. We have to get [hisviews] over the other telephone.MR. ALLISON for MR. WALLICH. Governor Wallich would prefer 14 and 18.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich would prefer 14 and 18, if you understoodthat. Do we have John Balles out there at this point?MR. ALTMANN. He's not a member.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, he's not a member.MR. ALTMANN. Let's get Mr. Winn first.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're getting Mr. Winn's conclusion.MR. ALLISON for MR. WALLICH. President Winn is in favor of 18 at the top and he'sindifferent on the bottom. Either way is all right with him on the bottom.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are the new members of the Committee.3/7/80MR. ALTMANN. That' s right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's go to the nonvoting [Presidents] now. Mr. Balles. Didyou all hear Mr. Winn's preference by the way?SPEAKER(?). No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He favors 18 on the top and is indifferent on the bottom.SPEAKER(?). John Balles is also in favor of 14 to 18.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles is 14 to 18. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. I would go with the 14 to. 18. In fact, I would go with taking [thelimits] off altogether.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. I would go to 18 percent and leave the bottom where it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel. Bones has disappeared. Mr. Willes.MR. WILLES. I'd go to 18 and leave the bottom where it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would suggest that the only operative proposition reallyis the top and we can discuss the bottom when we meet in a week. Do we need a formal vote, Mr.Altmann?MR. ALTMANN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's put that proposition to a vote.MR. TIMLEN. The top being 18 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The top being 18.MR. ALTMANN. The lower limit remains at 11-1/2 percent and the upper limit is raised to18 percent.Chairman Volcker YesPresident Guffey Yes3/7/80President Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesFirst Vice President Timlen YesGovernor Wallich (by remote) YesPresident Winn (by remote) YesUnanimous, with 11 votes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. We'll be back in touch with you one way or anotherwhen we get a little firmer fix on timing and anything else that's relevant.MR. GUFFEY. Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. Roger Guffey. We had a vote this morning by wire that is inconsistentwith what we just did. I would hope that the record would only show one vote today, that being the[vote to raise the upper limit to] 18 percent. 1CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the record probably has to show both, but it will showthat the first vote was an interim decision made until we had a meeting. I think it was clear that thatvote was for the day, pending consultation. We'll make sure that's the way it appears.MR. GUFFEY. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Thank you very much.END OF MEETING1/ Secretary's note: Prior to this meeting, the Committee had approved by notation vote arecommendation by Chairman Volcker to raise the upper limit for the federal funds rate from 16-1/2 to17-1/2 percent, pending a discussion of the situation in a telephone conference call to be held in theafternoon of March 7. Previously, by notation vote on February 22, 1980, the Committee, on theChairman's recommendation, had raised the upper limit from 15-1/2 percent to 16-1/2 percent. At theCommittee's regularly scheduled meeting on February 4-5, 1980 the full range for the intermeetingperiod had been set at 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent.