Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 5, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Friday,December 5, 1980, at 2:10 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was atelephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C.,except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of thoseparticipating.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnChairmanVice Chairman(New York)(Kansas City)(Boston)(St. Louis)(Cleveland)Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), Baughman (Dallas), Eastburn(Philadelphia), Mayo (Chicago), and Timlen (New York),Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMr. Corrigan (Minneapolis), President of the Federal ReserveBank of MinneapolisAltmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryOltman (New York), Deputy General CounselAxilrod, EconomistMessrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland),R. Davis (New York), T. Davis (Kansas City),Eisenmenger (Boston), Ettin, Henry, Keir,Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for DomesticOperations, System Open Market Account11/18/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Boehne (Philadelphia), Burns (Dallas), Fousek(New York), Keran (San Francisco), and Scheld,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofPhiladelphia, Dallas, New York, San Francisco, andChicago, respectivelyMr. Meek (New York), Monetary Adviser, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMrs. Nichols (Chicago), Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ChicagoMr. Campbell (New York), Assistant Secretary, FederalReserve Bank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofDecember 5, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're sending out a search party forGovernor Schultz. I don't know whether he is back in Florida or not.I just wanted to [bring] you all up to date on the markets and have alittle group-think about where we are at the moment and whether wewant to do anything or not. I will make a suggestion on that after wefinish with the description that Mr. Axilrod will give you.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, on the latest data the aggregateshave been showing some signs of weakness, even on an overnight basissince late yesterday. As of the moment we're planning to publish thisafternoon an increase of $1.1 billion for M-1A and of $1.2 billion forM-1B for the week of November 26, in each case less than thepreliminary numbers had indicated. Preliminary numbers for the weekof [December] 3rd show a drop--more than we had expected as of lateyesterday--of about $1.8 billion for M-1A and about $1.7 billion forM-1B. These numbers would give us estimates for November of a 6.8percent rate of growth for M-1A and a 9.6 percent rate of growth forM-1B. M2 remains strong, growing at a 12.2 percent annual rate, asthe weakness in the transactions components of M2 has been offset bystrength in the nontransactions components. We still expect growth inDecember, despite the very weak number for the 3rd, at rates of 3.7and 4.9 percent for M-1A and M-1B [respectively]. The weaker recentnumbers do, however, lower required reserves in this 5-week operatingperiod. And given the level of borrowings that we had achieved in[the weeks of] November 26 and December 3, working through the pathsfor total and nonborrowed reserves hitting the targets would imply alevel of borrowing for the current week and the next two weeks ofaround $1760 million. So that's down somewhat from the $2.1 billionlevel of borrowings that we actually had in the week of December 3rd.Borrowing on Thursday, by the way, was $1.4 billion. So we arestarting off not too far away from these targets but on the low sideof them. I believe, Mr. Chairman, that updates the Committee on theposition of the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Peter, do you want to fill us in on themarket?MR. STERNLIGHT. As for the market reaction today, we startedout with a quite firm money market, Mr. Chairman. Funds openedbriefly at 19-3/4 percent, went up to 20 percent, and even touched 21percent briefly this morning. They slipped back to about 20 and thenwere 20-1/4 percent around 11 a.m. At that point we went in because,having drawn up these reserve paths as Steve described, we had a needfor reserves in this week. We put in some repurchase agreement fundsover the weekend. We had some difference between the Board staff'sestimate and the New York staff's estimate, with New York seeing alarger need. The amount [of repurchase agreements] that we did fullymet--in fact slightly more than met--the New York staff's estimate,and we did that amount because funds were trading at 20-1/4 percentthen. I thought we were just experiencing a burst and a kind ofpsychological lifting of the funds rate. Following those repurchaseagreements, the funds rate inched down to 20 and then to 19-3/4percent. And then around 1:30 p.m. or so, the rate dropped off rathersharply, and to me rather surprisingly, to 18 percent. It looked asthough the big buyers had their demands satisfied and they were seeing12/05/80some supply from agencies, banks, and regional banks around thecountry.I don't know if you want me to go into this, but I had givenan estimate at the time of our usual morning conference call that,given this level of borrowing of around $1-3/4 billion, I would haveexpected the funds rate to back [down] from the 20 percent plus levelto perhaps 19 to 20 percent. That would still be my feeling. Iremain somewhat puzzled as to the latest drift off to the 18 percentarea. As for the market reaction elsewhere to the discount rate[increase], there was an initial very modest decline in the Treasurymarket, with [a move in] the long end of the market of around 1/2point and most of that has been recovered now. So there's about nochange on the day in the longer end of the market. The shorter couponhad been off as much as 3/4 point, but has recovered some so those[issues] are only off about 1/2 point. The greatest remaining changeis in the bill area, particularly the short-term bills; the 3-monthbill is up almost a full percentage point to about 15.80 percent.Finally, CDs seem to be up about 1/2 percentage point; the 3-month CDis around 18.40 percent and up. And the prime rate, I should mention,is pretty generally becoming 19 percent now, [led] off by Citibank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just for the purpose of completeness: Youhave had a little action in the international area, Mr. Pardee, I takeit?MR. PARDEE. Yes, we have. The dollar has continued to be upa bit since the last FOMC meeting. It has advanced by about 2-1/2percent against the Deutschemark and by similar amounts against othercurrencies. We have continued to buy marks in a large amount. All ofthat to this point has been [unintelligible] to the Treasury. TheTreasury now, however, on the day's business is covered as far as theCarter notes are concerned. The presumption is that we will now[revert] to even sharing [of purchases] between the Federal Reserveand the Treasury; [we have bought] $400 million worth of [marks] outof the $1.5 billion authorization to buy marks. The factors relatingdirectly to the [strength of the] dollar are mainly due to risinginterest rates in the United States. And in Europe we have asituation in Poland which has led to a number of [unintelligible] inthe market [unintelligible] selling of the Deutschemark [and going]into dollars.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we have to make anydecisions on [the international side] today, but I think we have toreview the domestic situation, to put it in a setting of theCommittee's decision on the directive. [At] the meeting, we made adecision which [implied] a certain reserve path and we also made aborrowing decision of $1-1/2 billion, as I recall. I think theunderstanding was that if the actual money supply figures came insomewhat higher than that, but not too much higher--then that would,of course, be reflected in higher borrowing from the naturalconsequences of the nonborrowed path in the short run. And if [theborrowings] came in high enough, we would have to make an adjustmentin the nonborrowed reserve path. As has happened after other recentmeetings, they did indeed come in high, and they came in high enoughso that we did make an adjustment in the nonborrowed reserve path aswell as having the natural consequence of the higher money supplyfigures. And we are left, I guess not certainly, but with the12/05/80probability that the 2-month numbers will look higher. On the presentestimates that Steve gave you they're certainly higher than theCommittee's decision. But there is a certain smell about thissituation at the moment of the money supply perhaps coming undercontrol. I say that not so much because I am so impressed by the mostrecent figure of a projected decline next week, but largely because ofthe way the figures have been coming in. For the first time this fallwe have been getting downward revisions instead of upward revisions.I don't know why we have always had upward revisions before and Idon't know why there is a change now. But it has a slight smell toit--I hope more than a slight smell--that we may be getting somestability here. So there is a chance that we have in that sense doneenough. But in terms of the Committee decision we made at themeeting--I forget, has it been modified since the meeting?MR. ALTMANN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it was modified once since themeeting. So we have that 18 percent limit [on the funds rate] in anyevent. And at the moment that is in jeopardy. Clearly, the Deskdoesn't have much maneuvering room--or any maneuvering room if that[limit were viewed] literally. What I would suggest in this somewhatuncertain situation is that we in effect temporize for the moment andnot make a decision to change that limit. We might have to do that,or at least review it, next week. But for the moment I would proposethat the Desk be extended an understanding that, in the immediate wakeof the discount rate change, it has whatever maneuvering room it feelsis necessary to keep on the path--with the hope that that will notmean a much higher federal funds rate than where it has been,certainly not higher than the 20 percent area. But I can't guaranteeanything. Then we will see, looking a week from now when we will haveanother week's preliminary figures on the money supply, whether it isreally desirable and necessary or not to operate within thatconstraint of the 18 percent limit.Now, the figure that Steve gave you is a projection forDecember. If I recall correctly, it assumes a pretty big increase inthe money supply in the week of the 10th. We have no data on thatwhatsoever. That's just a reflection of the belief that every othermonth recently has had a big increase in the money supply at thebeginning of the month and that a cautious projection better assumethat. But we really have no specific information on it. And if we'rereally getting a turn in things here, maybe that figure will not comein so high, and then the December estimate would look quite different.I obviously don't know that now, but that is a factor in my mind insuggesting that we not make a permanent type of change in the upperlimit. It's not very permanent anyway in that we're meeting fairlysoon. But an explicit change in the upper limit may not prove to benecessary or desirable in the light of what we will know by the middleof next week. Meanwhile, the Desk needs some operating room and wecould have a note to that effect in the published record that comesout after the next meeting. That is, in the wake of the discount ratechange the Committee had a consultation about the immediateconsequences in the money market and agreed that during the period ofimmediate reaction the Desk should have sufficient operating leeway toconduct its operations without being constrained by the 18 percentrate, pending further consultation. The implication is that we willcome down to the 18 percent limit in the latter part of next week if12/05/80we do not by that time make an explicit decision to change [thelimit]. I haven't gotten precise here, but that is the substance ofwhat seems to me appropriate at the moment.I might just add one further thought. If the money supplyfigure came in very low for the weeks that we don't know anythingabout, we've got to decide whether to drop [the borrowing path]instead of the very decided increase [we were] talking about. It justraises the normal question of whether that adjustment in thenonborrowed reserve path that was made when it was high shouldn't bereversed so that that's washed out, which would itself relievepressures on the market. But that's just a hypothesis based uponsomething we don't know.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, do you want comments?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. I think this is a reasonableproposal as long as it's going to be in the record. Otherwise the NewYork Fed would be in danger of being [on the hot seat] for a greaterperiod of time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I agree. I think it has to be in therecord.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Sure, and we can see what thesituation is next week.MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos. I have two questions and Idirect these toward Steve. First, what would the December M-1B figure[have] to be [assuming] a 9.6 percent growth of M-1B in November toget us to the top of our annual range? Do you know approximately?MR. AXILROD. No, I couldn't answer that right now, Larry. Ican give you a figure that [might give you some perspective]: To beperfectly consistent with the target path adopted at the previousCommittee meeting, it would have to be minus 6.1. But the--MR. PARTEE. That's above, I think.MR. AXILROD. And that target path led you to a rate abovethe long-run range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would take a huge decrease to hit theannual figure, Larry.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Unintelligible.]MR. PARTEE. We could close a few banks.MR. ROOS. Paul, do you [want to] talk about the [public]relations [aspects] of an overshoot of those annual targets? In otherwords, it seems to me that the issue of what we do in the next fewweeks really [involves] the alternatives of the fed funds rate rising,perhaps significantly, or the [money growth] overshoot occurring[unintelligible].12/05/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have lost on the annualtarget on M-1B explicitly, Larry. M-1B is almost certainly going tobe over [its annual target]. Of course, that target technically is alittle low but even if we adjusted it, we would almost certainly beover it. But if we talk about the theoretical possibility of having abig enough decline in M-1B in December to be within the range, I thinkwe would get a helluva lot of flak from the other direction for havingsuch a big decline in the number in one month. I don't know what therate would have to be [in order to come within our target range], butmy impression is that it must be a 10 percent annual rate of declineor something like that.MR. AXILROD. To hit the cone, so to speak, in December wouldinvolve a lesser decline, but it would be huge. And to hit thequarterly average that would [produce] a fourth quarter-over-fourthquarter number at the upper end of the range would involve a massivedecline as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. We are 1 percent above itwith two-thirds of the quarter gone. Somebody's doing the arithmetichere, but--SPEAKER(?). To get to the top of the cone we'd have to havea decline at about a 7 percent annual rate.MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's finish this point. I am justgetting some numbers and I can relay them to you.SPEAKER(?). Okay, the top of the cone would be $411.6billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.SPEAKER(?). And we're at $414-1/4 billion for M-1B. So wewould have to have a 7 percent annual rate of decline to reach the topof that cone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. But you haven't figured out thequarterly figures?SPEAKER(?). No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't give you the full answer.But to hit the top of the cone in December, just looking at it monthlynot quarterly, takes a 7 percent decline. And it must take threetimes that, I suppose, to hit it for the quarterly figures. So Ithink for the quarterly figure we're talking about a change that isout of sight. But even if [we got that], it would be a decline likethe one we had in April. And everybody would say, my God!SPEAKER(?). Some people may say more than that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe it will happen. Who knows!MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. Isn't this a bitacademic? Given the lags, there isn't much we can do on December 5 to12/05/80impact the money supply in December. But I would add that I thinkyour "smell of things" is also supported by [the economic] statistics,particularly the evidence of a decline in housing and reports of avery sharp [slowing in] retail sales in November. So I support yourfeeling.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Larry, I don't know whether you hadfinished.MR. ROOS. Yes, I have finished; that answers [my question].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But do you have an opinion on theproposal?MR. ROOS. On the proposal, I am fully in agreement with you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.MR. CORRIGAN. This is Jerry Corrigan. I, too, am inagreement with the proposal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.MR. MAYO. It sounds fine to Mayo.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.MR. WINN. Paul, this is Willis. I haven't any objection tothe statement of the principle. I would feel a little morecomfortable if we [lifted] the federal funds range and told the Desknot to go above 18 or 19 percent, except temporarily.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the proposal is that we leave it at18 percent but tell the Desk it can be above that temporarily pendingfurther discussion next week.MR. BALLES. Paul, this is John Balles. I would just like tobe [a devil's advocate] for one minute. It's not clear to me what wegain by [this] course. [Why not] increase the upper limit instead ofjust telling the Desk it is permitted to exceed it for a week? Is itsubstantive or procedural or are there public relations aspects tothis in terms of the public record later on or what? I don't quiteunderstand this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's nothing particularly [in therealm of] public relations about it. My feeling is that the Deskneeds a little maneuvering room. But I suspect, looking at it over atime horizon and given the uncertainty in the money supply, that it isa question of whether people want to make a decision now that thefederal funds rate should be at any particular point. I don't knowwhether explicitly for the next day or two, 19 percent gives the Deskthe maneuvering room. On the other hand, I am not crazy right at themoment myself about making a decision that the 18 percent limit shouldbe raised until I see at least the following week's money supply data,given my sense that the trend may be changing here. That may be wrongand we may well have to raise the rate. But I don't know preciselyhow much maneuvering room the Desk needs at the moment. I hope it is12/05/80not too much, but I don't want to have the Desk unduly inhibitedeither.MS. TEETERS. Is there a chance it will go to 19 percent andjust stick there? If we get--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters just came in. Let mejust catch her up to date. The latest information is that the federalfunds rate at the moment is at 18 percent, but it had been over 20percent earlier in the day. So I don't know. It is not at 19 percentat the moment anyway.MR. PARTEE. This is Chuck Partee. Paul, one question Iwould have is about the way you put it. You put it rather strictlythat the Manager would go about his reserve-supplying activities alongthe path and see what was needed. That to me almost means that thereis no cap at all on the funds rate for this next week. And since Ihave a sense of the market being in a crisis atmosphere, I have alittle concern about the possibility that, in fact, the rate might govery high in this next week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would be concerned if I thought itwas going very high. I am a little less concerned [given] the mostrecent trend--that [the market] is [not] fixing a 20 percent rate inits mind. What I meant to imply is that the Manager knows the generallimit is still 18 percent. And while that is being suspended, he is[to be] within the limits of what is feasible on the path. He is [tobe] a bit tender with the market this week, if that answers yourquestion.MS. TEETERS. I have a question. If he sticks to the path,will we be in a position of providing reserves this coming week orwithdrawing them, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, we have differences in estimates, asPeter reported earlier. We have to provide reserves. What Peter hasdone today already provides more than our path had called for,assuming that the estimates are accurate. So we are in a positionwhere we have already provided more than the amount called for andunless there is a shortfall in the factors, we wouldn't be providingmore. And in response [to what we provided today] the funds rate diddrop down to 18 percent.MS. TEETERS. I mean next week. Are we going to be in aposition [to add reserves] or have we done all we're going to do [asof] today?MR. AXILROD. It depends. If the factors break away from uson Monday or Tuesday, then we might have to provide more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the moment it looks as if we have doneall we have to do.MR. AXILROD. The implied level of borrowing, GovernorTeeters, dropped to $1760 million from the $2 billion we had then. Sowe are providing [reserves] on that assumption.12/05/80MR. STERNLIGHT. Could I [chime] in on something? I thinkSteve is referring to the current statement week. Governor Teeters,if you are asking about the following statement week, I believe wewould have to provide reserves then.MS. TEETERS. Thank you, Peter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where [we were]. You raiseda question of clarification, Governor Partee. Do you have anythingfurther to add?MR. PARTEE. I guess I share your feeling that the aggregatesare in the process of coming under control. Indeed, I think we arenow in the range where the great danger is that we will overshootquite a bit. Therefore, since I think the process is already underway of giving us the numbers we want, I would like to avoid any senseof true crisis in the market. So, I will buy your proposal, but Iwould buy it with the reservation that we don't mean by it that wewould let the rate just escalate in these next few days to anything itwished to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I didn't mean to imply that in thecontext of where we are. But I'd hate to say 19 percent is just theright number.MR. PARTEE. No, I agree. I think there may be a very realchance that we can keep it within the 18 percent limit after a coupleof days--[it seems to be] settling down--but I am not sure of it.MR. EASTBURN. Paul, this is Dave Eastburn. I think the morecrucial part of the Desk's problem will be how rapidly [to respond] asthe aggregates come in low, as I suspect they will. I would beinclined to agree with what you said earlier, that we should respondfairly rapidly and promptly to low aggregates figures if and when theydo develop.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does that mean, Dave? If youmean by [unintelligible] reserves?MR. EASTBURN. I think we ought to let the rates come down[if] the aggregates come in low. Does that answer your question?MR. PARTEE. But we do have a range, Dave, with the bottombeing what--14 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I think we probably won't have toface that question until the next Committee meeting at the earliest.I think we are really talking about the degree of leeway we have onthe up side during what we hope is a period of transition here. It'shard to believe that those numbers would come in so low in the nexttwo weeks that--. You know, the optimist would say that under thoseconditions the federal funds rate would settle in the 17 to 18 percentarea. I don't think we are talking about anything lower than that inthis time period. And one has to be optimistic even on that score,but that's what we will know next week.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I assume that we would accept theperiod of undershooting, if we get to that point, for sufficiently12/05/80long that we correct some of the overshooting that we had in thesecond half of this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is what the current directive says.MR. EASTBURN. I guess what I was [saying], Tony, is that Iwould agree with Chuck in that I think we are in great danger ofoverkill here. I believe the market is very sensitive to the level ofinterest rates, and to the extent that we can permit some easing whenwe see the way clear to do so, I think we ought do it as promptly aspossible.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey. I would supportyour proposal if I understand it, and I think I do. I would add justone other point. It's puzzling to me, in view of the discussion hereand at least our view as to what is happening, why the discount ratewas increased yesterday. It would be helpful to me if somebody couldexplain the rationale for it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I will explain it to you as best Ican. I think it is rather interesting that perhaps for the first timein some time we seem to have a real split in evaluations of theReserve Banks [regarding the appropriate level for the discount rate.]Some of them felt pretty strongly that it should not be moved andothers felt very strongly that it should be moved. Some of thatflavor was reflected in our own discussions, and I think it's inherentin the kind of situation we are in. It was a question of balancingthe risks of overkill, as it's sometimes put, against the risks ofunderkill, as it is also sometimes put. In favor of doing it was thefact that the aggregates as of the moment are still running high andthat this sense of things perhaps turning may or may not be real.Even if it is real, the fact of the moment is that now the aggregatesare high and if they continue high, those problems of credibility andso forth that you people keep telling me about are there. We are at avery sensitive stage in terms of what has happened in the past interms of credibility and the current inflation problem and all therest. So that was balanced against the risk of either appearing tocontribute too harshly to a business downturn or even the possibility,which begins to glimmer in one's eyes, that the money supply mightactually go down--and that it might actually go down faster than onewants to see it go down. That case is far from proven, but those arethe two balancing factors. And I suppose the decision reflected thefact that there was a feeling that there was a greater risk of[overshoot] rather than [undershoot].MR. GUFFEY(?). I guess I am really asking what was thechance of--MR. PARTEE. Greater damage. [Unintelligible] as a result ofit, whether or not it was merely an announcement effect that offsetsome of these concerns, or whether or not the realization was thatunless other action was taken we would, indeed, increase the interestrate levels.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, and I speak for myself, we weren'tlooking for any great announcement effect. And if the money supply is12/05/80turning--but that's an if--there's a hope that there wouldn't be allthat much interest rate effect. If the money supply is not [turning]for that or any other reason, we would get an interest rate effect.But if the money supply really turns, maybe the interest rate effectwon't amount to much because we can relieve the borrowing pressure.That is precisely the reason I put this decision today the way I did,as "in the wake of the immediate impact" [of the discount rateincrease]. I don't want to prejudge that issue. And we do have thisimmediate market reaction type of thing. We will give it a week tosee whether it settles down; that is what I am saying.MR. GUFFEY(?). In that context, I would support theproposal.MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we took onetype of action yesterday, which was an effort to be consistent. Weshouldn't back away from taking further action that would beconsistent--that is, to raise the upper limit. Now, [if] it's truethat the aggregates are slowing and may be coming down, then thereisn't going to be any effect. On the other hand, if they are asrelentless and they continue to go up, we wouldn't have lost severaldays' time in making that move. [I'd prefer that] we go up. Ipresume we will have to make that move anyway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but [we are not] preventing it fromgoing up at the moment, although the market is being treatedcautiously. That's--MR. WALLICH. It seems to me it is a logical and consistentaction to have a discount rate increase and then to follow that upwith an increase in the funds rate range.MS. TEETERS. And then you will argue for an increase in thediscount rate again to close the gap.MR. PARTEE. It's going to catch up.MR. WALLICH. The gap closes gradually; it doesn't close allat once. But it certainly diminishes. We took a large stepyesterday; I don't see why we should back away from a small andpossibly quite inconsequential step now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what steps you areproposing, because I don't know where the rate may fluctuate in thenext few days. All I am saying is the kind of consideration that youare raising seems to me one that would appropriately be considered inthe middle of next week when we see whether it is necessary or whetherit isn't.MR. WALLICH. Well, it certainly [would] be appropriate nextweek. I would much rather take it now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In answer to Henry, I think the chiefadvantage of your approach, Paul, is that we don't know now whether toraise it to 19 or 19-1/2 or 20 or even 21 percent for that matter.This may be a very involved situation, and I think there is a chancethat it will settle down in the course of the week. If we were tomove [up] and raise it to 19 percent, we might have to meet again-10-12/05/80Tuesday or Wednesday to raise it to 20 percent. So, there is someadvantage in this approach, even though normally I don't think it is agood way of addressing a problem.MR. WALLICH. Is it your thought that by letting it remainundefined, that it might actually go higher than it would go if we seta limit of, say, 19 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we set a limit of 19 percent,presumably [Peter] is going to go out there and defend 19 percentfairly precisely at the moment and I am not sure that is a good thing.MR. WALLICH. But [not] on a daily basis, a weekly basis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. But [if] it is already at20 percent over the weekend, I don't know whether [a limit of] 19percent means that he would have to go down to 18 percent after theweekend if we adopted a strict construction--MR. BAUGHMAN. This is Baughman. It seems to me that I amsitting here listening to arguments for taking [the limit] off.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have. The proposal is to take it offwith a caveat that it is treated tenderly for one week.MR. BAUGHMAN. The proposal is acceptable to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who haven't we heard from?MR. GRAMLEY. This is Lyle Gramley. I have said nothing yet,and I am with you. I think it's a good way to handle the problem now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice has not said--MR. RICE. I support you, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Has anybody not been heard from?MS. TEETERS. Me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters has not been heard from[except] in asking a question.MS. TEETERS. I voted against the discount rate increaseyesterday. I just think we are using this process to [ratchet] up therates now to where they should be or where they can be. Mainly forconsistency, I can't support this proposal because I think if it goeswrong, you folks are going to come back and ask for a discount rateincrease again. And I think that is going too far. I can see theadvantage of letting it fluctuate for a week, but the experience thatwe had last spring was that every time we added another percentagepoint on the range, we went to the top of it and almostinstantaneously it stuck there. And then another week went by and wehad to raise it again. I would just like to see the ratchet stopped.So, I will be consistent and vote the same way I did on the discountrate.-11-12/05/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mentioned a vote. I'm now talking tothe Secretary. There seems to be a consensus; do we also need a vote?I think this has to be in the record. For general matters ofexplanation it should be in the record, but also for the reason Tonymentioned. We can have a vote. We can either have it now or we cantry to write this down in a sentence or two and send it around in atelegram for a vote. I can try to phrase it now and we might as wellhave a vote. But let me see what the Secretary says about this.MR. ALTMANN. Well, if there is an objection to thisprocedure, there really is no way to register a dissent apart fromhaving a vote on the issue of whether to maintain the currentdirective or modify it in some way, which either raises the limit orprovides for a temporary exception.MR. PARTEE. I think we need to have a vote, Murray, becausewe had a vote on raising the limit a week ago or whenever it was. Soto accept [exceeding] that limit, since that limit was established byvote, I think does require a vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with having a vote; itmay be appropriate. Let me just try to formulate something orally tosee whether it comes close enough to capture the spirit of this so wecan have the vote now instead of waiting for a telegram vote. I wouldpropose, in the light of the uncertainties surrounding the immediatereaction to the discount rate change and the questions as to marketreaction in the ensuing days, that the open market Desk be givenlatitude to pursue a reserve target without its operations beingconfined by the existing 18 percent limitation [on the funds rate] inthe directive, pending further consultation if necessary--if in factthe rate is exceeded in the middle of next week.MS. TEETERS. How long is that to hold? Is it the nextcalendar week or until the middle of next week?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't pin me down on whether the[consultation] is Wednesday or Thursday. What I have in mind is thatI'd like to get a look at which direction the money supply is going inand we won't know that until the middle of next week some time.MR. PARTEE. Probably Thursday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably Thursday is what we are talkingabout. So basically this is carrying us through this statement week.MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, just to clarify my position: Idon't think it makes a great deal of difference in terms of the rateslikely to be achieved. The time period is very short, to be sure.But it does seem to me that one of our problems has been a lack offirm consistency on [timing]. And that is what we could demonstratehere. We made one move; we make another move. It is not a very riskyor damaging move and I think it would enhance our posture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not quite sure I understand that. Ifyou went all the way and said we should permanently take off thelimit, then I think you would be making a real postural change. I'mnot sure what the postural implications are to go to 19 percent, say,if that turns out to be constraining this week.-12-12/05/80MR. WALLICH. Well, it means that we take a move that islogically consistent with the previous move. And what we sought to[accomplish] would be missing in the record if we don't take it.MR. PARTEE. I think you would need 20 percent, Henry.MR. WALLICH. Even that aggressive?MR. PARTEE. I mean to be logically consistent.MR. WALLICH. When we moved only one percentage point [on thediscount rate]?MS. TEETERS. To be logically consistent, Henry, I would takethe floor off also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are probably ready to vote if Ihave sufficiently or adequately conveyed [the sense] of the sentencethat would appear in the Committee's record. Mr. Altmann, do you wantto call the roll?MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesPresident Solomon YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich NoPresident Winn YesSPEAKER(?). Gee, we like these ballots don't we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will be interested to see how thedissents read.MR. ROOS. Paul, this is Larry and I have a question.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. ROOS. You indicated that at our next FOMC meeting we'regoing to have a preliminary discussion of the 1981 ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. ROOS. Shall we be prepared to discuss that in somedepth, or what are you planning to do on that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know quite what you mean by"some depth." I would anticipate a fairly considerable discussionthat would extend over some period of time. I think the discussioncan be a little wider--more free ranging--at this stage than itprobably can be at the [following] meeting when we are going to boreinto a very specific decision. So if anybody has radical thoughts,-13-12/05/80you certainly ought to bring them up at that meeting and we can letour minds roam a bit and have a kind of philosophical debate. I thinkthere are real questions here. We face the problem next year--and Ijust don't know what we should do about it--regarding themeaningfulness of the M-1A and M-1B targets. Abstracting from that, Ihave a few ideas of my own on presentation that I am looking at; it'spurely presentational, but it is interesting. I am sure that nopresentation can solve the problem of judging the uncertainty aboutM-1A and M-1B and their meaningfulness.In that connection, I might say that the banks have gottenquite excited about this decision of the DIDC--for the same reasonthat we didn't like it much--to have the same rate on transactionsbalances as on savings deposits for commercial banks. They havevisions dancing around in their heads that all their savings depositsare going to turn into NOW accounts. And they don't like it becauseit will cost them a 12 percent reserve requirement. But apart fromthat, it certainly is going to make those M-1B figures look funny. Wemay have to have a target of 32 percent for M-1B next year!MR. MORRIS. This is Frank Morris. I suggest that we don'thave a target for the M-ls because we don't have any basis for makingprojections.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is one of the things I think weought to be looking at at this next meeting. Do we end up with theconclusion, whether we like it or not--maybe some people like itanyway--that we have to put more weight on M2 and M3? I don't know;it is a very difficult subject.MR. PARTEE. M-1B plus savings accounts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee was just saying maybe wehave to follow an M-1B plus savings accounts kind of figure. But thetrouble with that is that savings accounts have been going down soprecipitously that--MR. PARTEE. So we put a [unintelligible] for that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't got an answer, but we ought tobe thinking about it before the next meeting. Any other questions orcomments? I guess the answer to your question, Larry, is that I woulduse the term "in depth" [to describe the nature of our discussion nexttime]. I would not assume, obviously, that we have to zero in on theexact [growth rate] percentage of a target. But we ought to try in apreliminary way to clear out as much of this underbrush, if that iswhat it is, as we can, so we have the issues clearly in our minds andhave some possible approaches for dealing with them.MR. ROOS. Fine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, that's it if nobody else has anyquestions or comments. Thank you.END OF SESSION-14-