Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofJuly 25, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I conclude from all of this, gentlemen,that whatever people say about our monetary policy, our technology isworse! We will see what we can do to improve it. [Secretary's note:The Chairman was referring to problems with the telephonecommunications equipment.]The general question that I wanted to review with you is thereaction to this targeting [or] nontargeting that we went through for1981. I think it's apparent after going through several days ofhearings, not only with the Banking Committee but with othercommittees, that we have contributed to a lot of confusion about whatour intention was in not presenting targets [for 1981]. Of course,the testimony and the statement and the report were couched in termsof working toward some reduction in the targets. But I am afraid inthe [interpretation] that came through that was not at all clearbecause otherwise we would have said something about the targets. Sothey doubt our conviction as well as our good will in following whatthey conceive to be the law. This leaves me troubled somewhat--not in[regard to the] substance--but that our trust and good faith have beenquestioned by a large number of people. And I think it could lead tosome continuing problems. It will certainly lead to a very adverseCommittee report, but that in itself was anticipated. What disturbsme is this underlying sense of a lack of trust in our good faith.I have a specific request from Mr. Proxmire, which I am nowfulfilling, to review this situation with the Committee. [The BankingCommittee] challenges us on legal grounds, I think, as well as onsubstantive grounds. I think the legal position is perhaps a littlefuzzier than we thought it was at the time [of our decision]. Whatthey point out is that there is a Senate committee report that hasfairly specific language. It's just a Senate committee report, butnonetheless it's there, and it speaks of "numerical" monetary targetsfor a fixed calendar year. Of course, by coincidence that wasprecisely the language that I used in the testimony--that we didn'tchoose to give them precise numerical targets. So they found somelanguage that spoke precisely in terms of numerical targets. Thatcommittee report isn't absolutely conclusive but it surely had somecoloration to the effect that we would have precise numerical targetsfor both years. So I think our legal ground is still valid, but it'snot quite so one-sided as the presumption that we had at the time wewere discussing it at the Committee meeting. But more fundamentalthan the legal question, which our legal counsel is still sure hecould win, is that the issue is just a little more clouded, as Iunderstand it. I'm not sure there's any merit at all in getting intoa legal argument. In the end they can change the law, obviously, ifthey want it clearer. There was no support for our position byanybody, and there was bipartisan concern up and down the line in theBanking Committee. And, as I say, [the issue] was mentioned in someother committees.This leaves me personally with the feeling that we probablyought to go ahead and give them some quantitative idea as to what weare talking about. The substantive problem is that, with all of theinstitutional changes, [numerical targets] are likely to confuse them.I told them that 19 times, to no avail. I am in the process of7/25/80preparing a letter that will go to both committees, if we want to gothis way. It starts out by saying: "It's apparent to me from thequestions and discussions in the recent monetary policy oversighthearings that confusion has unfortunately arisen over the intent ofthe Federal Open Market Committee in characterizing monetary targetranges for 1981 in general terms. I was, for instance, disturbed thatsome members of the committee apparently seriously considered that theOpen Market Committee was somehow signalling a reluctance to providenumerical targets for 1981 at any time--a thought that I canconfidently say has never entered our discussions." The letter thenexplains why we chose to do what we did. But it goes on to say thatit's going to be terribly confusing if we try to give all thesetargets. But the key sentence would say, if I can find it:"Abstracting from institutional influences and the questions citedabove"--and all those questions are about the fact that we don't knowwhat the impact of NOW accounts is-- "we find it difficult to gaugethe continued significance of the money market fund growth and we needto learn more about this apparent shift in M1 demand." So abstractingfrom all of those things, "the general intent of the FOMC at this timecan be summarized as looking toward a reduction in the ranges for M-1A, M-1B and M2 on the order of 1/2 percent next year." The letterwould go on to say that if we translate that into specific targets, wehave to allow for all of these shifts. And then it gives them somenumbers, but it says don't take these numbers seriously--they're allillustrative and we will have to look at them again. All we aretrying to say is precisely what we already said and I repeat thelanguage that we have already used in the report and in the testimony.That's what should come through and not all of this arithmetic, and wehope the arithmetic doesn't confuse you. We fear that it might, butsince you insist upon asking for [numerical targets] we are givingthem to you.That is the way I would propose going. I could send out adraft of this letter to you this afternoon. We don't have to take anyformal action right now, but I wanted to relay this concern, theformal request of Senator Proxmire, and my sense of how it should behandled. I basically don't think we have much to win in this game bysitting on our present position, because I think genuine confusion hasarisen among some of those who are most supportive of our generalpolicies and approaches. It's unanimous in that sense. So that is[my recommendation] in substance. Now, I had tentatively put in thisletter a sentence that speaks of a reduction "on the order of 1/2percent" [on the ranges] for M1 and M2. But also there is a sentencesaying consistent with that, at this very early stage we think thereprobably shouldn't be any reduction next year in [the ranges for] M3or bank credit, because in a recovery period those measures tend to bea little higher relative to M1 and M2 than in another kind of period.So the letter just speaks vaguely of [those ranges] being unchanged.I don't think that's necessarily essential, but that's again talkingsomewhat in the abstract. Also, the letter in great tortuous detailgoes over how it would look, not in the abstract [but] on the basis ofarbitrary assumptions as to NOW accounts and money market funds and soforth. That is the essence of it, and I [would be interested in] anyreaction you have at this point to the general idea.If we want to go ahead in this fashion, I can send this[draft letter] out. I don't think we need further conversation ifit's generally acceptable, but we would need a formal vote at [some]7/25/80point, since the [decision] is being put in numerical terms. I don'tmean a formal vote this afternoon, but when you see the actual--MR. EASTBURN. Paul, this is Dave Eastburn. I think that'sjust fine; I think that's the way we should go.MR. WINN. This is Willis Winn. I agree with you, Paul. Doyou want to put in any remark saying that, of course, in Februarythese circumstances that we've footnoted may cause us to alter these?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says that at great length. I couldread this to you and--MR. WINN. No, no.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The draft as it is now goes on about fivepages. And the reason it goes on is that it keeps telling them howarbitrary these assumptions are on NOW accounts and--MR. WINN. That's good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --and how we are going to have to look atit all again in February. It says that in three different ways.MR. ROOS. St. Louis enthusiastically agrees with you.MR. BLACK. So does Richmond.MR. MAYO. And Chicago.MR. FORRESTAL. And Atlanta.MR. GAINOR. And Minneapolis.MR. BAUGHMAN. Dallas agrees.MR. BALLES. San Francisco also.MR. CZERWINSKI. Kansas City agrees. Mr. Chairman, we hadone question. You mentioned a reduction in the ranges. Does thatmean on both the top and the bottom?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, this talks about on the order of 1/2percent, so that's the presumption. It is not meant to conveyrigidity on those kinds of questions because the tone of the wholeletter is not to convey great rigidity. But it specifically saysnothing about that point. The key sentence is the one that I read.MR. CZERWINSKI. One would assume that it would imply boththe top and the bottom.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I think in the absence of sayinganything else that's the clear implication.MR. WALLICH. Is there anything said about the possibility atthis time of widening the ranges now that we have to make a statement?7/25/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have had a little discussion ofthat informally here--not with the Committee but with Mr. Axilrod andothers. We could do that for the M1 ranges very easily in my opinionbecause they are 2-1/2 percentage points [wide] now. To make a rangewider than 3 percentage points for the others I think would look alittle peculiar. I just wonder whether it would undermine theexercise a bit. I have, as you know, traditionally been in favor ofwide ranges. But there's a point at which I begin gagging a bit attheir significance if we make them too wide.MR. WALLICH. The second question that I would like to askis: Do you think we accomplish our objective by a five-page letter?Would it perhaps be better to have a short piece and then somehow addthe rest of the material as an appendix?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. I puzzled over that. Myconclusion was--whether it's in an appendix or the letter--give them alot of language to keep reiterating the arbitrariness of theseadjustments. So, I don't think just a sentence saying that is goingto carry the flavor. And I really believe we want to get that messagethrough somehow. What the letter actually says is: Arbitrarilyassume that 2-1/2 percent comes out of M-1A into M-1B and that 2percent, I think, comes out of savings deposits into M-1B. And thisis just the arithmetic: If we lower the range by 1/2 percent and thenmake those two adjustments, we have an M-1B range of 5 to 7-1/2percent. It looks high. And that is my concern. Just looking atthat range for M-1B, the key aggregate number, it is raisedsignificantly from this year. [The reaction could be that] theFederal Reserve is going to hell with an inflationary policy. Now, itbrings the M-1A range down to 0 to 2-1/2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This is New York. In our judgment[the adjustments] are a little lower than the Board staff's estimates.We have -2 percent for M-1A and plus 1 percent for M-1B. I think thequestion Henry raised of whether to have a short letter--MR. BAUGHMAN. This is Ernest Baughman. We--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just hang on, Ernie. I'm listening toTony Solomon on another phone and I'll tell you what he saidafterwards.MR. BAUGHMAN. I see. All right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the question of whether weshould have a short letter with an attachment as against the five-pageletter should be looked at after you send us the draft. I think it'simportant in the letter not to protest too much about thearbitrariness of the NOW adjustments. We want to do it sufficientlyto make our point, but on the other hand we don't want a lot ofnewspaper stories that say the whole targeting process is becomingmeaningless because of the excessive arbitrariness of all the NOWadjustments.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is quite possible we could writea letter--I'm just thinking out loud here--that is instead quitebrief. It would note all this uncertainty that has arisen, theessence of what we are saying, and translate that into the 1/2 percent7/25/80 -5-reduction in the ranges for M-1A and M2 in the abstract. And I couldsay I am attaching an appendix which [discusses] these furtheradjustments. That may be a way to do it. It's the same in substance;it's just lifting out 2 pages of this letter and putting it into anappendix.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there is some advantage tothat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There may be. Then the letter itselfwould only speak about the 1/2 percent with qualifications around it,and it would say look to the appendix to see this more or lessarbitrary translation into the other numbers.MS. TEETERS. Are there any qualifications around the 1/2percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me go backwards, here. I take it therest of you didn't hear Tony's comment.SEVERAL. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He was kind of seconding Henry Wallich'sproposal to put part of this [lengthy letter] into an appendix. Andyou heard what I said, I'm sure. He just thought it might be lessconfusing, from the standpoint of the press, to have the elaboratespecific targets developed in an appendix. We can certainly look atthat, and it may be better.Now, Mrs. Teeters just raised a question on how manyqualifications I had around the 1/2 percent. Well, it talks aboutthat general statement [as] one of the clearest and most usefulindications we can make and [notes that] the numerical ranges mightultimately prove to be a source of confusion rather than clarity. Itspeaks about the institutional change. The key sentence, again, isthe one that I read. It says "on the order of 1/2 percent" and theletter at various points talks about uncertainties, including thepublic's desire over the longer run to hold money balances in relationto income.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, given the admission that 1/2percent is a pretty small number and the emphasis on imprecision andalso your expressed concern as to whether the Federal Reserve isreally going to maintain an anti-inflationary posture, I'm wonderingwhether it would be advisable--even though we are thinking in terms of1/2 percent--to say on the order of 1/2 to 1 percent. That wouldgive the impression that we are thinking of a minimum on the order of1/2 percent.MS. TEETERS. Well Ernie, quite frankly, I'm thinking of aminimum of zero. And going to 1/2 to 1 percent doesn't appeal to meat all for next year because we are going to lock ourselves in. Weare not going to be able to change this come February.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do have some language here [about that].What is essential is that our intention to lower monetary growthranges over time toward rates consistent with virtual price stabilityshould remain clear. There is language [regarding our intent to]7/25/80review this. Here's the sentence I'm looking for. This is close tothe end as it's now written: "In accordance with usual procedures,all of the ranges will have to be reassessed in or before nextFebruary. The extent of downward adjustments in the ranges not onlywill be influenced by the technical factors noted above, but also willbe conditioned by the speed with which inflationary bias in labor andproduct markets can be reduced, and by the likelihood, therefore, thatthe economy can make an orderly adaptation to curtailed money growth.The need for public policies other than monetary policy to move in acomplementary way to speed those adjustments was, of course, theessence of my testimony before the Committee." Now, that paragraphobviously could be read either way, as permitting more downwardadjustment or conceivably none. I think it's probably the way I wouldlike it read. I must say that if we make enough progress on pricestability, we'd go faster. But I think it's formally neutral in itswording. We are caught in a box, obviously. Looked at from one pointof view the 1/2 percent doesn't sound like much. If somebody says:Hell, the inflation rate is 10 percent and at best they are going toget down to 0--and the progress will be measured by the decline in themoney supply--they have 20 years to go. On the other hand, if someonesays something like 0 on M1 monetary growth--or to have a range, let'ssay 0 to 3 percent--is ultimately where we would end up, we are notall that far from it. It's just these darn lags that have made itlook so far off.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What about seeing what theCommittee's feeling is--or what is your own feeling--about making therange as suggested 1/2 to 1 percent?MR. GRAMLEY. I would be reluctant to see that. I think wedo have to make some change, but I am very worried that if we lowerour targets too far, we may have to [let money growth] run above themnext year. Therefore, I'd rather keep the reduction in the range aslow as we can get away with. So I like the [proposed] range as itstands.SPEAKER(?). We were unable to hear the first discussion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you hear Governor Gramley?SPEAKER(?). No, we did not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the question was simply how muchsentiment is there for 1/2 to 1 percent--the question that ErnieBaughman raised. And Governor Gramley said he prefers the 1/2.MR. EASTBURN. This is Eastburn. I would support just 1/2.MR. ROOS. This is Roos. I'd prefer the 1/2 to 1.MR. RICE. I would certainly prefer 1/2 rather than 1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comment?7/25/80MS. TEETERS. I have a question. Jerry [Zeisel], theforecast for 1981--MR. BLACK. This is Bob Black. I think 1/2 is about right,Mr. Chairman.MR. BALLES. San Francisco is for 1/2.MR. GUFFEY. As is Kansas City.MR. WINN. And Cleveland.MR. GAINOR. Minneapolis, too.MR. MAYO. And Chicago.MR. KIMBREL. And Atlanta.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you have a question? Well, it soundsto me as if we are at 1/2. I think there is a real problem here inthat it will seem very small to people who are unaware of some of thetechnicalities. The sentence I read to you may help a bit inexplaining that, but I guess that's where we are stuck.MR. EASTBURN. Paul, I assume that in this letter youreiterated "in the long term"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I think you'll find this letterreiterates everything! Well, I think we have enough guidance; it'sjust a question of whether we put the specific ranges in an appendixor the letter. I may try it both ways to see which I like better. Wewill get this out to you in a day or so and then I think you canrespond in a formal way, so that when we have numerical [ranges] wecan say there has been an actual vote on this. I don't think we needthat today; you might as well wait until you see the language. And Iwill also call Messrs. Proxmire and Reuss. I presume they will behappy, but if they tell me they really don't want anything more,despite what everybody said, I may drop this whole thing. I think thechances of their saying that are virtually nil.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, could I make a request? The[staff projection in the] FOMC material was run on a 4-1/2 percentrate of money growth for next year. I would like to have sent out tothe Presidents and members of the Board [an analysis of] what wouldhappen to the projections if money growth were lowered 1/2 percent ora full percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will do that. We'll send it with theletter. Okay, thank you.END OF SESSION