Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 21, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 21, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMr. SolomonMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Balles, Baughman, Mayo, and Timlen, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, andAtlanta, respectivelyMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Axilrod, EconomistMr. Holmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Truman, andZeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account10/21/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Smith 1/, Assistant Director, Division of Inter-national Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Morton 1/, Economist, Financial Markets Section,Division of International Finance, Board ofGovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. Smoot, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of PhiladelphiaMessrs. Brandt, Burns, Danforth, Parthemos, andScheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Atlanta, Dallas, Minneapolis, Richmond,and Chicago, respectivelyMessrs. Bisignano, Mullineaux and Sloan, VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of SanFrancisco, Philadelphia, and Chicago, respec-tivelyMr. Levin, Manager, Securities Department, Federal1/ Left the meeting prior to the action to amend paragraph l(a) of theAuthorization for Domestic Open Market Operations.-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 21, 1980SPEAKER(?). Mr. Chairman, I move that the minutes beapproved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Pardee.MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions?MR. MORRIS. Scott, if they don't like either the dollar orthe deutschemark, where are they going to go?MR. PARDEE. Sterling, gold.MR. MORRIS. That much in sterling?MR. PARDEE. A lot has gone into sterling, into Swiss francs,and particularly into yen. The Swiss franc has advanced in the lastfew days against the mark.MR. WALLICH. Do you see any systematic move to diversify outof D-marks or is this footloose money that moves around all the time?MR. PARDEE. It's probably in between. There are footloosefunds, but what we're hearing--we don't have a real term for it--onemight call reverse diversification.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Diversification?MR. PARDEE. Shifts of funds out of the German instrumentsand the dollar. [It may involve] OPEC, a central bank, a noncentralbank. It's on the margin that these people operate. They're gettingso much money each month, they decide which way they're going to moveit; or when there are maturities, they move the money at that time.MS. TEETERS. But the increased pressure on the mark issomething that has just developed in the past week, isn't it? Whythis week, instead of before? Most of the factors that would bepressing the mark have been there for quite some time.MR. PARDEE. I know. That is one of the questions that evensome of the seasoned traders are asking: Why now and not two monthsago when all these factors emerged? It's a coalescence of things. Insome ways it reflects the post-electoral situation. In Germany it wasimportant for the Bundesbank to maintain high interest rates throughthe election because the whole idea was that they were fightinginflation. Now that the election is over and they're looking at veryslow growth and other domestic problems, the market may feel that theBundesbank may ease up at this stage. Also, some comments were madeduring the IMF-World Bank meeting that afterwards rattled around thepress pages for several days suggesting that President [Pohl] wastalking in terms of lowering interest rates. He had not said that butthat's the way the press played it after a while. So there had beenthese expectations. And by the time the Bundesbank did act, no onewas listening. It's one of these bearish situations where anything10/21/80positive for the currency is ignored. We've seen it so many times onour side; we know all of the symptoms. But as I say, it's essentiallya bearish market. It could pass. They may have some good numberscoming up. If their economy does slow, then their current accountwill improve.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Another way of putting it is thatwe're seeing a market reaction to a much more sensible and balancedGerman policy. There used to be an impression that more than anyother single objective the objective of German policy was a strong andappreciating Deutschemark. People are seeing now a Bundesbank policy,pushed by the government as well, toward an easier domestic monetarypolicy even with a large current deficit and even though the marktends to be toward the lower end of the EMS. I think the Germansought to be congratulated for following a more balanced and lesssingle-minded policy. It certainly is helpful in terms of worldstability as well as in terms of the U.S. dollar. Do you agree, Mr.Chairman?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not fully. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I just wanted to inquire whether there has beenany official German reaction that has been noticed in the market.MR. PARDEE. Official reaction?MR. RICE. Yes, any official reaction. Do they seem to bepanicking in the government or are they, as Mr. Solomon suggested,playing it cool, so to speak?MR. PARDEE. On the outside they are playing it very coolbecause it's hard for them to know what else to do. They are veryconcerned. Of course, we have helped them a great deal; we are buyingthese marks in very close consultation with them. And our two centralbanks are coordinating their intervention very closely. So, wehaven't had a panicky situation in the exchange market. In the waythey handled the rollover of one of these provisions of liquidity theydid move the interest rate up a little to warn the market that theyaren't caught in a fixed interest rate situation where they can onlygo in one way. But it's a very uncomfortable situation. In factthere have been crazy rumors in the market. One was that they weregoing to put on capital controls. There's no way [a government] cananswer that sort of rumor when it comes out. It can't deny that it'sgoing to put on capital controls because then everybody will say:Aha, they're denying they're going to put on capital controls;therefore, they're going to do it. Yesterday there was a rumor thatRussia had invaded Poland. It hadn't happened, but it added to someof the flavor of sales of marks. So there is, as you put it, outwardcool. But they are quite concerned about the situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I saw something in the paper yesterday orthe day before that the head of the German Federation of Business orsomething said they ought to devalue. That's the first time I've seenanything like that, I think.MR. PARDEE. We are seeing the type of traditional strainswithin the European monetary system that we frequently saw in theearlier "snake." That is, the mark is declining and pulling other10/21/80strong currencies within the band down, like the French franc and theDutch guilder. In the past when someone left the snake or there was achange in par values, the whole thing snapped back giving profits toeverybody on both sides. So, if the pressure continues to build, wecould run into one of these classical speculative sprees that we havehad in the past, this time with the mark on the bottom.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I just wanted to ask Scott about a veryinteresting development I noticed. As I recall from the reports,Scott, for the first time since 1971 you've made some outrightpurchases in the forward market. I was just wondering if in your viewthat kind of intervention in the forward market has any morestabilizing influence on exchange rates than outright purchases in thespot market?MR. PARDEE. Well, in fact it's quite the contrary. This isan operation for the Treasury. We're doing it as quietly as wepossibly can. We've only talked with a very few people in the market.The objective is to see if we can acquire more marks [through] a fewpeople who have good corporate customers. When the corporation callsin and says it has some forward marks to offer, then the trader canoffer them to us. The Treasury, of course, has its own maturities toconsider on the Carter notes. So the forward marks in addition towhat we're buying spot are simply placed with the Treasury for thatpurpose. We're doing it as quietly as we can and on the idea that itwould have less impact than intervention in the spot market. There'sa great deal of flexibility in the forward market and it doesn't havethe same influence. We're doing it also as quietly as we can becauseour experience in the past is that once the forward market gets activeand finds us there, then we can do billions without blinking an eye.So it's a very, very dangerous operation. But the Treasury wanted itand they're getting it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I'd like to point to a broader matter. I [willtry to] be very brief. We may be facing a situation we had early thisyear [when] the dollar was very strong--this time not so much becauseour interest rates are rising as they did at that time but because themark is weak. And we may find ourselves either having the dollar goup or with a possibility of accumulating a fair amount of D-marks.Now, last time we operated so as to allow the dollar to run up prettyfar; it came down again. We had a very pronounced upward and downwardtrip which did no particular good. We didn't accumulate or gather infor repayment a very large amount, although we did do some but overtime. We didn't pay all [our mark indebtedness] off and we could havedone so at that time. Now the question really is: If similarconditions develop, and there's no assurance that they will, should wefollow the same strategy or should we follow a different strategy?That is, should we lean harder against the wind, which in this casewould mean not just to gather in [marks] to pay off debt but toaccumulate some reserves which might be split with the Treasury or beall for the Treasury or all for us. There's a problem of risk infinancing to be considered. But I believe we should think ahead alittle and not just leave it to the developments of the day.10/21/80MR. SCHULTZ. But we're coming up pretty close to the limitright now. We do we have left--a hundred and what?MR. PARDEE. There's $160 million left under the limit onmarks. We've already purchased $55 million worth of marks thismorning and we would under the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we in the government are no way nearbeing in this position. The Treasury is $2 billion in debt, as Scottsaid. And they would like to cover their debt so there's $2 billionto go. They have a few problems in terms of the rate of speed withwhich they accumulate balances, because of cash problems, which raisesa question of whether we can put some element of flexibility in here.I disagree with you on the value of letting [the dollar] goup earlier. It may be that the reason why the dollar didn't go downfurther was that the market had seen that they lost some money when itwas going the other way. That doesn't mean that we've got to do itthat way again. But I don't think one can say that that wasmeaningless. You can argue about whether it's disconcerting to haveit go up--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I would agree with theimplication of Henry's point. I think this time there ought to bemore emphasis on accumulating deutschemarks and building Treasurybalances. And then if it goes that far, we could always raise thelimit here and not let the rate go as much as we did last time, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a different question. Idon't know how much influence we have on the rate anyway.MR. PARTEE. But both of your comments imply that you knowwhat the rate ought to be--that you think the rate has gotten too highand that it's going to come back down again. Now, do you know thatwith that degree of certainty?MR. WALLICH. No. We wouldn't be forcing it back down. It'sjust that as it goes up we would accumulate some D-marks. And if itdoesn't come back down, which is highly possible, then we would havebuilt up some reserves and we would have slowed down the movement,which I think is desirable in any event.MR. PARTEE. Well, if it's a fast movement, I will agree.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, Chuck, the only answer I cangive you is that I think we know a little more about what is adesirable--to use a dirty word--target range than we do about monetaryaggregates and interest rates.MR. PARTEE. I'm not so sure we do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't pin it down very much!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Germans are running at aninflation rate of 5 percent or less and we're running at 10 percent orwhatever rate you want to call it. Eventually there will be areversal of this movement. I do not think that we get points--weought to let the dollar rise sufficiently so that traders do not tend10/21/80 -5-to be bearish on the dollar. They can be caught off guard. But onthe other hand, unnecessary volatility on the up side which one knowsis going to get reversed later is not helpful. It goes beyond thepoint of keeping the traders off balance. And I think we have shownin the last couple of years that a more activist policy in regard tothe exchange markets is a useful policy. So we don't have to have anexact sense of what an equilibrium rate is to know that at some pointwe want to limit the volatility on the up side and take advantage [ofopportunities] to restore balances.MR. PARTEE. My only point, Tony, is that I can remembersitting here not too long ago and hearing that if the rate droppedbelow 2, the end of the world would be at hand. Well, we're not evenback to 2. I agree that it slips with time and perhaps what was 2then ought to be 1.90 now because of the differential in inflationrates. But it requires some care, I think, not to accumulate largebalances that in fact turn out to be, as on the down side, aresistance to the tide that really can't be resisted and then resultsin a large ultimate loss for the central bank.MR. PARDEE. It doesn't matter how much reserves you have;[what matters is] the determination that you're going to use them andthe market's confidence that you're prepared to back your policies.You can have an infinite amount of reserves--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's take this up in a little moreorderly way. We have to ratify the transactions since the meeting onSeptember 16. Do I have a motion?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we shall approve them.You have no recommendation with respect to the swap lines, I take it,because we're out and the French [drawing] is not maturing.MR. PARDEE. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have this question of changes in theterms of the swap agreements on which we have a memorandum. Just byway of background, the Committee agreed to this in principle. I don'tthink it requires a formal action. In 1978 there was no formalaction, was there?MR. ALTMANN. No, not on these issues.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was, in effect, an authorization fornegotiation. You have a memorandum describing this again. Itbasically comes to the conclusion that we probably would have beenbetter off financially [if the proposed changes had been in effect] inthe past. Nobody can promise that [will be true] in the future,certainly not on any individual operations. We have had some furtherdiscussions with the Treasury. The situation the last time [weconsidered this question] was that the Treasury had agreed inprinciple, too, but didn't want to do it at that particular time whenwe were becoming very active again [in foreign exchange markets] andthere was a question of raising an issue which may have been a10/21/80complicating factor at that point. The Treasury is agreeable tochanging. They have at least one swap that should be parallel in theExchange Stabilization Fund, and they would consult with Congressabout that. And they are prepared to do so if we agree in principle.I don't think we have to take any formal action now other thanunderstand that this [change in swap line terms] is going forward ifwe want it to. Then we would formally agree, I take it, when theswaps come before us in a renegotiated form. Is that correct?MR. ALTMANN. No, the authorization says that the Committeeshould consider and approve changes in terms. What we've done in thepast is to have the Committee vote to authorize the Manager to conductthe negotiations toward that particular end.MR. PARDEE. That's right. I would have a hard time comingto you in November with a whole series of new swap arrangements foryou to approve once again if I hadn't had a chance to negotiate theseparticular items.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that you have to havethe authority to negotiate. I just don't know how formal the actionhas to be. I don't think we should go ahead unless we're going toapprove this when it comes before us. That's what I want to find out.MR. ALTMANN. What we've done each year, usually in November,is to approve the renewal of the swap agreements as far as theindividual currencies, central banks, the amounts, and the 12-monthterms. But any other changes in terms have been in the form of anauthorization to the Manager to negotiate terms without our being veryspecific in the Minutes of Actions as to what those terms andconditions were.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you may be saying the samething I did in different words. I don't want to be very specific.MR. ALTMANN. I'm only saying that there has been a vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether the Congress is goingto approve and I don't know that I want a formal vote at this point.But I certainly want the opinion of the Committee as to whetherthey're going to approve this [proposal] formally next month, ifthat's when it comes up, if this is renegotiated. Is that thought tobe a good idea?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. Why don't we see if there'sany objection to it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I am asking.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it makes a lot of sense to dothis. I assume that you will touch base with the Treasury and thatyou will [negotiate] on behalf of both the Federal Reserve and theTreasury--that's my understanding with the Treasury--unless Treasuryvoices [a contrary view].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know about that. Somebodywill--10/21/80MR. WALLICH. The situation has become more and moredisagreeable as our interest rates rise above German rates and we payour interest rate for borrowing in D-marks. They pay the D-mark rate.Now, the expected gain and loss--I fundamentally agree with Tony thatover time inflation will have its way on exchange rates--in the shortrun, of course, is very unpredictable. So one can't be sure that thesurrender of the profit and loss sharing will have the "expectedeffect." But that just means that one focuses on the gain in interestfrom switching to the D-mark rate instead of the dollar interest rate.MR. PARTEE. It's really a very complicated question, isn'tit? I was impressed by the memo, which did indicate clearly that wewould have been ahead if we had run it the other way. But it dependson the presumption that the strong currency will have the lowerinterest rate. Now, that's not true in the case of sterling where theinterest rate is higher than elsewhere and the currency is stronger.Do we know that it will always be true of the mark?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MR. WALLICH. Well, there is a--MR. PARTEE. Do we know that our interest rates will alwaysbe high? It just seems to me that the relationship is complicated.That's the only thing I'm saying. And I don't fully understand it,because I think it probably involves a question of meshing of monetarypolicy worldwide, or at least among the major countries. I don'tthink they'll agree to that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically.MR. WALLICH. At the very abstract level, there is reason tothink that the difference in interest rates equals the expectedexchange rate change, because why would anybody hold a currency if hecan make 3 percent more in another currency unless he fears that heloses at least 3 percent going in?MR. PARTEE. Because the inflation rate must be another--MR. WALLICH. That means inflation is part of the basic[calculation]. Inflation differentials tend to equal interest ratedifferentials and inflation differentials also tend to equal expectedexchange rate movements. If you can swallow these abstractions, whichare tremendous ifs, then you'd have a very neat pattern where thereturn on every currency is--MR. PARTEE. Equal.MR. WALLICH. Exactly.MR. PARTEE. Well, I understand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically.MR. MORRIS. I don't think the issue ought to be decided onthe question of whether we make more money one way or the other. Itseems to me that the terms of the present system reflect a period whenwe were reluctant interveners in the market. Now that situation has10/21/80changed, and, quite apart from the dollars, it no longer seemsappropriate for us to proceed with this kind of system.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are various considerations.Theoretically we ought to be a little better off. That theory is notgoing to be borne out in practice all the time. But there are theseother considerations in that [the proposed terms] look moresymmetrical--in fact are more symmetrical--and the foreign countrieswant us to do it that way. I take it in the case of sterling thatthey've always refused to do it the other way anyway. In thatparticular instance, we just haven't done any [swaps] with sterling.We don't anticipate any, but it could happen. And it could happenthat sometimes we will do it when we get stuck on the interest rate.When this interest rate was originally negotiated in the early '60sI'm sure that the U.S. presumption was that U.S. interest rates wouldalways be lower than the foreign rates. But that was a somewhatdifferent world. It hasn't been borne out in recent years, anyway.But it could happen again.MR. PARTEE. Yes, in the past we always assumed we would havea lower rate. We now seem to be assuming that the Germans will alwayshave a lower rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't forecast that. The experienceshows that the theory has been more or less borne out recently. ButI'm not going to stake my life on that in the future. There are goingto be instances where it doesn't work out, I'm sure, as there were inthe past. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. I would favor going ahead with this, Mr. Chairman.I have just two points. The loss and gain business doesn't make itany harder for us to explain this to a busy Congress under the newsystem than under the old. As far as I'm concerned, we shouldn'tworry about the losses and gains except on general principle. And Ifind Henry's equation and the equation in effect that's in the memoeasier to understand than our own equation on domestic monetarypolicy. So, I would favor going ahead with this. I think it's theright course.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that the general view?SPEAKERS(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to make sure because if we goahead now we may run into some problems in the next month, moreinternally than externally, I suspect. But what we'll look toward isnegotiating it that way. Would we [ordinarily] have approved these inNovember or December?MR. PARDEE. In November, because the first renewals are inearly December. So we have to act between now and November.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we are saying, without objection as Iunderstand it, is that we would go ahead and negotiate to this endassuming that we don't run into some roadblock here or abroad, thoughmore likely here. I don't think we will, but I can't be sure. Now wehave this remaining question--I don't think we have to debate thewhole problem at this stage--of how much in foreign currency balances10/21/80we want to hold or should properly hold over time. I do think there'sa case [for some accumulation of balances]. I say that because theTreasury is so far in debt that there is quite a bit of absorptivecapacity in the United States government for the next month or twoanyway. But there is a problem with the Treasury's management of itscash. Just how that is going to be worked out, I don't know. We aregoing to have some discussions with them, and I think it might behelpful to have some more flexibility in holding D-marks anyway. Thatis the area in which the Treasury is short and eventually they aregoing to want to cover this $2 billion at least. As I understandthis, we're operating on a rather informal understanding now in thisarea. The present limit, which was informally agreed to quite a whileago, is not in an authorization; it is not in any written directive.MS. TEETERS. Is the problem that the Treasury wants us towarehouse the marks?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if it's warehousing, it doesn't comewithin this limit. If that's the way it is worked out, there is goingto be no problem for the time being. They may just do more forwardsand I suppose theoretically we could swap-out some of this spot stuffand buy it back forward for the Treasury. We can just hold some for awhile until they're ready to take it. There are several options; Ijust don't know the answer to it. But I would propose that it doesn'thurt to have enough flexibility to go to, say, $1 billion during thisperiod while we're working this out. The more general question can bediscussed in the fullness of time, but I don't think we have todiscuss it right now.MR. GUFFEY. Don't we have in place warehousing agreementswith the Treasury where they permit us to accumulate mark balances?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, it's not that they permit us;we permit them and we'll take them back. That's one of theconsiderations we'll be looking at--whether they want to do it thatway. There are several ways this might be worked out, all of whichhave pluses and minuses from the Treasury's standpoint. They have adebt-ceiling problem, too, among other things. And I don't think theycan be seen warehousing currencies with us in indefinite amounts toavoid a debt-ceiling problem. There are a number of considerationsthat bear upon this. I would simply suggest--I don't think it's outof keeping with our long-term needs--that going up to $1 billion,which does not strike me as very excessive considering the amounts bywhich we have gone into debt on the other side, would give us someflexibility.MS. TEETERS. The current limits are what--$l billion of allcurrencies except the yen and $1 billion of yen? And then there is a$500 million limit on any currency within the overall $1 billionlimit. Is that correct?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Other than yen.MS. TEETERS. Other than yen. And you're suggesting that wego up to $1 billion on the D-mark alone?MR. PARTEE. How about the aggregate?10/21/80MS. TEETERS. What about the aggregate, yes?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose we'd have to put that at $1-1/2billion, say.MR. PARTEE. Make that $1-1/2 billion?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would leave us where we are except[to allow] another $500 million on the D-mark.MR. WALLICH. You're making a very modest proposal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is just a holding action to give us alittle flexibility at the moment, that's all.MR. GRAMLEY. Is it likely to be enough to last us until nextmonth?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it might not be. I'm perfectlyhappy to go higher if the Committee wants to. And if it's not highenough and we run into a problem, we can come back [to the Committee].MR. GRAMLEY. Maybe we can get some understanding from theTreasury on warehousing. It would be to our advantage to encouragethe Germans to continue to follow a more relaxed policy, as Tony hasbeen talking about. Given the developments in the world economy, wecan't afford to have Germany go back to a very tough monetary policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I only suggest $500 million to give us alittle maneuvering room; I would come back if I thought that created agreat problem. The basic philosophy that is being expressed I agreewith. I just don't think it's necessary to make it a very high limitright at the moment. It probably isn't necessary operationally.MR. WALLICH. Well, it gives the impression that $500 millionis a lot of money in this particular game, whereas actually if themarket should be weak for the D-mark we could use up a good part ofthat in a day.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could we authorize now on an interimbasis a move up to, say, $1-1/2 billion in D-marks?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can if you want to.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me that the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do think we'll try to work something outwith the Treasury so that they are, in effect, taking the first $2billion. So I think we have more room. But if that isn't easy towork out, that's when we will run into the problem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It is possible that one of theoptions that could finally prove most satisfactory to the Treasury andourselves in regard to their cash problem [would] also involvecharging this against our own balances. It would be useful to have ahigher limit on DM holdings because [that is] one of the options,although it is not likely [to be needed]. Warehousing doesn't requireit. It seems to me that if there's no opposition within the Committee-10-10/21/80it just makes sense to put ourselves in a position where we do havesome extra margin. And an interim authorization to hold up to $1-1/2billion in DM seems to make some sense.MR. PARTEE. I'd be more comfortable with $1 billion myself;I feel uncertain about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem going up to $1-1/2billion. I personally have no problem with going higher in a long-runcontext. But I think that raises other questions.MR. GRAMLEY. What about an arrangement whereby we grant upto $1-1/2 billion, but the extra $1 billion is not used unless we feelfairly certain that arrangements can be worked out with the Treasury,however we work it up. That would give us the additional freedom andstill meet Governor Partee's concerns.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just don't know. I suggest $500million in the knowledge that we can always come back to the Committeeif we need more. The way you worded it makes it sound a little morerestrictive--that the presumption is we won't come back. But I guesswe're [talking] nuances here. I'm perfectly happy to add $1-1/2billion, if that's the way you want to go. I'm perfectly happy to gowith $1 billion with a footnote that if the Treasury for some reasoncan't [finance more marks] very readily and we run into the kind ofproblem you're talking about, we may well want to come back andindicate that we want more than the $1 billion.MS. TEETERS. What has been the size of your D-mark purchasesrecently?MR. PARDEE. Yesterday we bought $200 million equivalent ofmarks. On other days we've bought $10 million. The amount variesdepending on the pressure. Today we've already done some $85 million.MR. PARTEE. You bought $200 [million] for our own accountyesterday, Scott?MR. PARDEE. To be split between the Federal Reserve and theTreasury. We're splitting it down the middle all the way, exceptthere are certain transactions that the Bundesbank insists the FederalReserve take rather than the Treasury. But basically we're splittingit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it's important whetherit's $1 billion or $1-1/2 billion. Since Chuck feels so stronglyabout it, let's keep it at $1 billion.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't feel too badly as long as it's ona consolidated basis, so to speak, and we're not holding a significantcash balance. But I always get concerned because of the parallel,let's say, with buying [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we go to $500 million more nowbut with the understanding that if we run into a problem, we'll beback to the Committee.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We can go up to $1 billion.-11-10/21/80MR. PARTEE. We can go up and ask the Germans--MS. TEETERS. I take it the overall limit is $1-1/2 billion.MR. ALTMANN. It's $1 billion in any one currency and $1-1/2billion overall excluding the yen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, $1 billion just in the mark is allwe're talking about at the moment.MR. PARDEE. I don't want to buy $1 billion in Swiss francs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we run into a problem, we'll just beback [to the Committee] with a written communication.I think that's all on the international side. We canconsider at some point the more general issue of whether these limitsare too restraining or not. Do we have an overall limit? We're leftwith a limit, I discover, [in the formal authorization] of $8 billion,which seems a little inconsistent with our open position. We can onlyhave $1 billion on the up side but we can apparently have $7 or $8billion on the down side. But we may--SPEAKER(?). I think there's something asymmetrical aboutthis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may want to look at that, but I thinkwe can do it when we review the whole authorization early next year.MR. PARTEE. The notion is that we defend the dollar harderthan we defend the mark.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The psychology of this[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?MR. PARTEE. What is your estimate of the reserve releasethat we are facing in early November, Peter? How big is it?MR. STERNLIGHT. The drop in required reserves is on theorder of $3 to $3-1/2 [billion]. There's also, depending on what wedo with definitions, a large increase in excess reserves. Of course,we don't expect to offset that raw figure for excess reserves. Infact we are still having staff discussions on that.MR. PARTEE. My point was simply that your request forexpanded authority is roughly related to the size of the release thatyou may have to be doing.MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right.-12-10/21/80MS. TEETERS. Is that from member banks or from nonmemberbanks coming in or is it net?MR. STERNLIGHT. The $3 to $3-1/2 [billion] would be a net ofthe phase down [in required reserves] for member banks and the firstphasing in for nonmembers.MR. ROOS. Peter, I'm a little confused. Page 2 of theBluebook shows a dramatic increase in August and September both intotal reserves and in the monetary base. Both skyrocketed, in effect,which should normally signal a massive increase in growth of theaggregates. When you at the Desk see this type of thing happening, doyou take steps to compensate for that? In other words, first of all,what caused the 16 and 22.9 percent monthly increases in totalreserves and the 15 and 10 percent increases in the base? What[unintelligible] the Desk operation, or couldn't you take steps todrain--MR. STERNLIGHT. We were following our nonborrowed pathduring those periods. For the most recent period, as I mentioned, wewill be coming out very close to the path on the nonborrowed reserves.Total reserves are running above path essentially because of thestrong growth in the aggregates. We have not accommodated thatincrease. The banks have been obliged to get those additionalreserves from the discount window. And in the course of seeking thosereserves, they've had to bid up the funds rate; and we have had theinterest rate increases that I mentioned. We did take some further[tightening] action during the period, as I mentioned. As we saw thetotal reserve path running at $400 or $500 million above the path, weacted to reduce the nonborrowed path by $200 million midway throughthe period. That had a reinforcing effect on bolstering the need forborrowings and stepping up the pressure on the banking system.MR. ROOS. When you observe a significant increase in banklending, which obviously requires the availability of reserves, do youaccommodate that? In other words, do you make those reservesavailable to the banks? Or sometimes if a bank decides to increaseits lending and knows it is going to have to pay the piper two weekslater or a week later on this lagged reserve accounting, do the banksjust assume that they can make these loans and price them because thegood old Fed will come along and provide the reserves to enable themto meet their reserve requirements at a later date? Or do wesometimes say: Look, you guys can't have it both ways. You'reincreasing your loans and it's going to cost you more money in thefederal funds market.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's essentially the latter,President Roos, because by sticking with our nonborrowed reserve pathfor the period we are saying we are going to provide nonborrowedreserves in line with the path and the additional reserves will haveto be obtained at the discount window. And banks are subject to thosepressures that emerge when there has been a persistent sizableborrowing.MR. ROOS. What is the relationship between the nonborrowedreserve path and total reserves? We obviously agree that totalreserves and the monetary base grew too quickly in August andSeptember, right?-13-10/21/80MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. ROOS. So, couldn't you have done something to avoid thatexplosive growth?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I said, by sticking with thenonborrowed path, pressure emerges on the banking system; and we didaccelerate that pressure somewhat by reducing the nonborrowed path.We could have gone still further with that. We conformed with whathas been about the norm in such behavior, which is to reduce thenonborrowed path by roughly half of the overrun on total reserves.MR. ROOS. So it's a matter of degree, really?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think so.MR. ROOS. But we don't really stick to them.MR. STERNLIGHT. The pressure could have been increased alittle further, with of course an impact on interest rates.MR. ROOS. That's the bottom line, right.MR. AXILROD. But without necessarily any impact on totalreserves in the period you are talking about. That is, the impact ontotal reserves and the base might well have come later. And it mighthave been considered, conceivably, to be a lot greater than you wouldhave wanted later. It's really very difficult to judge. I doubt thatthe banks would respond instantly to an increase in the funds rate ofanother 1/2 point or 1 point. They will respond, but perhaps notinstantly. The response may come later when the money supply mightotherwise have been being reduced, so we have to judge that also.MR. MORRIS. Well, if you have developed a convention thatyou only offset half of the overshoot in total reserves by a reductionin the nonborrowed path, what is the rationale for that convention?MR. AXILROD. I don't know [that it's a] convention. There'salways an option of adjusting the discount rate or the nonborrowedpath. I don't remember exactly when the discount rate went up, but Ithink it was in this period. So that's an additional factor; that is,I viewed that as an alternative to further downward adjustment in thenonborrowed path. That's [equivalent to] taking another $200 to $300million off the nonborrowed path. So I would say [the adjustment]went pretty far. Otherwise, you're left with a rule--I don't knowwhat the rule would be--that every time total reserves are above wherethe original path was, we lower nonborrowed. The amount of loweringin the nonborrowed path we have to do really isn't equal to the [dropin] total reserves. It would have to be one heck of a lot more--billions more--because banks are going to borrow more. So we'd haveto lower nonborrowed even more to offset the increase in borrowing toget any drop in total. And to do it within a month is very difficult;it would require very substantial drops in nonborrowed reserves. So,inevitably, we get into the question of either letting nature take itscourse or trying to figure how much speed we can give to the processgiven the lags.MR. MORRIS. So you come out with 50/50 [as your rule].-14-10/21/80MR. AXILROD. When Governor Partee was head of research, inall uncertain things he laid down the dictum 50/50.MR. MAYO. It's all Chuck's fault!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't know. This gets into somevery serious problems, as Steve suggested. If we had pressed downvery hard and pushed, I don't know where the federal funds rate wouldhave gone but the evidence seems to be that we get very little impacton the money supply in the short run. But we might get a helluva bigimpact two months from now and then you would say: My word the moneysupply is declining 8 percent and we have to push way the other way.So if we let the federal funds rate go to zero--I'm exaggerating abit--we still won't get much impact [in the very short run]; we'd getthat impact two months later. Now, if one wanted to be nasty andcritical of the Federal Reserve, one would say we reacted or pressedtoo hard in February and March when money supply growth was high. Theresult was a very [weak] money supply in April and May. And wepressed much too hard against the decline in the money supply in Apriland May with the result that it went up [rapidly] in August andSeptember. Now, I think there are other things operating, but to theextent that these lags are operating that's the dilemma we get into.MR. PARTEE. Yes, we get whipsawed. As long as we assumethere's a lag--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there's a lag of that sort, we can getwhipsawed. That's very easily--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I know there's no exact answer, butwhat are the best estimates of the length of the lag?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we are working on that again. It'sprobably premature to say anything, and we probably won't get a goodanswer when we get it. So, what do you say?MR. SCHULTZ. The lags are shorter than they used to be.MR. AXILROD. They have gotten shorter. On both ourquarterly model and monthly model the lags are quite a lot shorterthan they were a few years ago when we first started [looking into]this. On the monthly model, to the degree there's a response in moneydemand to interest rates, the elasticity is a little over 10 percent.On our current estimates of the model, fifty percent of the impactcomes in about two months. It's pretty fast.MR. MAYO. That isn't Chuck's 50 percent.MR. AXILROD. No, no.MR. PARTEE. It used to be five months--50 percent in fivemonths.MR. AXILROD. It's down at least to three months. Ourquarterly model, which has been re-estimated very recently but onlywith data through '74 because using data after '74 we couldn't get afit that was worth talking about, the elasticities are variable.There is one for the bill rate and one for the [unintelligible]-15-10/21/80savings rate. If you add them up--pretend they're additive--it'ssomething like 10 percent again. It says that within a quarter we get60 percent of the response, depending on how things go. And after onequarter we get three-fourths of the response. That's much faster thanwe had when we started estimating these things. That means that if wehave done a little here, we will begin to get some movement shortlythereafter. I don't think this is too inconsistent with the kind ofbehavior we have had this year, but we are working on [an analysis of]it. But our latest view is that the lags are a lot shorter than theyused to be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that's based on pre-1974 data?MR. AXILROD. For the quarterly model. But for the monthlymodel that's estimated with more up-to-date data.MR. PARTEE. We ought to recognize that we could still havethis whipsawing with a lot of two-month cycles.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It only takes a 2- to 3-month lag. Wedon't assume a very long lag, but we have to assume there isn't muchinstantaneous [effect].MR. GRAMLEY. It isn't just a matter of lags. It's also amatter of the size of the elasticities and what's happening totransactions demand for money as a consequence of changes in GNP. Theworst possible implication of thinking through this lag business isthat if we have both significant lags and a very low interestelasticity of demand for money, when we try to push the money stock inthe direction that's counter to the direction in which transactionsdemand is going, we don't get a response right away. It may pushinterest rates to a point where the response comes through the effecton the economy later on, in which case we could end up chasing ourtail more or less perpetually. And that's a possibility I think wehave to look at very carefully. I've asked the staff to begin lookingat this, but it's much more [than lags]; it's a complicated process.MR. PARTEE. You change demand [for money] by changing thespending that it's related to.MR. GRAMLEY. Right.MR. SCHULTZ. If one carries that to the extreme, theamplitudes of the swings get higher.MR. GRAMLEY. They could get worse, yes.MR. BAUGHMAN. Doesn't even the short-term adjustment we aretalking about have to come through interest rates? That is, banksindividually presumably are not responding to what we are doing interms of total reserves or total nonborrowed reserves. I'll put it asa question. Shouldn't we assume that whatever adjustment we get fromour actions that impact on money stock growth has to come through theinterest rate circuit? It doesn't come directly through themanipulation of reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll ask you the question back again. Youdon't have to resolve what mechanism it goes through; [the question-16-10/21/80is] how can you get the restraint on the money supply and on bankactivity without having an impact on interest rates?MR. BAUGHMAN. I don't think you can; therefore, I don'tthink we are talking about two separate things. In other words, theeffects on the economy are through the interest rate and the effectson money stock are through the manipulation of reserves. It seems tome that they are both through the interest rate and that should berecognized. To me the lag aspect of the reserve part of the mechanismis not too important; if we focus on it, it seems to me that we areexaggerating its importance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not talking about the lag in thereserve requirement. This is the lag between interest rates orwhatever other mechanism and the change in the money supply.MR. BAUGHMAN. That's where the focus needs to be. And thatbrings to the surface again this idea that if one is going to focuspretty closely on the aggregates and accepts the desirability ofstability in the movement of the aggregates, then one just has toaccept a lot of flexibility in interest rates in the short term.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that doesn't follow; that's theproblem.MR. BAUGHMAN. And if we don't go that route, then it seemsto me we come back to the old problem we had--which we apparentlydidn't handle too well--namely, our ability to project what level ofinterest rates will give us what we want in some other measure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That problem we surely have had. But Idon't think one can simply say that the answer is that we ought to beless concerned about interest rates. Indeed, it may be--I justpresent this as an hypothesis--that our lack of concern over interestrates is what produced the fluctuations in the money supply this year.Now, I think many other things are going on, but one cannot reject thehypothesis.MR. BAUGHMAN. Did you say project or reject?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I cannot reject that proposition on thebasis of what I know now.MR. PARTEE. It might have been a factor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's the whole thing--I'mspeaking somewhat theoretically--but it may have entered into it tosome degree. By letting interest rates fluctuate so much, we may havehelped to generate the fluctuations in the money supply.MR. WALLICH. In one sense I think that is almost certainbecause we helped to change income. That's Lyle's case. We havechanged income by letting interest rates fall so sharply; we probablycontributed to the recovery. It changed income again. So thatmechanism has been in play. Now on your mechanism, the lag in moneydemand to interest rates, I just don't know about the evidence. Weused to say it was six months to get the full effect, wasn't it?-17-10/21/80MR. AXILROD. Yes; it's a lot shorter now.MR. WALLICH. And you've shortened it now considerably.MR. PARTEE. It used to be that in five months we'd get halfof it.MR. ROOS. This is a subject that is part of the overallstudy?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Indeed it is.MR. SCHULTZ. We have another problem. The communicationsproblem is terrible. There are enormous numbers of people out therewho believe that the money supply is controlled by some magic wand.And there are an awful lot of people who say: Look, if you guys wouldjust hold down the money supply, then interest rates wouldn't go sohigh. I just sort of look at them and my eyeballs twirl a bit,because it's very difficult to figure out how they intend for us to dothat. So, we really have a serious communications problem we aregoing to have to address.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we're left--there's no escape at themoment--with having to rely on some judgment as to how to express thisformula for how far to put down the nonborrowed reserves when theaggregates begin running high. The mechanism isn't a perfect one,that's for sure. But I don't know of any statistical formula thatresolves it at this point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Following up on what Fred said, Ithink we're in a major quandary because I think the way the countryinterpreted our October 6th announcement was that we were going to paya price in terms of volatility of interest rates but the implicationwas that there would be much more stability in the growth of the moneysupply. We have seen at least in a year like this--and possibly,although I hope not, even in a year when the underlying economy is notquite as volatile--that we don't have that kind of control for thereasons we were talking about. So I think we built up expectationsthat we can't meet now. And there's also an impression increasinglygetting around that it's not so much a lack of political will orresolution by the Fed but that the Fed basically doesn't have theability to control the money supply, which is your point. But, Fred,if we stress too much that we can't control the money supply in theshort run, it can give a very undesirable impression of the FederalReserve's [impotence] among those in the public and in the businessand even the financial community who are naive about [the extent of]our ability to control the money supply.MR. ROOS. Tony, in defense in those of us who believe thatwe do have the ability to do it, in the study we are undertaking Iwould hate to close our minds to that possibility and reach theconclusion that the money supply cannot be controlled better than ithas been. It's only fair to stay open-minded on this. Hopefully, theresearch that Steve and his people are doing might indicate thatperhaps the way we went about controlling the growth of the moneysupply was not the most effective means of doing it. In other words,I wouldn't buy the fact that it can't be done. I'm not sure that we-18-10/21/80did it in the most effective way. But we could argue this issueendlessly. This is what is being studied, correct?MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's one of the things for sure. Thereare several, but that is certainly a key issue.MR. ROOS. There are a lot of people in the markets who feelthat we announced we were going to do this and then we reestablishedour practice of flirting with [controlling] interest rates, so wereally only [went part way] in this process, not the whole way.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the whole point, Larry. Therehas been a supposition that if we are willing to let interest rates gowithout any limit whatsoever, we can achieve more control over themoney supply. I think the results--plus the analytical discussion wehave had in miniature this morning, with our discussion of the lagsand other things--have shown that one can't draw that conclusion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one can't draw it right now. But itis obviously on the agenda. I don't mean to exaggerate this but Ithink the main reason the money supply has been fluctuating is thatthe real economy has been fluctuating. That may be partly due to ourpolicies but I--MR. PARTEE. I think one has to have time periods in mind,What we are talking about is a relatively short interval of a fewmonths and we are having great difficulty controlling the money supplyin a short interval. But I think the record is pretty good on thelonger run.MR. MAYO. That's just what I was going to say, too, Chuck.Let's turn it around the other way. Yes, it can be done--it has beendone--if one is willing to look through the second quarter and thethird quarter and at the broader record. The subject of our study is,can it be done better? And if so, we want to find out how. But westill have to stress the successful side of this if only to keep upour credibility and our confidence. Credibility has two sides.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles.MR. BALLES. In listening to this discussion, Mr. Chairman, aquestion did occur to me that I wanted to ask Steve. As you recall, ayear ago when we got into this new plan, we all anticipated a need toadjust the discount rate with great frequency. To our considerablesurprise, at least to most of us, that turned out not to be true forquite some time. In looking back on the experience since June, whenwe had this big surge [in money growth]--actually now June throughOctober--do you have any feeling, Steve, that had we been moreflexible on the discount rate we might have headed off some of the netovershoot in total reserves? I gather that what has really gone on isthat the multiplier has worked out pretty well but we've come in withmore reserves after the fact than had been planned before the fact;and most of that was accounted for by a higher level of borrowing thanwas in the plan at the start when we projected the nonborrowed reservepath. What good would it have done, if you have a view, to havemanipulated the discount rate more in this period?-19-10/21/80MR. AXILROD. Well, I'll just give a tentative response,because we are doing research in that area and the results of thatresearch, particularly with the relation of the lags to what happenedto money, would be critical in one's appraisal. I don't view itmyself, President Balles, as a discount rate question. I see it moreas a question [relating to the level] of the federal funds rate or theconstellation of short-term rates. So I would transpose your questionto be: If the discount rate had been raised earlier, would it haveput more pressure on the funds rate earlier and, therefore, dampedmoney growth in January and February of this year? I don't think it'sa question of discouraging borrowing but of discouraging bank[lending] activity and the public's demand for money. And that's nota question of the discount rate per se, but a question of the level ofshort-term rates. My tentative view is that one would have raised thediscount rate to higher levels only if one came to the judgment thatother short rates ought to have been higher. If one were content withthe level of short rates that emerged, I don't see any need to haveadjusted the discount rate from what was done. On a more technicalbasis, there is some validity [to that concept], and I think thesurcharge is a step in that direction. There is somewhat of aslippage in that; one can't be sure, as we saw this time. We mightget a lot of borrowings early on when we're expecting [only] a little,and we might get little when we are expecting a lot. There areuncertainties in the relationship between market rates and nonborrowedreserves as a result. Those are rather short-run slippages andprobably a more structured discount rate system, which the surchargewas, might help to give a little more certainty in the relationshipbetween borrowing and the funds rate. So we may get more certainty inthe response. But that's a technical thing and not a question of theoverall level of the discount rate. I think the question is whatoverall level of short rates the Committee is willing to see andtolerate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just remind you that we had aperfect practical example this time of raising the discount ratebetween meetings, which did not affect the margin between the discountrate and market rates at all. It just raised the level of marketrates. So we were left with an even larger discrepancy, so to speak,between market rates and the discount rate by the time [theadjustment] was finished. That is what one would expect to happen ifthe level of borrowings, which we control, remains the same or goesup.MR. BAUGHMAN. I was going to make this remark later, but itmay fit better now in view of the discussion. It seems to me thatanother thing that falls out of this recent experience is thepossibility that we need to move in the direction of relatively moreweight on, or attention to, the broader concepts of money. There areinstitutional changes taking place and, I gather, an increased amountof speculative activity flowing from the rising concern aboutinflation in the economy and an increasing tendency to shortencommitments. I thought that was captured very well in the paragraphin part I of the Greenbook that begins at the bottom of page 14 andconcludes on the top of page 15 on how funds are flowing between thecategories we include in M-1A, M-1B, and M2. It seems to me that weare seeing relatively more stability in the broader [M2] measure, andthat measure is one which is more and more becoming a closer-20-10/21/80approximation of what people view as money or something they can useas money. We may be exaggerating the importance of achieving targetsin a fairly stable way on [the basis of] an unduly narrow concept ofmoney or what people are looking at when they behave in a way that wethink has a relationship to money.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll just make one more comment inconnection with what you said [and then I think we ought to move on.]My impression is--it has to be confirmed by a little more statisticalanalysis--that basically all countries have much more instability inM1 than in M3 or M2 or whatever [broader measure] they look at. Andsome of this stability we hear reported in foreign countries isbecause they concentrate on the broader aggregates. If one looks attheir M1, it doesn't look a lot better than ours, although ours lookspretty bad this year relative to any experience [unintelligible].MR. BAUGHMAN. This has the further link in terms of whatitems we attach reserve requirements to. It seems to me that bookneeds to be kept open to the extent we can keep it open.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions.MR. ALTMANN. And his [leeway] recommendation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, yes.MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not confident that I need the addedleeway--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take up the ratification first.Without objection the transactions are ratified. Now we'll take upthe $4 billion [leeway], which seems reasonable under thecircumstances. Would somebody like to move that?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, you have a $4 billion[intermeeting] limit. Mr. Zeisel.MR. ZEISEL. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're overjoyous. Let me ask a questionon the short run, the very short run. We had a pretty good increase[in economic activity] apparently in August and September. If we hada monthly GNP number, it would probably be going up--I don't know--atmaybe a 5 percent rate or more in those two months. And July was thelow point. So September must have been substantially higher thanJuly. To get only a 1 percent increase in GNP in the fourth quarter,are you assuming a decline if you plotted this monthly in November andDecember?MR. ZEISEL. We haven't plotted it monthly, Mr. Chairman, butit does imply some contraction in activity toward the end of the year,in November and December, seasonally adjusted.-21-10/21/80MS. TEETERS. Your housing starts alone would do that,wouldn't they? Aren't your housing starts trending downward?MR. ZEISEL. We assume that housing starts will drop offrather sharply.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, starts will drop off, but the [dropin] activity lags.MR. ZEISEL. Activity and spending continue for a while, andthat's why we get as much increase as we do in GNP. We are assumingvery little growth in personal consumption expenditures--actually none--for the fourth quarter. We don't assume any substantial increase inemployment or income during that period. The saving rate has alreadydropped in the third quarter; we don't expect any further decline inthat, or nothing major. So that's the major element. We also won'tbe getting the kind of help from the foreign trade sector that we havehad.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me put it this way: If your forecastfor GNP is right, does it imply a decline in industrial production inNovember and December?MR. ZEISEL. It probably would by December because we comeinto the fourth quarter at a rising slope, so I think we have to getsome [decline].MR. PARTEE. But, Jerry, your industrial production was a lotweaker in the third quarter than GNP. And, therefore, there could bea rise in industrial production compared to GNP in the fourth quarter.MR. ZEISEL. I would think industrial production would not beas weak. That's right. Industrial production was down about 2-1/2percent in the third quarter--about 10 percent at an annual rate. AndI would think we'd begin to get some pickup from that toward the endof this quarter and so we'd come into the fourth quarter at a higherlevel and that would hold pretty well. We are not anticipating thecontinued strength in spending for automobiles and other consumerdurable goods that we were getting. Basically, that's the sectorshowing weakness.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we will go on to you, Steve, andthen have a general [discussion].MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we deal with any immediatequestions that arise and then have a coffee break.MR. SCHULTZ. Steve, we may have made an error at midyear innot changing the M-1B target ranges. Do you think it makes any senseat this time to consider the possibility of making a downward changein the target range for M-1A and an upward change for M-1B for thisyear? Or are we already too far through the year so that we areunlikely to get any positive effects from that kind of action andmight get considerable negative effects?-22-10/21/80MR. AXILROD. I would say the effects of that probably wouldbe negative because I perceive difficulty already in the public'sunderstanding of the increase in the M-1B range [described] in theappendix to the Chairman's letter in February, having to do with the1981 targets. I've heard people interpret that as an increase inmonetary growth and an easier policy when it was explained that thatmeant a tighter policy. So I think an effort at this point to do thatfor 1980 would probably be nonproductive.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean because of the misestimationof NOW accounts?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. ROOS. I would caution, Mr. Chairman, against ourbelieving that we can move in an admirable fashion from M-1B, whichcertainly has been the primary focus for our attention in recentmonths, to M-1A just because we are running into trouble with M-1B. Idon't think we can fool the financial markets. At Frank Morris'srecent conference, which was attended by a lot of individuals from thefinancial markets, there was pretty strong allusion to the fact thatthe Fed has several different definitions for the aggregates just soit can conveniently use the one that seems to be working best for themoment. I don't think we can get away with it. I was a littleconcerned, actually, about what I sensed as a primary emphasis on M-1Ain the Bluebook this time whereas [previously] we have talked aboutM-1B. I don't think we can switch the tiller, or whatever we areusing as the directing mechanism, at will and not confuse thisCommittee as well as the financial markets generally.MR. WALLICH. I'm not sure that we have been using M-1Bprimarily and not M-1A, but I do think there are weighty reasons whywe should downgrade M-1A. There are substantial shifts into NOW andATS accounts. The indications that we get from M-1A are clearlybiased. So I would say that in the future we should look more atM-1B. There are some [financial flows] coming into M-1B that are notcoming out of M-1A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The same thing that distorts M-1A distortsM-1B. I don't see how we can escape that.MR. PARTEE. I think the reason we said they should haveequal weight, which I believe is what we have said in recent months,Larry, is precisely because we recognize a downward bias in M-1A andan upward bias in M-1B. And so we said we'd give them equal weight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we have ever to my knowledgemade a decision to deemphasize M2. Operationally, when the staff makeup the paths and so forth, they are looking at M1 because that's what[depository institutions] hold reserves against. And that tends tocolor the conversation. But in an analytic sense, in setting thetargets for the year I wasn't that conscious of downgrading M2.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I hope we will keep this in mindwhen we set guidelines for next year. Because if you think we haveproblems with the gap between M-1A and M-1B this year, next year---23-10/21/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Next year we may face the possibility thatneither M-1A nor M-1B makes sense for the first six months of theyear.MR. MORRIS. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be healthy. It's not just aquestion of looking at one or the other. We know they are bothbiased, but by some unknown amount.MS. TEETERS. Steve, in the Bluebook you gave us the interestrates associated with alternative A. Do you have the ones that areassociated with alternative B?MR. AXILROD. For alternative B, through this year we wouldexpect a funds rate roughly around the recent level of 12-1/2 percent,virtually no change. Over the course of next year we still expectrates to rise. Maybe Mike has those figures with him.MR. PRELL. We haven't put down a set of numbers. Because ofthis very short time period, the differences in money stock expansionare minimal and we'd end up the latter part of next year presumably atroughly the same rate.MS. TEETERS. But the near-term rates would be lower, is thatright?MR. PRELL. That's the presumption we have with more generousmonetary expansion.MR. AXILROD. Next year it gets to be a question of thefeedback of that on GNP and inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no more questions orclarifications, let's have a coffee break.MR. WINN. Could I make one comment, Paul, before the break?We pay a lot of attention to the shortcomings of our quantitymeasures. Are we paying enough attention to the shortcomings of someof the national aggregate measures that we are trying to [deal] with?I don't have a feel as to whether the underground economy is more orless than it used to be. But I'm becoming more and more skeptical ofsome of these national figures that we are using in some of theseother areas.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have an uneasy feeling that our nationaleconomic statistics in general are not getting any better. They'reprobably worse, but I don't know what to do about it.MR. WINN. That's my feeling. So I'm wondering, in terms ofwhat we are trying to do to the national figures, if we are reallykeying [our actions] to the real changes that are taking place.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other clarification questions? Let'shave our coffee break.[Coffee break]-24-10/21/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably the clarifications have beentaken care of. We can go around the table and see what you thinkabout the business picture. And perhaps you can give some generalcomments on our own posture and then we'll look at the decision morecarefully. But let's be a little general right now.MS. TEETERS. I looked back over the numbers and I'mimpressed with several things. Practically every indicator of realoutput is below last year. We talk about the increases in housingstarts in the past two months, but housing starts are 25 percent belowlast year. Industrial production is down a large amount. Employmentis flat because the labor force didn't grow very much. New orders aredown and consumption is down. Every indicator is below what it waslast year. If one looks at [developments in] a little longer contextinstead of just what happened in the last two months, we've created arather severe recession at this point. The numbers that are up,unfortunately, are prices. Both producer prices and consumer pricesare up 11 percent. And within [those measures] are energy prices,which in the producer price index are up something like 36 percent andin consumer price index somewhat over 20 percent. If one looks at themoney numbers, they have been quite reasonable over the past year.They're just about where we would want them to be and I think it makesone wonder. I don't think this is a surprising outcome. If youtighten monetary policy, the first impact is on real output. We havehad very little impact on prices. We've had relatively well behavedmonetary aggregates, but it does raise in my mind the question ofwhere we go from here. I'm quite worried that we'll put too muchemphasis on trying to get [monetary growth from] the fourth quarter1979 to the fourth quarter 1980 at some predetermined level. Thoseare pretty arbitrary dates to pick to say that we're going to hit themidpoints [of our target ranges].What also strikes me is that we're not very good in[estimating the] relationships. From the fourth quarter of '79 toSeptember '80, we're off the midpoint on M-1A by .35, on M-1B by 1.65,and on M2 by 2.2 percentage points, all plus. We're off M3 by minus1.2 and bank credit by minus 1 percentage point. No way are we goingto get all of them on the midpoint by the fourth quarter of this year.So it seems to me that we should pick which one we're going to try tokeep within bounds. I don't think we have any hope of getting M2within [its range.] We can come close on M-1B, but not completelywithin. And when we come down to the fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter projections, there's not a lot of difference where we end upif we choose "A" or "B." The rate for [alternative A] is 4-1/2percent and alternative B gets us maybe two-tenths of a percentagepoint above that. But alternative A does produce an extra 1percentage point on the federal funds rate. What we obtain by runningthe funds rate up by 1 point isn't a great deal in terms of obtainingour objectives for the year, fourth quarter over fourth quarter. Iwould caution against focusing too sharply on trying to hit somethingexactly in the fourth quarter of calendar year 1980. We may not havea double-dip [recession], but I think there's a great danger that wewill have a totally flat economy if we pursue our [monetary growth]objectives too strongly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.-25-10/21/80MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, looking over the economy sector bysector, I don't see much fundamental strength in the short run. So Iwouldn't be surprised to see one quarter between now and the springthat might come in with negative growth. What happens beyond then Ithink depends on whether or not we have any discernible success indealing with inflation. We [in Richmond] have been expecting lessinflation and more real growth than the Board staff over most of thisrecent period because we thought it likely that the aggregates wouldcome in significantly lower than they have. Since they've come inhigher than we thought, and in view of the deteriorating budgetaryprospects, we've come closer and closer to what the Board staff hasbeen projecting in the way of inflation and less on real economicgrowth. But my feeling still is that we're probably going to have alittle less inflation and a little more real economic growth than thestaff has projected.So far as the overall policy posture is concerned, I thinkit's imperative that we do what we can to hit these long-run targetson M-1A and M-1B, although I think we can tolerate some overshoot onM2. But if only M-1A comes in within the target ranges, then I doubt--no matter how much we justify it by the rapid growth in other kindsof transaction balances--that we'll stand much chance of maintainingany credibility. Also, I would say that the recent rise in interestrates we've had might be due largely to the public's perception of adeteriorating budgetary situation, more than just an expanded demandfor money. There's also a feeling, given the rapid growth in theaggregates, that we will have to react to that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I'm inclined to the view thatthe real economy may be a tad or so stronger over the next quarter ortwo but nothing dramatic. Beyond that, it's very hard to see with anyclarity. I think where we are on inflation will have a lot to do withthe longer-run performance of the economy. There are biguncertainties about fiscal and other economic policies as they will beenunciated by the new Administration. The question of consumerresistance to these high car prices is an area of uncertainty and it'sone that could work against us. I am not as sanguine as many peopleseem to be about the oil price situation either. I don't claim anyparticular expertise but the more I look at the information coming outof the Middle East, the more I think it could turn into a verynegative factor by sometime in 1981. On the financial side, I don'tknow to what extent the Ninth District is representative; it probablyisn't. But I can say this: There is intense advertising and pushingby commercial banks on ATS types of business to try to get a leg up onthe thrifts, which is compatible with what Steve was saying about thisdeparture between M-1B and M-1A. I think it is very real. It'smoving a lot faster than we thought it would, and I think we can havesome impact in terms of trying to explain it in a coherent way,particularly if we start to do it sooner rather than later.Broadly speaking, on policy I lean toward "A." But in thecurrent situation I think a more important consideration than "A" or"B" is the point that Steve made on how we might want to shape thelanguage in the directive so that whatever we come out with is couchedin terms of an upper limit. Therefore, if we continue to get the-26-10/21/80overruns that we've had in the last eight or ten weeks, we can respondto that more quickly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, as I look at the state of the economy, itseems to me that we have a lot of unpaid bills accumulated. We'vebeen through five years of expansion with a lot of inflation and otherdistortions and hardly any of that has been paid off--corrected orexpiated, if you will. We've had no reduction in inflation. We'vehad no significant restoration of consumer demand. The consumer hasbeen overbought because of inflation and is coming around slowly.We've had no restructuring of balance sheets. It's hard to believethat after five years of expansion the distortions could be corrected,so to speak, in one quarter of recession. Now, we didn't expect thatkind of short recession. We may have it. The forecast that we have--and it has changed quite significantly from last time--seems to saythat we have more GNP now and we'll get less GNP next year. At theend of next year we'll have about the same level of unemployment andGNP as we would have had if we had traced an alternative path with therecession continuing through 1980 and then a more rapid recovery. I'mnot sure whether this new path is as adequate in terms of correctionsas the previous one because we seem to be treating as a gain the risein the [third] quarter and maybe in the fourth quarter as something tobe defended by our monetary policies. We can't latch onto that. Ithink we have a bigger correction, unfortunately, to go through. Wemay be dragging it through 1981 with an almost zero rate of growth.That is why I conclude that we have to accept a degree of financialdiscipline. There just is no interest rate level that is bothnoninflationary and pleasant to live with in terms of the demandeffects that it has. If we're going to go to interest rate levels--and I always think of interest rates as being established of course bymoney supply targets--so if we go to money supply targets to produceinterest rates that will make the present situation livable andpleasant and make for expansion, I think we're building in moreinflation for the future. We're moving from an uncorrected base. Myinclination, therefore, continues to be to lean on the hard side ofthe aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I can't quarrel with the staff'sprojection. I suppose I still lean, if at all, toward the view thatthe economy may be a little weaker rather than stronger and that wemay have a little more unemployment and a little more inflation thanthe staff forecasts. Even with that, although I have never been agreat advocate of monetary targets, I find I am thankful that we haveseveral targets and ranges rather than spot targets for one or twoaggregates. The latter assumed a performance measurement device thatis far more risky than any of the FREPS measures that we fiddle within the Federal Reserve System in terms of the individual bankperformances. I find that we do have a public credibility problemwhen the heads of the two [Congressional] banking committees plusquite a few other people have embraced the idea, simplistically, thattarget setting and target achievement are the be all and end all oninflation control by the Federal Reserve System. Even though I don'tbelieve that that's the way to measure our performance, I acknowledgethe fact that [such a view] is there. And I still feel that we will-27-10/21/80have a better chance of [achieving] credibility through the end ofthis year by leaning toward "A" rather than "B" to give a littlebetter insurance that we will remain within the aggregate targets.Despite my agreement with Nancy on the interpretation of many of thesethings, I must respectfully disagree on the emphasis I think we haveto place to keep the balance of factors in proper perspective. Iwould lean toward the more restraining position even though thedifferences may be slight. We're being measured. From a purelytheoretical approach, I think we're being measured unfairly by any ofthese things. But I'm just old fashioned on that particular subject.I recognize that we are being measured in many different ways, notjust by the Administration or the Congress but by the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, in looking back over this pastyear, it seems to me that the real product of our new operatingprocedure has been pretty good. I think we turned the economy aroundmuch sooner than we would have under the old system. If we had beenmanaging interest rates, the expansion probably would have gone untilJuly and we would now be in a recession of the magnitude of the one in1974-75. And the unemployment rate at the end of the year would besubstantially higher than it's going to be. I think the resilience ofthe economy that we're seeing now reflects two things. One is thefact that we did turn interest rate policy around so sharply. Butsecondly, I think the economy shows signs of being able to live withhigher interest rates than was the case in the past. Nonetheless, Idon't think any of us can have much confidence in the forecasts forthe next couple of quarters because we've never been in a situationwhere we have come out of recession with interest rates at currentlevels. So, I don't think there's anything our econometric models cantell us, based on history, as to how the economy is likely to performin the next few quarters. I find that there's tremendous skepticismabout the Federal Reserve in the financial community. They arewatching us like hawks. We clearly need, not only for the financialcommunity but the business community, to get expectations working forus instead of against us. And that's why I am supporting alternativeA today. Having made the commitments we have made, I don't think wecan end the year and tell the public that everything else was higher,but M-1A was within the bounds and we declare that a victory. I don'tthink that kind of victory is going to fly. And since we don't knowmuch about how the economy will behave coming out of a recession withhigh interest rates--and I talked to Lyle about this at the coffeebreak--we may find that in order to stay within our guidelines that wewould have to produce absurdly high short-term money rates. If that'sthe case, then it seems to me that we've got to change the guidelines.But as long as we don't change the guidelines, I think our credibilityrequires that we stay within them. That's all I have to say.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I fully understand what youmean by guidelines.MR. MORRIS. I'm talking about monetary growth guidelines.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean for the longer run?MR. MORRIS. Yes. If we find in the fourth quarter, to takean extreme case, that we need a federal funds rate of 20 percent to-28-10/21/80get the money supply growth within our ranges, then we will eitherhave to change the ranges, which I think is the only way that we canhandle it without losing credibility in the marketplace--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For this year?MR. MORRIS. [Unintelligible] as they do. We either changethe ranges or--though I don't think we have this option--say we can'tstay within the guidelines that we've established.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be the fact. But I'm not sure wecan do anything at this point to affect that.MR. MORRIS. Well, if we were to decide that we can't staywithin the M-1B targets--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can decide that. I'm just saying thatwhat happens in the next two months may be very little influenced bywhat we do [today]--whether it's up or down or on the target--becauseit's in the cake.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that doesn't remove the need tomake a decision.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but that decision may influence morewhat happens beyond [that time horizon] than what happens within thenext two months.MR. MORRIS. But if we are going to try to stay within theguidelines, we would have to move monetary policy in a direction thatis consistent with trying to get inside the guidelines. To me theadoption of alternative B would be [tantamount] to telling the publicthat we've given up on the guidelines.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why?MR. MORRIS. Because we would be telling the Manager tofollow a reserve course which is only going to show a prospect ofbringing M-1A within the guidelines. And it seems to me that isequivalent to abandonment.MR. PARTEE. M-1A is well within the guidelines.MR. MORRIS. I know, but that will be the only one.MR. PARTEE. And M-1B will be outside regardless of whichalternative we take.SPEAKER(?). M-1B [comes out] right at the top on "A."SPEAKER(?). And right at the edge on "B."MR. PARTEE. Well, look at the chart. In fact, on average"A" and "B" are within the guidelines.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I question how clearly the market canperceive that. Governor Gramley.-29-10/21/80MR. GRAMLEY. You characterized the staff forecast as agloomy one, Mr. Chairman, and I think that's right. Indeed, I thinkthe outlook is probably even a little gloomier in the sense that therisks in the forecast are mainly on the down side. The staff'sforecast assumes a shift in the money demand function, which may ormay not happen. I have my doubts about it. It assumes that thesaving rate is going to decline by half a percentage point; that mayhappen, but I have some doubts as to whether consumers are going tospend that aggressively. It assumes that businesses are going to wantto increase the ratio of inventories to sales moderately in a periodin which final sales growth is extremely weak--and in fact decliningoutside the personal consumption area--and interest rates are veryvery high indeed. I conclude from this that if interest rates go upsignificantly further from what the staff has forecast, that we'regoing to convert growth of 1/2 percent into a recession. I think 1/2percent growth--to respond to Governor Wallich's comments--isappropriate; I don't find that an unacceptable outcome. In my view arecession is not going to give us any help in our fight againstinflation. I don't think the first recession, the recession of '80,did any good. I doubt that another sharp recession would do any good.I think you are quite correct, Mr. Chairman, insofar as the fourthquarter of the year is concerned, that we're probably going to seemore real growth this quarter than was forecast. That doesn't give meany comfort. On the contrary it gives me additional worries, becauseI think we may find that the demand for money is growing even morestrongly than the staff has forecast and that interest rates will haveto go up a long, long way to get [growth of the aggregates] within theranges of either alternative A or B. And then we will set the stagefor another downturn. What I want to do at this point is not tooverreact because I believe there is a very real possibility that whatyou say is correct: That we may be caught in a cycle in which thevery way we're trying to operate is producing these fluctuations inboth money and interest rates and [thus] in the economy.I want to call to the Committee's attention, too, what hasbeen happening to the components of M2 that are not in M-1A or M-1B.It's quite dramatic. We had an M2 growth rate in the third quarteroverall of 15-1/2 percent; that's the quarterly average. But duringthe course of the quarter, these deposits have shown an annual growthrate of 22-1/2 percent in July, 13 percent in August, and 7 percent inSeptember and October. There has been a dramatic deceleration; andthose deposits are four times the size of the deposits that are inM-1A and M-1B. And that's something we ought to take into account inthinking about how hard we try to achieve those targets for M-1A andM-1B in the near future. So, I'm leaning toward the easieralternative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I have several comments. First,with respect to the forecast, it seems to me that it's based on theinternalities of our economy rather than the externalities. I don'tknow how to recalculate it, but it seems to me we have oil problemsand military problems. [If one is] just conscious of what we'reshipping overseas at the moment, one can't miss the kinds ofactivities that are going on, and they are going to have a delayedeffect. Second, if one looks at the figures and then takes a smallsample--and I realize the danger of samples, but try to go to a-30-10/21/80shopping center some weekend. You can't find a place to park. If yougo in, you can't believe the prices they're charging. And people areall saying: Well, the price is only going to get higher; we betterbuy it now. And when you add to that what I see in the agriculturalarea, with foreign demand springing from China and Russia and otherplaces, the inflation pressure is very real to a whole host of people.So the saving rate decline wouldn't surprise me a lot, given what wesee people doing. It seems to me that somehow that [inflation]expectation has to be halted. And if the externalities get out ofhand on us, which we really haven't factored in [to the forecast], wewill have an explosive situation on that side of the coin that wehaven't thought about too much. Consequently, I lean rather stronglyto the feeling that with all the publicity that has been given to ouractivities we at least have to do our best to perform because thereare not many areas in which people have much confidence these days.Going back to my college days where A was a good mark, I guess I'dstrive for an A+. I'd not be too aggressive, but it seems to me thatwe really have to lean against the [tide] this time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Grading standards have been relaxed.MR. PARTEE. As a matter of fact they've been reversed.MR. SCHULTZ. I had heard that.MR. MORRIS. Well, that's why we don't have a C alternative!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I agree in general with the staffprojection. The only point on which I have some reservation--Iwouldn't say disagreement--is that the staff does not attach muchweight to the possibility that consumers may continue to try to defendtheir current living standards and spend at a level which continues toreduce the saving rate. We have misjudged the behavior of consumersbefore and we may do so again. I'm not saying this has a highprobability of happening because I recognize that the saving rate isat a low historical level, but it could happen. And consumers havedemonstrated a marked reluctance to accept lower real livingstandards. I agree with much of what Governor Gramley said [except]in this one respect--that is, a difference regarding the likelihood ofcontinued high levels of consumer expenditures.Now, from a credibility standpoint, I think it's veryimportant to end the year with the aggregates close to the targetranges that we've established. I emphasize "close to" because I thinknothing we're likely to do today will bring all of the aggregateswithin the target ranges. I mean "close to" in the sense that M-1Awill be well within and M2 may be near the upper end of its targetrange, with M3 and bank credit, of course, being within the ranges. Ibelieve either of the alternatives presented to us will bring us veryclose to the target ranges at the end of the year. I don't think itmakes a great deal of difference, so far as our credibility isconcerned, whether we get the monetary outcome under alternative A orthe monetary outcome under alternative B. The significant differencebetween alternatives A and B is the likely influence on interestrates. Following alternative A, we're almost certain to get upwardpressure on interest rates in the months ahead. We will get upward-31-10/21/80pressure on interest rates in 1981 under either alternative. Butunder alternative B we're likely to get little, if any, upwardpressure on interest rates for the remainder of the year and possiblythe first month or two of 1981. Interest rates are already at highlevels. As was pointed out by Frank Morris, compared to otherrecoveries they're at extremely high levels. And at this point theyare also positive in real terms. We have positive real interestrates. I see Governor Wallich disagrees with me but--MR. WALLICH. After tax.MR. RICE. So the danger is that by selecting alternative Awe run the risk that interest rates will have the effect ofeliminating even the possibility of that 1/2 percent growth that isprojected for 1981. I don't think we ought to do that and, therefore,I lean toward alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, briefly I'll make comments inthree areas. One, on the local situation, we get reports of very highlevels of activity across the border between the United States andMexico. Apparently that's still strengthening in just about allaspects, and it's presumed that both the legal and illegal traffic ismoving apace. Oil and gas activity, as you probably all know, iscontinuing to boom. And prices of both the rights to make holes inthe earth and of the equipment to do so are up sharply and continuingto rise rapidly, reflecting the views of the people who engage in thatactivity. An illustration of the kinds of distortion which governmentprograms can inject into an activity, with which we are all familiar,can be observed in the agricultural sector at the present time. Weare having very low production on land which has [been subject to] badweather this past summer; nevertheless, with the high prices, it wouldstill be economic to harvest the crop in that the market price wouldcover more than the harvesting cost. But if the crop is declared acomplete failure and not harvested at all, [farmers] will receive abit more income than they would if they went through the harvestingoperation. So we have some reduction in [potential farm] productionbecause the government disaster payments exceed the market value ofthe product.With respect to the general economic projections, I am lesscomfortable with them this time than I usually am. If my recollectionis correct, the current staff projections are about the same as thoseI reported when we had our round-up last July or August. And I canassure you that there is no basis for drawing any comfort in having aneconomic projection which is the same as the one that I may have made.With respect to progress on the economic and inflation fronts, as someof you know I have held the view for two, three years, that we're notgoing to handle this problem unless we develop some kind of machineryfor direct interference, particularly in the wage market. And it wasof interest to me that a locally domiciled airline, which isstruggling with a problem currently, has under serious negotiationswith its employees the possibility of a 10 percent pay cut. While Iwouldn't expect to see that sort of thing spread generally through theeconomy, it seems to me that we've got to find some machinery forbeginning to get those kinds of questions raised.-32-10/21/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the best news I've heard in a longtime, Ernie. I didn't know that. The last wage settlement I heard ofdown in your part of the country was a 60 percent increase for threeyears front-loaded.MR. PARTEE. Was that Reserve Bank employees?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was in the energy-related area.MR. BAUGHMAN. With respect to monetary policy, it seems tome that the Committee should go with alternative A. And bearing onthe comments with respect to our communications with the public onmonetary policy, it seems to me that we might buy a little in thatarea if we were to adopt the procedure of routinely moving the fundsrate range at a meeting so that it centers on the current funds rate,as compared with leaving a specified range stand for a long periodwith market developments at times making it bump against the bottom ofthe range and at other times making it nudge against the top. And Iwould not see such a change in what we report as necessarily providingany restraint on what we actually decide with respect to shaping andimplementing policy. That's all I have to say.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know that I haveanything to contribute on the economic outlook. I am not surprised atthe projection. As I view it, we have more or less established agovernor on the economy with our monetary aggregate ambitions and thecredit and interest rate implications that fall out. And if we have agovernor that limits the speed to 55 miles per hour for spending,well, we are not going to have more than 55 miles per hour spending.The question of how much head wind there is in the form of inflationis something that we all argue. I think wage costs, food costs, andenergy costs are pretty intractable and we'll have as much or close toas much inflation as the staff projects. But one could be moreoptimistic on that, as Bob is. However, the fact of the matter isthat if we get a little more housing, then we get a little lesssomething else in the existing environment, assuming we hold to ourassertions about monetary growth rates over the period.I do have a much stronger feeling about the shorter-runspecification of policy. I asked Steve where alternative C wasbecause it seemed to me that alternative A was totally out of the ballpark so one really needs to choose between alternative B, which [callsfor only 3-1/2 percent M-1A growth], and an alternative C which iseasier. The reason I say that is that I just don't think that one cansay to the economy at large--not the financial people or themonetarists but to the economy at large--that we are seeking, [as inalternative A], a 1-1/4 percent rate of growth in money supply over a3-month period in which we expect to have some continuation ofeconomic recovery. That just isn't the kind of number that one seeks,and it's way lower than anything I've seen. And 4 percent on M-1B isa very low rate, too, for the next three months. To get us down morecomfortably within the ranges, as alternative A would do, reallyimplies in the short run a policy which wouldn't be understood andwhich could very likely result in a second downturn, or at leastincrease its probability. I think it will occur anyhow, but that willincrease its probability. We faced a situation similar to this a year-33-10/21/80ago. We were running high in our target ranges. In fact, it lookedas if we weren't going to be within the target ranges. So what we didwas to specify, as Steve suggested at the end of his briefing [today]I think, that we would accept a rather moderate number or "somewhatless." And I think that's the way we ought to specify ouralternatives this time in terms of the 3-month [specifications].Going off from alternative B I find tolerable: The notion ofseeking a 4 percent rate of growth in M-1A or somewhat less, a 6percent rate of growth in M-1B or somewhat less, and a 7-1/2 percentrate of growth in M2 or somewhat less. I think we can take a littlechance on M2 because, as Lyle pointed out, we have been getting quitea lot of [slowing] in that rate of growth through the summer and earlyfall. I do think that we need to be even-handed about this and thatwe need to recognize that our mistakes always occur not because we are[slightly] off from modest numbers, but because we are way off frommodest numbers. And, therefore, I think the funds rate range shouldbe raised to 9 to 15 percent, which is in keeping with Ernie's thoughtthat we should center our range around where the rate is, and themidpoint of 9 to 15 would be 12. And I think we need to recognize thepossibility that if we have enough demand, we'll have to move againstit and the funds rate could indeed need to move up considerablybecause monetary growth is above [our specification]. But I justcan't accept the idea of saying to the public that we seek a monetarygrowth rate of 1 percent over the 3-month period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to thestaff's forecast of the outlook for economic activity, the only realdivergence I have is that I would suggest that the fourth quartermight be a bit stronger than they are projecting. In turning to thefinancial side, it seems to me equally that the Bluebook's forecast ofmoderate demand for money in the fourth quarter may be a bitoptimistic. Taking those two things together would suggest that wewill find considerably higher interest rates necessary to hit either"A" or "B." And it comes to my mind that the Fed's credibility may bemore suspect now than virtually any time in the future because we arethe only one out there that the public is looking to for any comfortthat prices will come down some time in the future. Thus, with theprospect of difficult times ahead, I don't think we should shirk theresponsibility. It seems to me that the nation would be well servedif we made a fairly strong public comment and commitment thatinflation is the number one problem. And we can do that in myjudgment only by adopting a policy at this meeting that is at least nomore expansive than "A." Let me suggest that if we adopt "B," forexample, we would be saying to the markets and the public--maybe 30days from now to be sure when they look at the record--that the Fedgave up in November the opportunity to come within the stated ranges.And I think that would be very unfortunate. I would focus on at leastalternative A. I think we are going to have difficulty hitting either[unintelligible]; it does imply higher interest rates. There has beensome comment about the 1980 recession and the fact that we got noprice improvement as a result of that recession. I'd like to pointout again that it was a very short recession. I don't think one couldexpect any price [improvement]. If we now shy away in monetary policyfrom the risk of having a recession or a double-dip, I think we areavoiding our responsibilities for the future. Lastly, if we adopt "B"-34-10/21/80or something to the right of "B," I think we would be making our taskfor 1981 impossible in the sense of trying to hit the targets we havealready announced. As a result, I would like to take the bite nowrather than some time later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I think that credibility is important not justbecause we like to use the word and like the ring of it, but becausewithout credibility in what we have announced we are going to do, weare going to have high interest rates. In other words, inflationaryexpectations [might be rekindled] because of the loss of credibilityin our October program and we'd have high interest rates andinflation. Now, let's go back just a second to October of last year.We adopted a policy at that time, based on a recognition thatinflation was generally at a much higher than tolerable rate in theview of the American people as well as in the view of the FederalReserve. We recognized then that in order ultimately to bring downinflation with the tools available to us we would try to reduce therate of money growth gradually over a period of four or five yearsuntil it was brought down to maybe a 2 or 3 percent rate. And that,in turn, we felt--and we announced--would have an effect in reducinginflation. At that time in 1979 money was growing at about 7 percentper year. We announced that our target for this year was 4 to 6-1/2percent, with some hope [that it would come in near the] midpoint atmaybe 5 to 5-1/2 percent. That was accepted with satisfaction by theCongress as well as the public. We have not succeeded. Even with themost restrictive policy from now until the end of the year, we willnot succeed in bringing that growth rate down much below the top ofour range, or to approximately 6-1/2 percent. Actually, M-1B, which Ithink is a good aggregate to use, has grown in the third quarter ofthis year at about a 13-1/2 percent rate. According to theprojections on page 6 of the Bluebook, under alternative A or B thestaff expects something like a 9 to 10 percent rate of growth in M-1Bfor the fourth quarter.Now, I am assuming that we don't want to abandon totally whatwe said we were going to do, which was to bring down the rate of moneygrowth gradually from 7 percent in 1979 to 6 percent, let's say, in1980, which would in turn imply 5 percent money growth in 1981. Butif we go from a 13-1/2 percent third-quarter rate to a 9 to 10 percentfourth-quarter rate and go to Congress and say we are going to shootfor a 5 percent rate of money growth in 1981, the only way we will beable to achieve that is by drastically reducing the rate of moneyexpansion starting in 1981 from the rate of growth in the last sixmonths of this year. That will most assuredly cause a seriousrecession. We've either got to bite this bullet now [or later]. Idon't like to use the word "politics" but I would rather dish out thebad medicine after the elections this year when everybody--or at leasthalf of the people--is in a euphoric mood for a couple of months thanwait until 1981 and face up to this very difficult task, which willnot be accepted by the general public too favorably. Therefore, Iwould [favor] neither alternative A nor alternative B--and I'm not amonetarist freak when I say this--because I think both of them imply[monetary] growth that is too fast. I would suggest that M-1B growth,and I'm only going to speak of M-1B, from September to December notexceed 2 percent. I would suggest that the growth from the thirdquarter to the fourth quarter in M-1B be 6-1/2 percent instead of the-35-10/21/809 to 10 percent figure that's shown here. I would suggest that therange for the federal funds be increased to have a top of 16 percent,because unquestionably this is going to drive up the federal fundsrate for at least a short period of time. If we don't do this, we aregoing to have to face up to it next year when I think the facing up toit will be even more difficult. If we don't do this, we are going tohave high interest rates as inflationary expectations continue. Ithink it's a very critical time for our credibility, and that's myrecipe.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. First, I have just a very brief comment on thebusiness outlook. On the West Coast we have had little evidence ofrecession except for the housing industry and auto purchases and soon. Given that this is the year of really cruel dilemmas, I wasparticularly interested in the views of two of our branch chairmen whohappen to run big lumber companies and another head office chairmanwho is a big operator in the construction business. Obviously, theyhave a direct interest in not seeing mortgage rates get so high thatthey cut off their own businesses. We had a pretty extensivediscussion of what the alternatives and the problems are.Interestingly enough, all three of these guys came out expressing theview that we are really faced with a dreadful set of choices: Eitherwe price people out of the housing market temporarily through higherinterest rates or, even worse, price them out of the market for thelonger run through inflation. And if their diagnosis is correct, theyare willing to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune asit were by seeing mortgage rates go up at the present time, hopefullyon a temporary basis, to get inflation under control.As far as the immediate economic outlook is concerned, ourstaff forecast doesn't differ too much from the Board staff's exceptthat we expect somewhat more growth in the months immediately ahead.All of us were surprised by the bounceback in real GNP in the thirdquarter; we underestimated that, and I'm hoping we may see somewhatmore GNP growth in the fourth quarter. But the differences betweenour staff views and those of the Board staff are not all that great.I am getting increasingly concerned that the economy has been subjectto some exogenous shocks that have the effect of increasing inflationexpectations--such things as the Middle East war and the talk comingfrom both parties about big tax cuts either before, or probably morelikely, after the election. As people think about the implications ofthat in terms of bigger budget deficits, I think that has had theeffect of increasing inflation expectations. My real fear is that ifwe should have a significant overshoot in our targets for this year,we ourselves will become a source of rising inflation expectations.Now, looking back over the year as a whole, I think we've haduntil recently at least a pretty credible record. That is to say theshortfall in money in the spring was one which we offset--in my viewquite properly, and I was in favor of doing it--by efforts to catchup. And through August I felt pretty comfortable about that becauseby August we had caught up and were roughly back in the middle of ourranges for the various Ms. I'm quite concerned, though, about whathas happened in September and October and whether we're building to anovershoot that we aren't planning on but which may occur in any event.At the last meeting I called attention to the fact that it is very-36-10/21/80troublesome, I'm sure, from the staff's point of view that for each ofthe months June, July, and August they initially had substantiallyunderestimated how much monetary growth there was going to be. I havethat same fear now about October. We have now had three estimates ofOctober monetary growth, and each one has been higher than thepreceding one. And I fear that before the month is over we may haveanother outcome like September, in which case there won't be any hopeof our coming even close to the upper end of our ranges. So, givenrecent economic developments that portend some rebound from therecession, which is the good news, and given the persistence of thebad news that there has been almost no measurable progress oninflation, I'd be inclined to tilt more toward combatting the latterproblem and would move toward alternative A. Indeed, I think there issome merit in the [unintelligible] inflation that some people havespoken of. So if there were an "A plus," that would be my choice.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Smoot.MR. SMOOT. Thank you. I'll be brief. Anecdotally, though Iheard your story about the shopping centers, Willis, my barber assuredme yesterday that people are getting fewer haircuts in reaction toinflation. I said it was just because I'm getting bald!I think as a group we have been somewhat surprised by thestrength in the economy and that has been reflected in the unexpectedstrength in the aggregates. The Bluebook provides policy alternativesthat are somewhat accommodative to those surprise events by proposingtwo alternatives, both being less restrictive than the path chosen bythis Committee last month. I think that's correct; [if not], then Iretract that. My impression looking at "A" is that we picked [agrowth rate of] something less than the top of the M-1B range lastmonth. I raise the point to question whether we are trying to lead orfollow here. And I would certainly urge that we attempt to lead,although I bear in mind the problems with monetary policy attemptingto do it all by itself. With regard to the forecast, the Greenbook ismore pessimistic than we would be on the economy and somewhat morepessimistic than other forecasts we have seen. This would cause me tobe somewhat concerned about our present view of the future and ourreaction to it. Further, if we are entering some kind of recovery, Isuspect that we have tended in the past to underestimate the growth ofthe economy in the early stages of recovery; and I throw that out as areason for being somewhat concerned. Given that, I would urge at aminimum alternative A, accepting the risk of higher interest rates.On the issue of credibility, I think it's important that we do all wecan to meet the M-1B target in the sense of staying within the range.I think changing the ranges because of technical factors, which wassuggested today as an alternative, would be a mistake. We tend toaccept what is given to us in the form of a lower M-1A but we're nothappy with or [don't] tend to accept M-1B when it drifts out of itsrange. So I would urge alternative A at a minimum.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. On the business outlook we don't have much to add.My staff is exuberant about the fact that they have done better forthe last two or three quarters forecasting the aggregate economicvariables, and they are saying that the quarter we are in now may be alittle stronger than the Board staff's forecast. In the Southeast we-37-10/21/80are finding a very mixed economic picture and some of the sameconcerns that others around the table have expressed about what wemight do to housing and whether or not new car sales will really go upand all that. But the new things that I would like to add to thediscussion that has occurred around the table so far involve not justhow our policy would be viewed by the public but how the public andthe financial community will perceive the government's overall policyactions. And what is happening on the fiscal front concerns me asmuch as what we are doing. Irrespective of the outcome of theelection, if I read it right, we are going to continue to see aboverange spending in the federal government; every revision of the levelof the federal deficit has been sharply up in recent months. We arenow looking at estimates for the deficit during this fiscal year ofperhaps $50 to $80 billion, after closing out last year somewhere inthe $60 to $70 billion range, without considering off-budget spending.So on the fiscal side, if we ask what we will be looking at six monthsfrom now, regardless of the outcome of the election, it appears to methat both sides are coming out with tax cuts. [So] that applies tothe outlook of the Board [staff] for the fiscal deficit irrespectiveof the outcome of the forthcoming election. That has to beconsidered.Everyone has mentioned that the outlook for shocks isparticularly scary right now, with a major war going on in the MiddleEast. So we are vulnerable there to inflationary pressures hitting usagain. And that brings us down to what we should do against thisbackground of vulnerability to shocks and the fiscal outlook. Myfeeling is that we have to be very concerned not to go through thesewild gyrations of monetary aggregate growth. I wouldn't want toadvocate that we sharply contract [such growth] in an effort to get itway down in the middle of the range because that will just encourageanother round of [unintelligible] that we will settle up with monetarypolicy. Rather I do think we have to temper our approach at this timeto try to hit--your commitment Paul, you were the one who said it lastOctober--these targets. We can't ignore the fact that regardless ofwhat we say and how we interpret the different variables to thepublic, they are going to make their own reading on it. What they aregoing to say is that either we did it or we didn't. In thatconnection, I feel somewhat like Mr. Mayo: Whether or not we arehappy about these things, the fact is that we are going to be measuredby them. So we may as well try to play to win, whether or not we likethe rules of the game. The only element that I would add [relates to]the letter you sent to us concerning how the public would interprethearing that we are reconsidering our operating procedures. If youthrow that into the pot, I think you are very right to be worriedabout how it would be interpreted, especially if we miss theaggregates. So with all of that taken together, I come out on the "A"side, with a lot of concern that we are not going to win either way wego on this. But "A" seems to be the one that gives us a chance atleast to maintain some element of our credibility on the October 6,1979 plan you announced.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a couple of quarters thathaven't been heard from. I don't know whether they want to be heardfrom or whether we should proceed.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I had hoped that the discussion was goingto help me some, but so far it hasn't! We are in a terrible dilemma-38-10/21/80and I would like to vote for "none of the above," but I don't have anygood alternatives to offer you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are permitted to be silent at thisstage.MR. SCHULTZ. You know that silence is not my nature!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying permanently. I said "atthis stage."MR. SCHULTZ. We have credibility problems on one side and onthe other side we have interest rates that I think are beginning tobite. I'm not sure how much we can do about monetary growth over thenext couple of months. As the Chairman says, [the outcome for thisyear] is probably already in the cake. And although I think the[economy's] momentum is rather strong and this fourth quarter might bea little better, [the economy] is very fragile; and if we run interestrates up too much, I see a real possibility that we will slip intoanother downturn. I don't think that would be very helpful nor is itthe kind of policy we want to carry out. It seems to me thatstability is pretty important but I hate to be slavishly chained toany kind of special numbers. So I really am having a very difficulttime. I would like to talk in such a way as to keep our credibility,which leads me to "A." And I'd like to act in such a way that wedon't let interest rates go up too high, which is equallyproblematical. So, we have a very difficult decision to make todayand I don't have a very good answer at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you, Governor. Does he speak foryou, Mr. Solomon?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. But let me follow up on whatFred said at the end. It seems to me that we ought to go for thetargets of alternative A but we ought to put the borrowing level closeto that of alternative B. I would suggest $1.3 billion. That canalways be reviewed later, but with a $1.3 billion [initial] borrowingassumption presumably we would not get any significant upward pressureon the fed funds rate if the other projections are correct. Now, bothalternatives may be completely unrealistic and we may just be sweptover by this situation. Taking these funds rate assumptions that areconsistent with the aggregates, it seems to me that we may pay someenormous costs if a month from now when the minutes of this meetingare published they show we targeted alternative B [growth rates] forSeptember to December, which clearly indicate mathematically that wehave given up on M-1B. Its growth would come in at 7 percent fourthquarter-over-fourth quarter, with the upper end of our range being6-1/2 percent. I think the public would not understand that. At thesame time, we are in this dilemma, and any significant rise ininterest rates right now would cause some proverbial problems to theeconomy. So my instinct is basically the same as Fred's, and I wouldreach toward a combination as I indicated.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a few comments. Wecertainly have some difference of opinion, which may not be fullyresolvable, but a certain number of truths keep repeating themselvesto me. Some have been mentioned and some may not have been. Thesetruths seem to me self evident. They may not seem self evident to-39-10/21/80everybody else around the table so I will repeat them. I think wehave to recognize, first of all, that there is a certain artificialityin talking about these targets, however much the market is preoccupiedwith them and however much we are preoccupied with them. We talkabout our credibility and that's important. But credibility over timehas to bear some relation to what is possible and what is desirable.And these targets were not exactly written in heaven. They werewritten by fallible people. And there are a lot of uncertainties inthe economy and a lot of changes occurring in it. I'd love to meetthese targets, but it is not absolutely the be all and end all ofexistence.Tony speaks about the public not understanding if we have--bysome complicated arithmetic, which I'm not sure they are capable ofdoing very well--[numbers that are] inconsistent by a half percent ofmeeting the target. My judgment is that they will understand one hellof a lot less if we broke our back to meet the target in the fourthquarter at the expense of a decline in the money supply by a rathersizable amount in the first quarter. We'd be sitting here with peoplesaying: Why did we have interest rates so high in the fourth quarterand now we are running way below the target in the first quarter andinterest rates are tumbling and we are in the midst of anotherrecession. I wouldn't like [it] either. I'd like to meet the targetsand not have the first-quarter experience. All I know, looking at thepast year, is that it isn't quite so simple to meet a target in anyparticular quarter and that an undue effort to meet a target in aparticular quarter, however important the target may be, isn't theonly thing that's important. There are some substantive problems thatI don't think we can completely solve by saying this is what we said,or more specifically, this is what I said 12 months ago. I think wehave to recognize--whether it's good strategy or bad strategy tochange the targets at this point and I would not at all suggest thatwe change the targets officially--Steve's point about the targets forM-1A and M-1B, which is that they are wrong. They are internallyinconsistent. That is the fact of the matter, which cannot be evaded.And in any public explanation of monetary policy and how we have metthese targets in the past year, I will say that because it happens tobe true. The M-1B [range for the year] is too low relative to [thatfor] M-1A. We thought there was going to be a 1/2 percentage pointdifference; there's a 2 percentage point difference. What we don'tknow is how much of that should come out of M-1A and how much shouldbe added on to M-1B. But we know roughly that the M-1A target is toohigh. If the central tendency of what we were aiming at a year ago isright, the M-1A target is too high and the M-1B target is too low.It's an arithmetic fact. We said they were going to be different by1/2 point and they are different by 2 percentage points.As a number of people have said, forecasts are uncertain.And we have not had a good forecast of the money supply, and I saythis with no criticism whatsoever. We haven't had an accurateforecast of the money supply on a monthly basis or a quarterly basis.We haven't had--really nobody has--an accurate forecast of the economyon a quarterly basis. When we sit here and guess about what willhappen to the money supply, a great deal depends on the relativeoptimism of the staff regarding the business forecast, which I thinkdoes imply at least a slight downturn in November or December. Thatmay or may not develop. A lot of people have suggested that there's achance [GNP growth] is going to be a little higher than the staff-40-10/21/80estimate--that's my own instinct--just from momentum. I'm not talkingabout anything big. And if we look at the direction of the errors inthe money supply estimates, well, maybe they are going to change.There's a good chance the money supply is going to come in higher thanthe staff estimate. But that's a gut instinct and not anything morethan that because basically it's a very uncertain proposition.If you look at the forecast for next year, I have theinstinct that it's improbable that the economy will be quite as stableas the staff suggests. But if I had to choose between whether it'sgoing to be stronger or weaker, I would be very uncertain. I wellunderstand why the staff ended up with a forecast of stability.Indeed, whether it's going to be stronger or weaker depends a lot uponwhat we are going to do this month, next month, or whenever. In thatsense, the decision we make today is very important. Unfortunately,the hard fact of the matter is that the decision we make today isn'tgoing to have much to do with what the money supply does between nowand next month or between now and the end of the year. I don't thinkwe have any experience that suggests the direction in which we try tomove things is terribly significant in the very short run. But it maybe very significant 2, 3, or 4 months from now. I just don't think wecan change that. That's the way the economy is built. We face asituation, given the October estimate--which should have a littlevalidity but which has been moving up, as John Balles says--in whichOctober is already higher than either of these paths. And to get downto "A" we'd have to have [an actual] decline, in M-1A anyway, fromhere on out. Whether that's achievable or not, I don't know. Itdepends in part upon whether the economy turns around as the staffsuggests it will.The next point I would make is that I think the instabilityin interest rates has become a problem. It has become a problem interms of real economic activity--I'm trying to abstract a little fromthe level of interest rates over a period of time--because the mereinstability of interest rates, to some considerable degree, I think,affects the housing industry and perhaps the car industry and otherareas of planning. If we could manage things so that in general weboth followed the targets and had less instability of interest rateswe would be better off, obviously. How to do that is the question.I would repeat the point about lags that I made earlier.There are limits to the effort that has to be made, given the relativeinelasticity of money supply in the short run, to change the trendover the next 2 months if the expense of that is changing the trend inmonths 3 and 4 by a much bigger amount in a direction we don't want tosee it go. And we don't know. We don't know those relationships verywell. I think we have to recognize that we're working in an area hereinvolving some ignorance. The difference between "A" and "B"--andhere is where the artificiality of some of this comes into play--isalmost negligible in terms of the actual reserve path exercise. Weare talking about a 2 percent difference in the growth path over theperiod to the next meeting, when we will look at them again anyway.That amounts to $60 million worth of reserves, which in the firstplace is within our range of error and is much smaller thanadjustments that we tend to make in the path between meetings in anyevent. So in that sense, if we just focus on those targets and weexpected that what we are going to do here is the only thing thatinfluences our actions, the difference between those targets we are-41-10/21/80talking about is trivial. I don't think our decisions are trivialbecause they affect more than next month; and we ought to bear in mindwhat the effect is likely to be not only next month or this quarter,but next quarter and make some judgment on those grounds.We are going to be controlled by what happens much more thanby a difference between "A" and "B." Last month is a perfect example.What happened last month? We had a great argument about whether themoney supply should be aligned, in terms of a target, 1 percent higheror lower. Within a week, as I remember, it was clear that the moneysupply figure was far above either of the targets. And we responded.I don't think the aggressiveness of that response would have been a$60 million difference--or I suppose in one sense $30 million--becausethere was only one difference in opinion. It was washed out in otherfactors. The fact is that the Committee in general recognized--therewas no disagreement, for instance, on the discount rate decision--that[the money supply] was going too high. And within the limits of humanjudgment we responded. I think it's more than likely that we willface that kind of question again this time.Now, whether we choose "A" or "B" biases things a bit, but Idon't think we ought to be overwhelmed by that particular difference.If I had to guess--and I suppose it's implicit in my remarks here onworrying about what's going to happen--I'd say the danger is that themoney supply is going to be too big and the economy is going to be alittle stronger. The growth in money is going to be too bigregardless of which of those targets we pick or if we choose somethingin between. Now, we still have to make a judgment about what we aregoing to do and reach some kind of consensus. In a sense the morerelevant issue substantively--not in terms of what somebody reads inthe directive a month from now, which I think is highly colored bywhat happens between now and a month from now--is what our intentionsare, or how we bias this in the future. That is only partiallyinfluenced by the choice of targets; it is more directly influenced bythe level of borrowings we set now and the speed of reaction to whatall experience shows is likely to be a change in the money supplyestimate, not within a 2 percent range but within a 6 percent or an 8percent range, either up or down. And that's where we have to make adecision.I would point out in just technically explaining what hashappened to the money supply during this year that we may have had oneof the biggest swings in the direction of economic activity in theshortest period of time that we have ever had. From March to July--I'm just guessing and not looking at the quarterly figures--I supposethe GNP was declining at an annual rate of something like 10 percentfor four months. It meant nominal GNP was virtually zero, looking atit on a monthly basis. Since then--I don't know what you would guess,Jerry--but I'd say it was going up 7 or 8 percent if one just lookedat August and September alone. So, getting into October we had aswing in the course of economic activity at an annual rate of 17percent. And since that is the major factor that affects the moneysupply in the short run, with stable interest rates anyway, looked atin that light it isn't totally incomprehensible as to why the moneysupply went through a swing of 17 or 18 percentage points at an annualrate. Now, I'm abstracting from some very big changes in interestrates, [whose effects involve] some lags, which is the point I thinkwe made to a considerable extent. That's why I think what happens to-42-10/21/80the money supply in the very short run is going to be largely governedby an uncertain business outlook as well as by all the randomdisturbances that enter in, as it always is.Let's look at where we come out. Right at this point do wewant to put considerable additional pressures on the market in theabsence of any further evidence that the money supply is off line ordo we not? That's the first decision, from my point of view, that hasto come out of this meeting. Secondly, I take it for granted that ifthe money supply is increasing more than, let's say, the "B" path--I'mnot suggesting necessarily that we take "B" at this point--but justgiven the random fluctuations in the money supply, if we get some moreupward revisions in the present estimates of the money supply, I wouldpersonally presume that we have to react. [The growth in money] isalready high; we are already above "B." If [money growth] in the nextfew weeks comes in still higher than we expect, that is consistentwith a reaction--from what most people have said, anyway. In generalterms of direction, I assume that there is a consensus on that point.If it comes in low--in that happy circumstance--I'm not sure there isa consensus. But Steve first, and others subsequently, commented onnot reacting too fast in an "easing" direction if the money supplycomes in low. I don't know whether I can take that as a given of ourdecision or not. I would personally accept that. And just to pindown the first point I made, I'm not sure I would come out of thismeeting with a strong conviction, based upon knowing nothing elseabout the money supply or the economy or anything else, that we shouldforce a significant change in the money market--in other words force asignificant change in the borrowing level. I'm not talking aboutfine-tuning here, but a really significant change.Now, I don't know whether there is a consensus on thosepoints or not. Point one is that we don't force a really major changenow and I'm not fine-tuning on that. [Point two is] that we certainlyreact if the money supply comes in above the current estimates thatthe staff has given us, which are already high compared to any ofthese [ranges] and that we don't react very fast if it comes in low.I'm speaking now in qualitative terms. If that's more or less anagreed framework--and I just raise that as a question--then we're leftwith what I see as the more trivial part of the decision, which hassome cosmetic importance, more cosmetic importance to some of you thanto others. I shouldn't downplay it as cosmetic. I realize it getsinto the so-called credibility problem and all the rest. Preciselywhere we put the forecast for the money supply, which is a figurewe're not going to affect very much in the next month anyway, is aquestion. Nonetheless, we have to put down a number at least in thedirective. I suppose after listening to all of this, I'd be perfectlyhappy to put that number between "A" and "B." So, let me hear yourreactions to all of that. And I suppose we need to make the borrowingnumber a little more concrete to give us some feeling of how fast weshould react if the number comes in high--I don't know that it's somuch a question of how fast, but how strongly--and the reverse if itcomes in low, as to how passive we should be in relieving theborrowing pressure on the market as some have suggested.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, following those comments, I'mattracted to Tony Solomon's proposal that we adopt the A alternativewith a borrowing level of about $1.3 billion. I would also suggest-43-10/21/80that we move the federal funds range to 9 to 15 percent, with somecaution as we go above 14 percent if that is indicated.MR. WALLICH. If we do that, aren't we saying "A," but doing"B" in effect? It seems very close to that because--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's just the opposite of what we did lasttime.MR. WALLICH. It's the borrowing level that really influencesmarket conditions and, therefore, eventually money.MR. GUFFEY. I'm picking up on the Chairman's comment that wenot move too quickly early in the period. I guess I've come to theconclusion that in this intermeeting period we are going to moveupward with interest rates. It's a question how quickly we do it.And I think we control that through the level of borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you've come to that conclusion--justto clarify your view--because your instinct is that the money supplyis going to come in high.MR. GUFFEY. I think that's correct.MR. PARTEE. It's already high relative to "A." Remember,M-1A is what has all the reserves on it. And we already have growthin October that looks to be above the number here. So, I think itjust means that the borrowing level will move up from $1.3 billion toa significantly higher number. And the result will be that [the fundsrate] will have to move up in its range. I agree with the 15 percentupper limit for that range; the question will soon be before us ofwhether 15 percent is too restrictive and whether the discount ratewill need to be increased another couple of points and so forth. Soit really biases [the outcome]--remember that we are going to berunning a path against whatever aggregates we choose--to take "A." Itmeans we are talking about a very tight policy consistent with asignificant degree of recession and no recovery.MR. GRAMLEY. I agree with Chuck. I don't think we can solvethis problem by just picking the level of borrowing. If we pickaggregates targets that are likely to be exceeded and the borrowingbegins to rise above the level [we chose], then interest rates aregoing to go way up. And then I think we will be in very great dangerof precisely the circumstances Chuck is talking about--generatinganother recession.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I mean to say by the differencebetween "A" and "B" is that the money supply--my own feeling and maybeI'm wrong--is [likely] to come in high; it's unlikely to come inbetween "A" and "B," just by the law of averages.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. But your guess is that it probably willcome up to the level of "B" and maybe run over.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MR. GRAMLEY. That's what worries me, too. And I think whatwe ought to try to do is find a strategy. I don't mind if we don't-44-10/21/80react on the down side. If the money supply falls a bit short, that'sall right. I wouldn't want to react in a downward direction oninterest rates. But I certainly don't want to react strongly in thedirection of much higher interest rates, if in fact the aggregates runover for a 2-month period. And I think they might.MS. TEETERS. Isn't the point about lags relevant here? Whatwe do with interest rates over these next couple of months will impactthe first quarter. And certainly the forecast for real GNP in thefirst quarter is weak enough that if we raise interest rates in thenext couple of months, we won't [reach] that forecast of real GNP; itwill be much weaker than that. So instead of trying to figure outwhat the money supply is going to be for the next two months, I'drather look at the first quarter. And I don't think we need a rise ininterest rates with the impact going over into the first quarter.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to speak for the oppositeposition. In picking $1.3 billion [in borrowing] you're contemplatingthat we would start out with about a 12-1/2 percent funds rate. Therate has been there for a month, roughly, despite the fact that theearly October money supply numbers have come in very strong, strongerthan we expected. It seems to me that what has happened to the moneysupply in October calls for some response on our part. So I wouldadvocate a level of borrowing compatible with a 13 percent funds rateas a minimum move. We don't have much time left in this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's for sure.MR. MORRIS. And, therefore, I don't think we should waste aweek or two when we have so [few] weeks left to operate.MR. PARTEE. In terms of quarterly averages, the year isalmost over.MR. WALLICH. If we look at the averages, we have to look notonly at what is happening now but what has gone on before. When welook at a 6-month period, the third and fourth quarters, we will havehad a very strong rise. I don't think one should say the thirdquarter is over, we're now looking at the fourth quarter only, and wecan't accept a risk of near zero on M-1A. We have to merge the twoperiods. But I do share the view that we need not focus too closelyon what happens between now and the end of the year on the aggregates.We really ought to look further ahead in order to get a reasonableperiod over which these things evolve. What matters to me mostly isthe stance with respect to the real sector in that we have a veryinflationary situation. Several people have pointed to possibleshocks that we might get from oil and other sources. And we haven'trun any of that out. I'm not arguing for a recession, but I think wehave to restrain this economy a little longer.MS. TEETERS. Steve, can you pinpoint a federal funds ratewith a level of borrowing?MR. AXILROD. Well, [the relationship] has been a bit shaky.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Pinpoint" isn't exactly the word he woulduse!-45-10/21/80MS. TEETERS. But that's what we're talking about--how we doit in--MR. AXILROD. We have had a level of borrowing in the lasttwo weeks of $1.1 and $1.2 billion [respectively], with the funds rateright around 12-5/8 percent. So, I'd say it isn't unreasonable tothink of $1-1/4 billion with a funds rate around 12-1/2 percent. Inthe previous two weeks we had a much higher level of borrowings and amuch lower level of the funds rate. That was around quarter-end. Butalso in that period very large banks were much heavier borrowers thanthey have been recently. In the last two weeks of September, largebanks borrowed 45 percent of the total borrowing and in the recent twoweeks they have borrowed 25 percent of the total borrowing. And whenthere are large borrowers, I think it takes a little pressure off thefunds rate; when they are not [in], it puts some pressure on the fundsrate. That's my view in any event. So a lot depends on which banksdecide it is their turn to borrow. I would say that a 12-1/2 percentfunds rate and $1-1/4 billion in borrowing isn't unreasonable to thinkabout, but I'm uneasy because I can't quite tell which banks are goingto decide to borrow or not to borrow.MS. TEETERS. But our determining the level of borrowingdoesn't automatically determine the funds rate.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right, not precisely; but there iscertainly a reasonable band. In interpreting the demand for borrowingwe certainly interpret the discussion of the Committee as well.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to repeat something Isaid earlier. I don't think it matters a great deal here in terms ofeither "A" or "B." When we talk about all the dangers and risks thatare out there, what still bothers me is that the biggest danger isthat if we get another month or two of money growth rates like theones we've had over the past three or four months, then all thosedangers we're talking about are going to materialize anyway. We'regoing to have higher interest rates. Indeed, I think we'll have theinstabilities of interest rates that you spoke of. We'll go into 1981on a growth plane in money that will give us a more difficult problemthen. I could easily live with "A" or "B," but I personally wouldlike to see the directive couched in terms that forcefully get acrossthe point that if we continue to get this cumulation of errors on theplus side, a [tightening] movement would be [warranted] because ifthat happens, we're going to have to do it anyway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that's quite clear.MR. PARTEE. I don't disagree with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's hard to disagree with that. If weget more indications of this excessive [money] growth, we're going toreact.MR. ROOS. That approach seems totally illogical to me, Mr.Chairman, because we say that there's very little we can do to affectthe rate of money growth right now and yet we say if something happensa few weeks from now, then we'll try to do something that will affectit, even though we can't affect it now. I don't think that makes muchsense, if I understand what people are saying. If we really want to-46-10/21/80do something about controlling the rate of money growth in the longpull, I don't think it's as complex [an undertaking] as we're makingit when we talk about borrowings and all of this. We are creating aterribly complex, complicated, and unworkable process of getting fromhere to there. We're never going to get the job done doing it thatway.MR. MAYO. It isn't a simple world.MR. GRAMLEY. It seems to me, though, that the issue we'retalking about on monetary control is not whether it can be done butover what time period. When one looks at what has been happening tothe narrow money supply, it went up 19 percent in August, 12 percentin September, and is projected to rise 4 percent in October. And thetwo alternatives we have [in the Bluebook] range from growth of minus1/4 of 1 percent to 3 percent. How dramatic a slowdown could youpossibly want? Why do we want to try to force all of the adjustmentsto what has gone wrong over the whole year 1980 to date into theselast two months? It seems to me that we would want to start a courseof policy that will bring us moderate growth rates over the next year,the next 18 months, the next two years. I just can't see trying tomake up for past mistakes in a two-month period.MR. ROOS. But, Lyle, hasn't that been where we've missed theboat for almost the last five years? As recovery has begun to occur,haven't we always said: Let's just look in the next 30 or 60 days andlet's not rock the boat because we might abort the recovery? Haven'twe procrastinated in taking any meaningful action so that in theaggregate what we've tolerated has led to this present recession?I've seen [that happen] ever since I've been on this Committee,whether we were trying to stabilize interest rates or were doing itthis way. We always have some fear that something negative is goingto happen to the economy. And almost inevitably we've had two[results]: We've been surprised at the resilience of the economy andwe've also failed miserably to do anything about inflation.MR. GRAMLEY. But, Larry, if you remember back just sixmonths ago, the shoe was on the other foot. The money supply wasdropping like a rock and you weren't saying let's not worry about it.We're always too much concerned about interest rates being too highand having negative effects on the economy. You were saying let's seehow much reserves we can dump in to get money growth this quarter inthe immediate future. I think that's one of the reasons we're payingfor it now. We just let interest rates drop too far last spring. Wegot the economy turned around too fast. We should have thought thenthat we needed to play for the longer pull not for next month or thenext quarter. And that's the advice we need now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're right; we made that error. Inpart we made that error not only because of ideology but because ofthe economic forecast. Nobody expected this early bottoming out ofthe recession. We may have had a causal impact on the earlierbottoming out of the recession by letting interest rates drop tooquickly. I agree with you that we were letting them drop too fast.MR. MORRIS. Why was that an error if we mitigated the extentof the recession? I don't think it was an error at all.-47-10/21/80MR. WALLICH. We aborted the recession.MS. TEETERS. We're going to abort the recovery, too.MR. MORRIS. If your objective was a 9 percent unemploymentrate, we made an error. But I don't see--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We miscalculated, though. If we hadknown that the economy would turn up in the third quarter, I don'tthink we would have pumped in reserves as much as we did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But suppose you argue that that was justthe right course. I think you can also argue that that's why themoney supply is rising so fast now. So don't be so worried about itif that was the right course, because now you have to worry about what[the money supply] is going to be in the first quarter.MR. MORRIS. Well, there's some logic to your [suggestion];I'm not saying it's completely illogical. But you talked aboutreacting if the aggregates come in high. I'm saying they have come inhigh in early October and we have not reacted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we haven't reacted in the last twoweeks. We've had quite a lot of reaction since the last meeting. AndI think the first question is: Do we want to react right now? That'sa reasonable question. I would say no, but that is the first questionto be decided, it seems to me. When I say no, I mean not reactdramatically; I think $1.3 billion or something like that may mean aslightly higher federal funds rate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think one thing we have to bear inmind is that none of us really has any confidence in the forecast. Itcould come in at that level or it could come in much higher or muchlower. Al Wojnilower in New York is saying it's going to be astronger recovery [than generally forecast]. Other people are talkingabout the double-dip. The forecasts are all over the lot. Underthose circumstances, it seems to me that we have to start off fairlycautiously in terms of not wanting to see any major movement ofinterest rates. But I do think we have the credibility problem; Paulobviously feels that I may be exaggerating it. But I am concernedabout a September-to-December intermediate target that would make usopen to the charge that we actually targeted growth fourth quarter-over-fourth quarter that is higher than our target range. It seems tome that in this very unsatisfactory situation there is no good answerand we should compromise because I agree with Paul that thedifferences between "A" and "B" are not that significant. I thinkthey have a public relations importance. The difference between$1-1/4 billion and $1-1/2 billion initial borrowing is not [much] moreimportant than the $60 million reserve difference between the "A" and"B" [alternatives]. I think there has to be a mix, and I've made aspecific suggestion. I don't know what alternative specificsuggestions there are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a specific suggestion. Idon't know if there is any argument about the funds rate; I don'tthink it's terribly critical. We can change that, but a range of 9 to15 percent has been suggested by a couple of people. I'll pick up theborrowing at $1.3 billion--that's Tony's suggestion--which I think-48-10/21/80implies a tendency toward a tighter market. It is not a dramaticchange, but it tends in that direction. And, just in the interest ofachieving a compromise, I'd split [the difference between] "A" and"B." We have to get a majority vote for something. Have I left avariable out? I know the qualitative variable is [how quickly wereact]. This wouldn't go in the directive, but the implication isthat if we get surprised on the high side--I'll call it a surprise--ofthe current money supply projections, we're going to be reacting aboutas soon as we know that [the aberration is] significant.MR. BLACK. By changing the nonborrowed reserve path orborrowings?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would permit the level of borrowings togo up automatically in the first instance and would begin thinkingabout changing the nonborrowed reserve path. If we change that, it'slikely to be by an amount that is bigger than the difference between"A" and "B." It always is.MS. TEETERS. How much higher do you think $1.3 billion ofborrowing would put the funds rate? Somewhere between 12-1/2 and 13percent?MR. AXILROD. Again, if large banks suddenly decided toborrow, I'd say it could be [higher]. Ordinarily--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the best guess is between 12-1/2and 13 percent, but it could conceivably go above 13 percent in someweeks depending upon the distribution.MR. PARTEE. That $60 million figure you've been using, Paul,that's for one month?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's only for one month.MR. MORRIS. Wouldn't it be a little more scientific, Paul,for the Committee instead of setting a borrowing level--we're notreally concerned about the borrowing level per se--to establish aninitial funds rate for the period? Why not express it that way?MR. GRAMLEY. It's not just the initial funds rate. It's thefunds rate [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, all this revolves around someconcern, which some people have anyway, about interest rates. But Ithink we really are saying something different if we set a specificfunds rate objective. We just said vaguely between 12-1/2 to 13percent; it could be above 13 percent in some weeks. That's a littledifferent in terms of the way Peter is going to react. If we say thefunds rate should be 12-3/4 percent, he's going to be fiddling aroundin order to make it 12-3/4 percent or as close to it as he can, Isuspect. I think that's a real difference in methods of operation.MR. SCHULTZ. I don't want to do that.MR. RICE. If we split [the difference between] "A" and "B,"would that imply changing the stated targets?-49-10/21/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What targets?MR. RICE. Monetary growth targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the year?MR. RICE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm assuming we are not going toannounce any change in the targets. But I've already said that I haveto testify in three weeks and I assure you that I'm going to say inexplanation--what else can I say?--that we had a target that assumed adifference of 1/2 percentage point between M-1A and M-1B and, in fact,it has been running 2 percentage points. After all, they can see thatby looking at the chart. We got more inflows to NOW and ATS accountsthan we had estimated. Part of that came out of savings or otherinstruments and part of it, presumably, came out of M-1A. We don'tknow how much came out of M-1A; we don't know how much came out ofother instruments. But the M-1B range is obviously a little low andjust on technical grounds--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're going to say that all thesebanking structural reforms that I recommended have complicated--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've already told them that. Now we'regiving them a specific example. It doesn't imply anything for policybut it does explain a bit why we're high on M-1A. What it's going toshow is that we're high both in the M-1A range and in the M-1B rangecorrectly interpreted. If the money supply comes in high, we're goingto be outside the ranges.MR. GRAMLEY. There isn't any real likelihood that [M-1B]fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter is going to exceed the stated range.MR. PARTEE. Well, he means adjusted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but if one correctly interpreted it,there's a possibility, I think.MR. PARTEE. It'll be high in the range. One way to look atit is that we'd be in the upper half of both the M-1A and the M-1Badjusted [ranges].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd be very close to--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We should really go back to anaverage of the two M1 measures.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we've always done that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's essentially what we are after.MR. PARTEE. I can't understand what has happened to M-1A. Iwasn't aware that Larry, for example, had shifted from M-1A to M-1Buntil right now. I can only conclude that it's because it's a highernumber and that therefore he's really not a monetarist but adeflationist.-50-10/21/80MR. ROOS. I just want you guys to know that the Chairmancan't starve me into submission!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will rest on a simple statistical factthat while these targets may be the most wonderful, impregnable thingsin the world, they are mutually inconsistent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, in your November testimony, ifyou are going to hammer that point--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't say "hammer;" I said "say."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think you're going to have tohammer it in for defense if for no other reason. And maybe you oughtto indicate to the [Congressional] Committee that the reformulation ofthe '81 targets will have to be much more explicit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will certainly indicate that. Wealready tried [not to be explicit] when we announced thempreliminarily. But somebody reported to me that that was promptlyinterpreted as an easing of the M-1B target when we said in threedifferent ways that it wasn't.MR. SCHULTZ. I hope you will also hammer in or fight againstany move to narrow the target ranges. Heaven knows that we ought tohave learned that we really don't know that much about the[relationships among the aggregates] at this time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The general impression that emerges to meis that [growth is] high in these target ranges. Whether we're alittle over or just within them, the fact is that on a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter basis, whatever we say, we're on the high side andnot the low side. I also hope that these things don't go wild in thenext couple of months and that we don't have to say we missed them alland that they are all out of the ranges.MR. MORRIS. That's the danger of talking about adjustments.Then we might be in a position where we have missed them all,adjusted, whereas at least this way we have one--MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] M-1A.MS. TEETERS. We have M3.MR. PARTEE. And M2 has been showing some life lately.MR. SCHULTZ. We'll go to L!MR. PARTEE. Some people think we already have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we take the midpoints of the twoalternatives, just arithmetically we come out with a 1/8 for M2--[7-3/8 percent]. So, [rounding for M2] we're talking about 2-1/2, 5,and 7-1/2 percent; or we could make M2 7-1/4 percent if you want tocompromise it that way. There isn't much difference between the twoM2 figures.-51-10/21/80MR. MORRIS. But we'd still have Tony's problem, Paul, thatwe would be describing a growth path for M-1B that would be outsidethe upper limits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, technically, people can't tell thatbecause it depends upon the path within the quarter. If somebodyassumes it's a straight line, that is right. The proposal that Imade, [given] the present M-1B target, would [imply that as] we sathere in October and looked at November we'd be 1/4 percentage pointabove the range. I don't think there's quite as much importance tothat as [there is to the likelihood] that the market is going toattach great importance to the fact that we chose a target that was 6percent or whatever it is, 6-1/2 percent as opposed to 6-3/4 percentfor the year as a whole. I don't think it's the easiest piece ofarithmetic in the world, but if that cosmetic is--MR. GUFFEY. The difference may not be so important today.But as we move into the first quarter of 1981 if we stick with thetargets already announced, we're making up not only the reduction thatwe're proposing for 1981, but the 1/4 or 1/2 percentage point that wemissed before. And it just worsens the problem if we're focusing onM-1B, for example.MR. PARTEE. I don't think that's technically true. Itdepends on the profile of the months. Now, if you're talking about adecline in the rate of increase so that we don't have that high of aquarterly average--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is that we know the marketfocuses on M-1B. I think that's unfortunate because M-1B is no betterthan M-1A. They're both bad. I suppose one answer would be just [forthe sake] of debate that we have a target for M-1A that is below themidpoint. I think that's arithmetically right, isn't it?MR. AXILROD. [Unintelligible] that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The [M-1A] number in "B" is at themidpoint. So if it came in below "B," it would be below the midpointfor M-1A.MR. AXILROD. These are tenths in all cases.MS. TEETERS. We're literally arguing over tenths. And thatseems ridiculous when we have such a short period of time left.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree; I won't argue. I wouldn'tdissent from your proposal, Paul. It's sufficiently balanced and itmeets the needs.MR. PARTEE. I would buy it reluctantly, too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's [see whether we have aconsensus]. Just to repeat: We have 9 to 15 percent for fed funds, asmall increase in the borrowing level initially and we have 2-1/2, 5,and 7-1/4 percent, just rounding these numbers, for M-1A, M-1B, andM2.MR. ALTMANN. And "about"?-52-10/21/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the directive we'd pick up thatlanguage that we used a year ago of "or somewhat less."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And you'd move the fed funds range to9 to 15 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, 9 to 15 percent on the fed fundsrate.MS. TEETERS. With borrowing of about $1.3 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Initially.MR. GRAMLEY. How would the Desk react if in fact we getgrowth in the monetary aggregates a little above the alternative Bpath or clearly above the alternative A minus that we're talking abouthere?MR. STERNLIGHT. If the Committee votes for this, we willhave a path that's based on these aggregates, and the nonborrowed path[will be constructed] using that borrowing assumption. If theaggregates come out at "B" or a little above, then presumably thedemand for reserves is going to be a little higher than we'retargeting and we will just stick with the nonborrowed path, so theimplied borrowing level would come out somewhat higher than this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it literally came out along the "B"path or a little higher, so long as that persisted the borrowinglevels would be edging up. But I would describe it as an edging uprather than a dramatic change. If it came in way above [$1.3billion], then we would have a different situation.MR. BLACK. But you would not lower the nonborrowed targetunder that?MR. STERNLIGHT. We have not typically done that unless we'reconsiderably above [the path]. When it was running $300 or $400 or$500 million above last month, yes, we did make adjustments then. Butat $100 million above, we wouldn't be inclined to make such anadjustment.MR. FORD. There are two other dimensions to what you'rediscussing on borrowed reserves. One is that on Friday, if the ratesdon't break this week, I suspect you're going to get a number ofReserve Banks recommending an increase in the discount rate, whichwould obviously affect the borrowings. The other thing is that we putout a revision in Regulation A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It won't affect the borrowings.MR. PARTEE. The borrowings are set.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll discuss that later.MR. FORD. We have a revision of Reg A which, if I've read itright--and depending on how the different discount officers interpretit--calls for a tighter policy in regulating borrowing by the bigbanks, the issue that Steve just talked about. So we have to [factor]-53-10/21/80into our thinking at least whether we're going to raise the discountrate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not aware of that. But I wouldinterpret a discount rate change as a rather forceful move, which I'mnot talking about taking immediately. But we can't exclude it if thisreally comes in high over the course of the next couple of weeks.MR. FORD. So you don't think the Board is likely to move[the discount rate] on Friday?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, not based upon this decision, withouta radically different money supply figure or something.MR. PARTEE. The Board would have to discuss it at itsmeeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's just a personal remark. Well,unless somebody has a--MR. SCHULTZ. Let's vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --further brainstorm, let me just seetentatively whether, as I take it, this attracts some support giventhe difficulties. I'm sure it doesn't please anybody perfectly.MR. PARTEE. It's strictly a live-with kind of thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. Under the circumstances, Ithink "live-with" is about the best we can do until November 18th.MR. BALLES. What was your federal funds range, Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nine to 15 percent, which just raises it apercentage point, doesn't it?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall we vote?MR. PARTEE. You wouldn't like to see a show of hands first?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can see initially with a show of hands.How many of the Committee members find this broadly reasonable?MR. SCHULTZ. It's the only way we can do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I'm forced to ask what else isbroadly reasonable.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, you have enough [votes]. Roger Guffeyvoted yes. He had a pencil up, but he did have [his hand] up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My sense is that I do not know of anyother approach that's more broadly reasonable, so we might as wellvote. I haven't heard any alternative that's likely to attract moresupport.-54-10/21/80MR. SCHULTZ. No, I think under the circumstances you'reprobably lucky to get 8 votes for anything. It's all smelly; it's alltough. It's just a question of what one is willing to live with. Ithink that's absolutely right.MR. WALLICH. Well, I'm less concerned about the money supplytargets than about the borrowing level. I said previously that onecan do one thing and say the other, and I'm perfectly willing tocompromise along those lines. But in terms of the market, I think theinterest rate is the crucial thing now.MR. PARTEE. Well, $1.3 billion [in borrowing] is above whatit has been running.MR. WALLICH. It's just that I don't believe the presentsituation is consistent with severely negative real rates after tax.We're going to have an inflationary--MR. PARTEE. You want higher interest rates. I see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To get [positive] real rates after tax,Governor Wallich, we'd need a 21 percent long-term bond rate.MR. WALLICH. Some people don't pay taxes and some peopletake the standard deduction. So this doesn't go across the board, butthere has to be some allowance for taxes.MR. SCHULTZ. Governor Wallich, I would tell you that if youtalk to people out in the business world, there are already some realscreams of pain. We are already flagellating them, but I think youwant to crucify them.MR. WALLICH. I think you're looking [at this situation] withan assumption that there is a painless solution.MR. SCHULTZ. Oh no, no.MR. WALLICH. And the only painless solution is moreinflation.MR. SCHULTZ. No, I agree that there's no painless solution.But there's already some pain out there.MR. PARTEE. Henry would argue that they really don't knowwhat pain is yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you talking about on theborrowing level?MR. WALLICH. I'd go with alternative A, $1.5 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's $200 million [more]. I don't sensethat that proposal is going to have more support than this one. And Ithink we better vote.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon Yes-55-10/21/80Governor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Morris NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos NoGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoPresident Winn NoIt's 8 for and 4 against.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Do we have a Board meeting now?SPEAKER(?). Yes, we have lunch and then the Board meeting.END OF MEETING-56-