TRANSCRIPTFEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETINGJuly 9, 1980Prefatory NoteThis transcript has been produced from the original rawtranscript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat haslightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding.Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription,the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances,words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought orto correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement.Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fullyedited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it wasintended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record ofthe Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not beenreviewed by present or past members of the Committee.Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader'sunderstanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount ofconfidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses,and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages areindicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manneris exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedomof Information Act.Staff Statements Appended to the TranscriptMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign OperationsMr. Meek, Monetary Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMr. Kichline, Associate EconomistMr. Zeisel, Associate EconomistMr. Axilrod, EconomistMeeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 9, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee washeld in the offices of the Board of Governors of the FederalReserve System in Washington, D. C., on Wednesday, July 9,1980, at 9:15 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMr. SolomonMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo,Alternate Members of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMr. Black, President of the Federal ReserveBank of RichmondMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Altmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselMannion, Assistant General CounselAxilrod, EconomistHolmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis,Keir, Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel,Associate EconomistsMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account7/9/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board ofGovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Boardof GovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Divisionof International Finance, Board ofGovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMrs. Scanlon, Economist, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board ofGovernors 1/Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Czerwinski, Forrestal, Gainor,and Monhollon, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of KansasCity, Atlanta, Minneapolis, andRichmond, respectivelyMessrs. Brandt, Burns, Corrigan, Danforth,Fousek, Keran, Parthemos, and Scheld,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Atlanta, Dallas, New York,Minneapolis, New York, San Francisco,Richmond, and Chicago, respectivelyMr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. McNees, Mullineaux, and Ms. Nichols,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Boston, Philadelphia, and Chicago,respectivelyMs. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer,Federal Reserve Bank of New York1/ Entered the meeting following the ratification of Systemopen market transactions in Government securities, agencyobligations and bankers acceptances.-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 9, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may have a long day ahead of us. If wedon't use it all up with the Open Market Committee meeting, we'll useit up [discussing] monetary reform legislation. With that in mind, wewill have lunch around the table in a convivial atmosphere. I am toldthat people worry about food and drinks being spilled on the rug.We'll see whether we can have lunch in the august Board of Governorsmeeting room without spilling anything on the rug; if we do spill, wewon't be able to have lunch around the table again.MR. SCHULTZ. Either that or the Governors can't have [arug]; it's one of the two.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd like to welcome Governor Gramleyofficially to this august body in a new guise. He is completelyunfamiliar with the table; I believe we literally have a new tablesince you were last here. So we welcome you to the table literallyand figuratively.MR. GRAMLEY. Thank you very much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have several First Vice Presidents withus today because of the absence--for various reasons--of some of thePresidents, and we welcome you. I don't think we have anything elseof that order of business, Mr. Altmann. We need to approve theminutes then.MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I hear a second? Without objectionthe minutes are approved.MR. SCHULTZ. That's the same problem I have in the Boardmeetings!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Pardee.MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, I think it's worthemphasizing one point, which is that the reluctance of the Bundesbankto intervene directly in support of the dollar on as large a scale inthe last few days--which means depressing the D-mark--is [related to]the fact that they are at the bottom of the EMS. So there is thiscontradiction and dilemma for them. Basically, cooperation with themon intervention had been very good,But they have this dilemma, andthey are very, very aware of it.MR. WALLICH. They also seem to take the attitude that if weare going to allow the funds rate to move sharply in response toreserve-based techniques, they logically should let the dollar raterespond more. I don't think we should accept that argument. Onecould argue just the other way: That precisely because it isnecessary for us to tolerate wider fluctuations in the funds rate, wewant to make a greater effort to avoid repercussions on the dollar7/9/80rate. We have to try to persuade them of that; they don't accept thatnow.MS. TEETERS. In November of 1978 we put together a $28billion emergency package. Is that still in existence?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, we didn't have $28 billion,Nancy. We would have had $30 billion, but that included $10 billionof Carter notes. Of the $10 billion of Carter notes, we actuallyended up selling--I don't remember the exact figure.MR. PARDEE. About $6.5 billion.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(?). We still have [our holdings of]Swiss francs pretty much intact; but Treasury balances ofDeutschemarks, where the pressure is, are [nearly] depleted. Theyhave ended up, in a sense, more in a hole than we are. If you compareour swap drawing with their using up the balances--they owe that moneyfor a longer term--they're in the hole by about $3 or $4 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When are those first Carter bonds due?MR. TRUMAN. Not until September of next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a little more than a year away.MR. PARTEE. Well, we must have most of the $20 billion.MS. TEETERS. How much did we have and how much do we haveleft?MR. PARDEE. We have about $2 billion left.MR. TRUMAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That $30 billion was theoretical in thefirst place.MS. TEETERS. What did we actually have out of the $30billion?MR. TRUMAN. Treasury balances are $2+ billion in marks, notincluding their swap balances, and $1.2 billion in Swiss francs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do we have left in the swaps now?MR. TRUMAN. In the swaps? They've only used about $1billion, so we have about $6 billion left.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One billion out of how much that we havein Germany?MR. PARDEE. We've used $1.1 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And what's the limit with Germany now, $6billion?MR. PARDEE. Six billion.7/9/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, it's $9 billion.MR. PARDEE. The swap line is $6 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's $6 billion, and the Treasury has $1billion.MR. PARDEE. The Treasury considers itself short right nowunder the Carter notes by over $3-1/2 billion, [so] we are in a hole.MS. TEETERS. I don't think I got an answer to my question.MR. PARDEE. The answer to your question is that we can getmore resources at some stage if the Treasury wants to go back andnegotiate a new Carter note.MS. TEETERS. All right, but that doesn't tell me how much--MR. PARDEE. The man who negotiated the last Carter notes issitting next to you. He's not at the Treasury now.MS. TEETERS. How much did we actually draw in November of[1978]?MR. TRUMAN. Governor Teeters, of the $30 billion, we have$20 billion worth of resources [in] notes [and] currencies nowavailable. And there's a net plus, in some sense, in the unusedportion of the $10 billion Carter notes, which in round numbers is $4billion. That's the answer, I think, to the question you asked.MS. TEETERS. Okay, thank you.MR. SCHULTZ. How much of the Carter notes come due a yearfrom September?MR. TRUMAN. A year from September only one comes due andthere's another one [due] in December. I think the total amount isabout $1.5 billion.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but then they start coming dueabout every 6 months for about 2 more years, Fred, because Ioriginally put them out with 3- and 4-year maturities. Then we hadscheduled them at 3-1/2, 4-1/2 and 2-1/2 and 3-1/2. So a whole seriesis coming due. The question of availability depends on how we look atour debt. Looking at it very short term and ignoring the fact that weowe this money and are going to have to get it somewhere else lateron, we still basically have sufficient resources. We have quite a fewbillion dollars, although in previous periods when the dollar cameunder heavy pressure we spent as much as $5 billion a month [inintervention]. This problem is getting more and more serious, and Ithink in our considerations of domestic policy we probably have to bea little more sensitive to it than we have been in the last fewmonths.MR. WALLICH. Even if we are able to repay, which I hope wewill be, we won't really be getting out of debt. We'd be substitutingdollar debt for D-mark debt, which is an advantage. But that's reallythe best way to look [at it] until our current account improves.7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our current account, of course, looksrelatively good compared to other countries' current accounts. Inround numbers, the deficits are $12 to $15 billion in Germany, $15billion or more in Japan, and $5 billion in France. There's a smalldeficit in the United Kingdom, despite their oil, whereas ourprojections are for close to balance this year and a surplus nextyear. Some people [expect] a surplus this year. If one just looks atcurrent accounts, we don't look too bad; in fact, we look very good.But people obviously are looking at other things, too. Of course,it's affected by the recession.MR. WALLICH. What about recession?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think a major question is whether orwhen we can expect some interest rate declines in the rest of theworld. [Foreign officials] are a little ambivalent about it. They'rein the same position we are. They want to maintain this psychologicalposture of getting on top of inflation and not appearing to yield toit. And they haven't had much improvement on the inflation front,although in some countries they've had a little. On the other hand,they're becoming a little worried about a business slowdown andperhaps a world recession and [there is] some sentiment that easingmight be a good idea. But nobody wants to be first. Nobody wants toshow the white flag on the inflation front. So they're quiteambivalent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But [I'd point out] one thing. Iassume the members of this group are aware that there is one quasi-phony component in our current account calculation. We are figuringin for 1980 $40 billion of services income from abroad. In practice,we are only going to get about half of that because we are counting asservices income for the United States all profits earned abroad byAmerican companies, even if those profits are reinvested abroad.Therefore, in terms of what crosses the exchanges, we still need about$20 billion of capital income to validate a so-called equilibriumcurrent account. I think I've made my point clear. If I haven't--MR. PARTEE. Is this unique to us?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Other countries don't do it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the other countries don't do it.MR. WALLICH. No, they don't do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We changed a few years ago, presumably toget on the same basis as other countries. But we have so much moreforeign investment. It's much bigger for us than for anybody else.MR. TRUMAN. I think President Solomon overstated the figuressomewhat. If you correct for both sides, as both the inflows and theoutflows are counted on that basis, the difference is about $15billion.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's $15 billion, not $20 billionthis year?7/9/80 -5-MR. TRUMAN. Yes. Last year, in fact, the adjustment on thereinvested earnings was $14.5 billion or something like that.MR. WINN. When we look at gold market developments and someof these flows, I wonder if we're not being a little oblivious to thefact that it's not all economic considerations that are causing them,with the Saudi situation now surfacing. In terms of the news, it's apotential Iran. We hear rumblings out of places like Nigeria andSouth Africa that we may get big money market flows, which havenothing to do with interest rate differentials or the economic outlookor anything of [that nature], although I don't know how to put anumber on it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right. Common wisdom inthe market, however, is that the [noneconomic factors] on balanceprobably have helped us a little so far. There is some politicalinstability in Europe particularly, but not with so much[unintelligible].MR. WINN. On the other hand, with our freezing of theIranian [assets], if you were a Saudi trying to maneuver would [theUnited States] be where you'd want to put [funds]? I don't know.MR. SCHULTZ. There is some indication that SAMA is nowmaking direct investments in this country in bits and pieces of $50 to$100 million. We first heard about it from the Texas bankers. Itbegan 5 to 6 months ago and seems to be continuing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We've had some substantial increasesin SAMA purchases of Treasury obligations. But I don't think we aregetting the same percentage of their investable surplus.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the real difference this year is theseother countries with current account deficits. Even the Swiss, theGermans, and the Japanese have advertised the availability of theirgovernment securities to the Saudis in particular, which they neverdid before; and they are selling them. The French also are selling afair amount of securities to the Saudis. I don't know [whether theyare selling] to other people too, though they probably are, but theyare selling to the Saudis and they didn't do that before. The Saudishad great difficulty getting investment outlets. Now they have moreopen to them.MR. WALLICH. In a sense, every country with a good currencycan expect some inflow--in fact, a very large inflow in the aggregate--from these sources. The Germans, the Swiss, the French, and theJapanese probably all benefit from this to an extent that they don'tseem to want to admit. So they've generated concern about theirdeficits that I think is needless. They can count on some financingautomatically. They don't have to go out and borrow the money.MR. BAUGHMAN. Is it considered a political no-no to sellgold in the current environment?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't think so, necessarily. Idon't think it's a political problem in the sense that you may besuggesting. It's a question of whether it's very useful or desirableat this stage. [If we sold gold], we'd have to do it alone; I think7/9/80that's pretty clear. It isn't anything that's ruled out a priori, butit's a practical matter of whether it's a good idea.MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, it's between selling assets andborrowing money. That seems to me the significant difference.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The psychology, Ernie, is that[selling gold] seems to be much more effective if it's a component ofan overall package of forceful measures than if it is done by itself.In the present climate it would look like a major act of weakness.And that might spur some additional dollar selling unless we did it onan enormously massive scale, not just the levels that we have before.On the other hand, if the situation gets to a point where once againwe have to begin thinking carefully of a package, then along with somemonetary policy measures it would be appropriate and add to theeffectiveness--this is my own personal feeling--to do some substantialgold selling. And in that situation I think the Congress wouldunderstand that. We'd have less of a political problem also. So Ithink both factors operate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I should say, in connection with thepolitical problem, that I don't think there are any great politicalconstraints so far as the thinking in the Administration is concerned.There are politicians who would make a noise that would reflect uponthe credibility of the action. If we sell some gold and thenimmediately get some congressional opposition, the market would say:"Well, they're not going to sell very much because there's too muchopposition." And, therefore, it might not be very productive in termsof the impact we'd want to achieve.MR. BAUGHMAN. There would be some grass roots opposition toit. I can report that, but I don't have any impression--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps I spoke a little misleadinglybecause that kind of opposition, I think, does reflect on thecredibility of the action. It raises questions about whether it couldbe sustained and what the [total] amount would be and whether it'sreally an accepted technique or not, even though in some sense I thinkit's not a political deal for the Administration except in terms ofappraising that reaction. I can't quite see the Congress opposing itin a formal sense but there would be a lot of noise by these limitedgroups.We have to ratify these transactions.MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are ratified. Doyou have any recommendations, Mr. Pardee?MR. PARDEE. I'd simply note that first maturities of sixswap drawings on the Bundesbank in the amount of $190 million will becoming up over the period before the next FOMC [meeting]. I expect toroll those over, renew them, if we do not have a significant reflow inmarks that would enable us to repay them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We presumably will renew those asnecessary--if necessary. Hope springs eternal. Mr. Meek.7/9/80MR. MEEK. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me interrupt you just a second for aclarification. It may be that I was up too many hours yesterday, butdid I read the Bluebook wrong? On the first or second page, where thepaths were shown, I thought it said we are marginally above theminimum targeted growth. If I look at the figures, it looks as if weare marginally below. Then there was a footnote on page 3 that saidwe changed the target [for total reserves] and made it a littlehigher; but it said the original target was $43,377 million and thesubsequent target was $43,293 million, which is lower.MR. SCHULTZ. It's supposed to be the other way around.Steve gave an actual yesterday, if that still stands. The figures aretransposed, aren't they, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, no. The figures actually got changed atthe last minute, so the marginally above was correct when it waswritten. It's wrong with regard to M-1A and M-1B; and M2, of course,is well above. It should read that with regard to M-1A and M-1B wewere marginally above; the figures were changed at the last minute andthe text was not. I think that's the answer.MR. PARTEE. So the path is below what was originally--MR. AXILROD. No, the path is above because of M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the footnote seems to be wrong on page3. I'm just gratified that I read this correctly. I found somethingthe matter with it.MR. SCHULTZ. Steve, yesterday you gave figures whichindicated that the target had been raised over the period by some $170million.MR. AXILROD. Yes, the footnote numbers seem incorrect. I'llget those numbers. The $43,377 million is not the original target butthe one we now have; $43,293 million was the original target. Thoseare simply transposed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just wanted to demonstrate that I waswide awake when reading your report!MR. AXILROD. You are quite right; those figures aretransposed.MR. SCHULTZ. Now that we have had that little ego trip--!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Meek.MR. MEEK. [Statement continued.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You were supposed to absorb reserves [toremain on] the path, right? I thought you absorbed less reserves thanthe path called for.MR. MEEK. In fact, yesterday there was less demand formatched transactions than we had planned to make. So we wound up7/9/80doing less than we expected. And there is quite an abundance ofexcess reserves to be mopped up today.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Your point is that the mopping of thereserves is justified not just by the weakness in the foreign exchangemarkets but also by the reserve path.MR. MEEK. Indeed. We had considered going in early, but thedollar began to strengthen at about the time we were prepared to goin, so we held off until our normal intervention hour.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions? These actions inthe last six weeks do not provoke any questions?MR. WALLICH. I might say, just to make clear that we are alllistening carefully, that I keep hearing about market perceptions thatwe have moved back to a funds rate objective with a very narrow range.Do you hear that?MR. MEEK. Yes, I think there has been some feeling in themarket to that effect. It is a problem we get into when borrowing atthe discount window is at frictional levels because it is somewhatindeterminate whether the funds rate will be in the 8-1/2 to 11percent range. The result is that when we put in reserves at 9-1/2percent, people chose to interpret that as being the top of somerange; similarly, it has been quite clear that we have been defending8-1/2 percent as the bottom of the range. It's a box that we tend toget into. I think yesterday's action of mopping up reserves whenfunds were trading at 3-3/4 percent caused the market to pause atfirst blush but the action was later construed as being consistentwith our normal operating procedures.MR. ROOS. Isn't that market perception contributing perhapsto the weakening of the dollar and an implication that we may berepeating some of the mistakes we have made previously that wereinflationary?MR. MEEK. Well, there's always concern in the market aboutthe level of interest rates and the general thrust of policy.MR. ROOS. In other words the markets are really in doubt asto whether we are determined to carry through with a primary emphasison controlling reserves?MR. MEEK. I wouldn't say that that is in question.MR. PARTEE. The market is doubting whether we have anobjective of fighting inflation and whether we are going to letinterest rates decline or push interest rates down long enough so thatit will encourage these flows of funds into marks, Swiss francs, andother currencies.MR. ROOS. But I mean those market--MR. PARTEE. Whether we follow the aggregates or not is anacademic point. They follow the M1 numbers, which come out on Friday--or this time on Monday. But the emphasis is on the thrust of policytoward inflation.-8-7/9/80MR. MEEK. There are two markets that we are talking abouthere. The government securities market is always very obsessed withtrying to invent a federal funds rate range if one doesn't exist.They react to what we do as though it has significance when it doesn'thave any.MR. ROOS. Do you tell them that it doesn't have anysignificance?MR. MEEK. Of course.MR. ROOS. Good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a proposal to raise theintermeeting limit [on changes in System holdings of securities].What is the intermeeting period?MR. ALTMANN. It would be for the period through the 12th ofAugust.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take it the limit is normally $3 billion[and the proposal is to raise it] to $4 billion because we are gettinga decline in reserve requirements that is going to have to be offsetin the normal course of events.MS. TEETERS. How much do we have to offset?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the decline in reserverequirements?MR. MEEK. It's $3-1/2 billion in the week of June 30.MS. TEETERS. Is $4 billion enough if you have $3-1/2 billionto mop up?MR. MEEK. It's right on the edge on our [staff's] estimates.The Board [staff] has somewhat lower estimates. But it seemed prudentto have adequate room. These estimates are notoriously unreliable.MR. PARTEE. I think, Mr. Chairman, that we want to be verycertain that we mop up any reserves here. I can't understand why inthe world the market thinks we won't, but there seems to be some viewof that. So if it's right on the edge, I would make it higher; Iwould propose $4-1/2 billion.MR. MEEK. Well, $4 billion would be quite adequate, I think.MR. PARTEE. But you said that was right on the edge.MR. MEEK. The $3 billion [normal limit] is right on theedge.MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see. I misunderstood you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can always change it again; fine-tuningthis figure doesn't have much significance. But if you are convincedthat $4 billion [is appropriate], is there a motion to that effect?7/9/80MR. PARTEE. So moved.MR. GRAMLEY. Seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we approve until thenext meeting a $4 billion limit. We need ratification of thetransactions. Can I have a motion to that effect?SPEAKER(?). So moved.MS. TEETERS. Seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we approve youroperations since the last meeting.[Before] we turn to the economic situation, I might just[raise] another point here so that you are aware of it. You mightalready be aware of it; I believe you have been sent a copy of theresolution that Mr. Proxmire and Senator Garn have introduced aboutFederal Reserve policy. This arose essentially out of the report byArthur Burns' Committee to Fight Inflation, which is made up of an ex-Secretary of the Treasury, an ex-Chairman of the Federal ReserveBoard, and a few distinguished ex-Congressmen. Among other things thereport said that Congress, as Mr. Burns had suggested in a speech lastSeptember, ought to support the long-term thrust of monetary policytoward restraint against inflation and ought to reinforce thatcommitment by a Congressional resolution. That language was in theCommittee's report and apparently Mr. Proxmire read that and thoughtit was a good idea. So he has introduced a resolution, the languageof which I have examined in its present form word by word. It seemsfairly unexceptional but I have a little concern, frankly, about thewhole exercise. It starts off with all these [whereas phrases]--whereas the Congress has the constitutional power, and whereas theFederal Reserve is an agent of the Congress, and whereas the Congresscan tell the Federal Reserve what to do, whereas this and whereasthat--[and then says] we support [the Federal Reserve] in this generallong-range intention [to restrain inflation]. It seems to me the kindof language that could easily be converted in some other circumstancesto say whereas we think interest rates are too high we direct you tolower interest rates. So, it may not be the most desirable precedentin the world, but I'm not sure there is anything we can do about it.I just have a little worry about it. We have not been active insupporting this but we have not been active in working against iteither. My own [instinct] is to let events take their course. Butthere may be an effort--and there's danger in this--to put in somedifferent language in the operative paragraphs that could give us alittle difficulty. We will wait and see, I guess. As it is, I thinkit's unexceptional. I don't know how helpful it really is, but youought to be aware of it. Maybe it is helpful; I don't know.MR. MORRIS. Do you think Mr. Proxmire knows the implicationsof this resolution with regard to real output and employment?MS. TEETERS. Well, the third paragraph says "to maintainfull employment and balanced growth."-10-7/9/80MR. PARTEE. Yes, but there is a phrase that says "get backon the targets for the aggregates." I see your point. There are alot of things in it; they could change it from year to year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It worries me a little, frankly. I'd justas soon it didn't come up. I discussed it with Arthur and I'm notsure he's so happy himself that this [process] has started. I'm surehe's convinced that he thought it all through, but I don't know whatwe can do.MR. SCHULTZ. When did you talk to Arthur Burns?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A couple of weeks ago.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I talked to him the day before yesterday,and he told me that the resolution as originally introduced had beenmuch more specific and that he had Proxmire make it much more generaland so forth. So it was a bigger problem when--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the main difference between [thecurrent version] and what was initially introduced is that the firstsentence talked about the long run anti-inflationary policy and soforth--I can't remember the language--but had a phrase in it aboutlong-term interest rates. It said, in effect, that [such a policy]could bring down long-term interest rates in the context of dealingwith inflation. Arthur got them to take out the specific reference tointerest rates. In fact, the reference wasn't bad because it was inthe context of bringing down inflation. But it's illustrative of thekinds of things we could get in a resolution of this sort some time inthe future that would be very difficult. Looking at this, my ownfeeling is that we can't go out and say we don't [favor] a resolutionthat says Congress supports our long-term efforts to deal withinflation. But I feel a little nervous about the implications of thisfor the future. Indeed, there may be an attempt to modify this in thepresent. What I am saying is that if it just died quietly, I wouldn'tshed enormous tears; there may be some other aspects of this thataren't apparent. Undoubtedly, I will be asked to comment about it inmy testimony. I suppose I am forced to say it's a fine resolution.SPEAKER(?). What else can you do? It would be like talkingagainst motherhood to oppose it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think you would be justifiedin going on to say that it might create--I don't know how to phrasethis but you'd have to handle it cautiously--dangers for the future.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I could say that I don't think it iswise for these resolutions to be all that specific but that aresolution with this kind of general sentiment is [fine].MR. WALLICH. Could you say that if Congress wants toinfluence Federal Reserve policy directly that the appropriate way isto do it by legislation rather than resolution? I would expect that[such] legislation would not [be enacted]. That is a tough statement.But we could be snowed with these resolutions and the pressure--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I did ask if there had ever been aresolution quite like this, referring to policy. And I think it is-11-7/9/80true--well, at least nobody was able to tell me off-hand--that therehas not been. The nearest thing to it was the concurrent resolution,adopted in [1975], which in part gave rise to the whole monetarytargeting exercise. In some of its initial versions that did talkabout interest rates; [those phrases] were pretty much extracted, sothe resolution became largely procedural instead of referring to theobjective of policy except in the broadest way. But there have beenmany attempts to introduce resolutions like this. There has been aresolution circulating in Congress in recent months about bringingdown interest rates. It never got anywhere, but it had somesignatures on it. There have been other attempts of that kind, whichweren't pressed very hard. We weren't able to find any precedent forthis kind of thing actually passing in Congress. I don't know ifthere is anything else to be said about it but I thought I'd ask forany reactions you had. And you ought to be aware of it.MR. BAUGHMAN. I don't see how it could be opposed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Kichline and Mr. Zeisel, it's upto you.MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me interrupt you. If I remembercorrectly from the Bluebook, this is an artificial 4-1/2 percent in asense because it doesn't allow for a depression of M-1A from NOWaccounts and so forth.MR. AXILROD. Yes. Whatever shifts occur would be subtractedfrom that. So if the shift were one point, the number would be 3-1/2percent; and if it were 2 points, it would be 2-1/2 percent, etc.MR. PARTEE. A shift over and above what is already assumedin M-1A and M-1B?MR. AXILROD. These are shifts that could be related to theintroduction of nationwide NOW accounts beginning around the end ofthis year. So the 4-1/2 percent subsumes whatever is going on now.This is the new introduction--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, if I understand correctly, the targetdoesn't fully allow for what is going on this year.MR. AXILROD. Well, given what is going on this year, wethink that 4-1/2 percent is more reflective of unchanged policy than4-3/4 percent because there seems to be a little more movement out ofdemand deposits into NOW accounts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you're just saying that the 1/4percentage point allows for that.MR. AXILROD. Yes. It's a small amount. We raised M-1B abit.MESSRS. KICHLINE and ZEISEL. [Statements continued.]-12-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a very complete and verycomprehensive presentation. I'm sure it leaves a certain amount ofquestions in peoples' minds. I have two or three myself, so I mightstart. We will spend a little time here on the economic outlookbefore we get to the aggregates discussion. Your forecast, obviously,has a very low recovery in disposable income in '81 by historicalstandards. You also have a low increase in productivity. When wehave a low increase in productivity somehow we have to have a lowincrease in disposable income. But there's a certain amount ofchicken and egg involved; if we had a faster recovery, we might getmore productivity. I guess I'm groping for a question here. How lowdoes the rise in disposable income have to be [to reflect] the factthat productivity is not performing the way it used to and how much is[related to] a sluggish recovery in some sense?MR. ZEISEL. Well, the point you made earlier applies tovirtually all of the variables in the sense that we get low growth indisposable income in part because of the sluggish improvement inemployment, which is related to the sluggish improvement in output,which is consistent with the sluggish improvement in productivity.The question is: Where does one get aboard the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how much of it is the other wayaround? I'm asking how much [reflects the fact] that anything isgoing to look less buoyant than it looked before because we get lessproductivity growth, all other things equal.MR. ZEISEL. Of course, any improvement in productivityperformance would give us the potential for a greater increase in realincome. In a sense that's partially endogenous and partiallyexogenous. Our projection of sluggish productivity growth isconsistent, as I mentioned earlier, with our projection of the verysluggish recovery in output growth. But it's also consistent with thelonger-term problems that seem to be plaguing productivityperformance. We have an underlying trend rate of growth ofproductivity of less than 1 percent at this point. If productivitywere performing, let's say, as we thought it was back in the late '50sand '60s--at another 1-1/2 or 2 percentage points above that--thatwould give us the potential for a considerably improved outlook. Sothat could be very significant.MR. MAYO. Your capital spending assumptions tie into thisproductivity assumption, too, don't they?MR. ZEISEL. Well, over the longer haul, obviously, that'scorrect. Over the short run it would not be a significant variable.MR. MAYO. I'm thinking really of the capital spending that'salready in place or under way.MR. ZEISEL. The capital/labor ratio, as I'm sure you know,has deteriorated in recent decades and people feel that that hasplayed a significant role in the deterioration of productivity. But alot of other factors appear to be operating as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure this has something to do with thechart you've labeled "Prices II." There's a striking difference here.In '75-'76 [the percentage rise in] the gross business product-13-7/9/80deflator went down, my word, from 12 percent to 4 or 5 percent. Nowyou say it can't go down much. Of course, it had gone up verysharply. But how did we manage to get it down 7 percentage points orthereabouts in only a year or 18 months and now we can't get it down?MR. PARTEE. Look at the previous [chart], Paul.MR. ZEISEL. Well, several things are operating. One factoris the behavior of energy and food [prices], and I think we ought toabstract from those. But even [so] we had a very significantdeceleration. Part of the answer is the very vigorous recovery inoutput and productivity during that period. The productivity swingbetween 1974 and 1975 was about 8 percentage points; it went fromabout a 3-1/2 percent decline to a 4-1/2 percent increase. We arefiguring on a recovery in productivity of a little more than halfthat. So in a sense we don't get the improvement in unit labor costsand the removal of pressure on prices that such productivity--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a 4 point [swing], if Iunderstand you correctly.MR. ZEISEL. Well, yes.MR. KICHLINE. Actually, if you flip the page and go back to[the chart labeled] "Prices I," the numbers on the top panel of thatchart show the peak was in the fourth quarter of 1974 when unit laborcosts were up 14.9 percent [from a year earlier]. The fourth quarterof 1975, one year later, was the low point [when the year-to-yearincrease was about] 4 percent. So we had [nearly an 11] percentagepoint swing in unit labor costs in that particular period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had an 8 point swing in productivityduring that period, so we must have had a 4 point swing or so incompensation?MR. ZEISEL. I don't have [compensation figures] quarterly; Ihave hourly wages figures.MR. PARTEE. Compensation is [charted] on the previous page;that shows around 3 percent, I think.MR. KICHLINE. It was 2-1/2 percent to 3 percent[unintelligible].MR. GRAMLEY. Wasn't there another factor going on duringthat period, though, that affected all of these variables on bothcompensation and prices? The wage-price control program [affected]1974. There was an enormous catch-up increase, which inflated therates of increase; and when that was over, everything settled downagain. That was an important part of the improvement that took place.MR. ZEISEL. That was a very important component. We had anexplosion and then a deflation, so that played a significant roletemporarily. A combination of forces was operating that I'm afraidcannot be exactly disassociated from one another.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In some sense it could be argued that youare rather pessimistic on both compensation and productivity.-14-7/9/80MR. KICHLINE. Well, we are pessimistic relative to pastcyclical performance. And I think the productivity assumption is avery tenuous one. There are alternative explanations of whyproductivity declined, and one could very easily suggest that we mayget a bigger rebound. At the same time, on the compensation side wehave a situation where real wages have declined for a substantialperiod of time. In fact, I would view it the other way around on thecompensation side: We think we have a good forecast given theassumptions. But one could very easily think that there will be moreintense upward pressure on wages and that compensation might not slowas much as we have built into our forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because real wages are declining?MR. KICHLINE. Well, in a sense that puts pressure on thebargaining units and on workers who wish to command higher nominalwages to offset that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All [I'm talking about is] this pessimismrelative to earlier cycles. It's pretty deeply related to theproductivity picture one way or another.MR. ZEISEL. It is very deeply related. I think that'sabsolutely correct.MR. GRAMLEY. Is that really true? If you had a higherproductivity growth plugged into your forecast, unless you had achange in the monetary and fiscal policy, wouldn't the main effect ofthat simply be a lower rise of employment with the same increase inreal GNP and hence the same increase in real disposable income? Ifyou look back at the charts, the biggest increase in real disposableincome was in '77, when by no means did we have highly favorableproductivity developments.MR. ZEISEL. We'd also have a good deal less pressure on unitlabor costs and prices and presumably the ability, therefore, to moveinto a different fiscal position as well.MR. GRAMLEY. If you removed policy constraints and foundthat policy were more expansive, then you would have a larger rise inreal GNP.MR. ZEISEL. But what we have provides the basis for allowingthat, I believe.MR. PARTEE. I would agree with Lyle. I think you'resubstituting manhours for lack of gain in productivity. So you don'tactually get a difference in real output in the forecast period, but Ithink it does lead to pessimism on the price front compared to whatmight otherwise be the case.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To the extent it came out in lower prices,with the same money and fiscal assumptions you get more output.MR. SCHULTZ. What effect do you get from the fact thatenergy prices in manufacturing never made very much difference? Theywere so low in terms of the costs. Now the situation is quitedifferent; a lot of manufacturing firms are thinking in terms of-15-7/9/80capital expenditures of the kind that lower their energy costs. Whatdoes that do? Is there any way to calibrate that sort of thing?MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's one factor. It tends to cutseveral ways. One of the arguments is that, given the rising cost ofcapital, firms will tend to substitute more labor for capital. Itdepends on the industry. In fact, President Morris had a conferenceat the Boston Fed about this whole role of energy and productivity andcapital investment, and it's a cloudy area. But the balance ofthinking is probably that energy prices for many firms are arelatively small part of total costs. So it's hard to sort out wherethat will fall; one has to do an awful lot of disaggregated work. Wethink that it probably on net adds something to capital investmentdemand, but relatively little if you abstract from what's happening inthe energy sector directly. And that's obviously a different animal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just ask one more question. Onthese charts of econometric exercises with and without tax cuts, isthere a lower real GNP in '83 with a tax cut? If I understand itcorrectly, you also have a lower unemployment rate. Offhand thatsomehow seems inconsistent.MR. KICHLINE. Well, unemployment adjusts with a lag. Andthese are rates of growth. We have a higher level of real GNP butthese are rates of growth of real GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, you still have a slightly higherlevel of [real GNP].MR. KICHLINE. That's right, but it's reversing. Thedifference in the unemployment rate in 1982 is 0.8 percentage pointand in 1983 it's a half percentage point. So the gains on theunemployment side are disappearing, but with a lag.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, that was a fine presentation. Ihave only two questions. One has to try to put monetary policy in thecontext with the thrust of fiscal policy, and in the first section ofyour report you have a table on the federal budget and also one on thehigh employment budget. My question has to do specifically with thehigh employment budget assumptions. We've had some discussion of thisbefore, Jerry, as you surely remember. To refresh my recollection,what unemployment rate are you assuming here?MR. ZEISEL. I think it's about 6 percent. Governor Gramley,do you recall?MR. GRAMLEY. If it's the official one, it's 5.1 percent.MR. BALLES. And this uses the official one?MR. ZEISEL. Yes, we'd be consistent with that.MR. KICHLINE. In the last several months there was ageneralized governmental review of the calculation of this highemployment budget and an agreement on the calculations involved. Sowe're using that.-16-7/9/80MR. BALLES. Well, as you know, this calculation is verysensitive to differences in the unemployment rate assumption. A lotof observers, including my staff, think that the non-inflationary fullemployment rate is somewhat higher than 5.1 percent and may be closerto 6 percent. Have you made any alternative calculations? What wouldhappen if you assume 6 percent, for example?MR. KICHLINE. We have done that in the past. We have notdone that this time. The way we use this high employment budget inour own approach is to look at the change in the budget from one yearto another. Differences in the unemployment level used mainly affectthe level of the budget rather than the swings from one year to thenext. And I might note that for 1980 and 1981 this projection has afairly dramatic increase. On a calendar year basis we are going froma surplus of roughly $18-1/2 billion in 1980 to [a surplus of] $39billion in 1981. Now, the levels would be different if we calculatedthe budget on a higher unemployment figure; but the swing, we think,is indicative of the thrust of policy.MR. PARTEE. You'd just raise [the non-inflationary fullemployment rate] by 0.9, would you? Is that effectively what youwould do?MR. BALLES. Well, by how much is the question, Chuck. I'mtrying to get some range of estimates here as to how restrictivefiscal policy is going to be and I doubt that it's going to be asrestrictive, in terms of the level, as what the staff shows. What Iwas trying to find out is what the level would be with a 6 percentassumption.MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have not done that calculation, and Idon't have in mind any rules of thumb that would allow me to give youan answer right now.MR. BALLES. Okay. Maybe we can talk about that later.MR. KICHLINE. We can certainly do [the calculation] andcirculate it.MR. BALLES. If I may, Mr. Chairman, I have one morequestion. It's related to the chart entitled "Domestic NonfinancialSectors," the opening chart in the fourth section. I'm particularlyinterested in the reality of what will be going on in financialmarkets in terms of federal borrowing, broadly defined. The red barson the chart show federal borrowings. Did I understand you to saythat that is on the unified budget basis? In other words, what I'mtrying to get at is: Does it include that very large and growingamount of off-budget activities--the mortgage pool, the governmentsponsored enterprises, and what have you?MR. KICHLINE. No, it does not. It includes the Treasuryissues and a small amount of agency issues. It does not include FNMAor the Home Loan Banks, for example. We have numbers that start at$75 billion for 1980; there's a narrower definition of the budget andit does not include the off-budget items.MR. PARTEE. $75 billion?-17-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That includes the off-budget agencies,just not the sponsored ones, doesn't it?MR. KICHLINE. Right.MR. BALLES. It does include the off-budget?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon how one defines off-budget. My understanding is that it literally includes the off-budgetagencies but it doesn't include the [agencies] not owned by thegovernment, [such as] FNMA and the Home Loan Banks.MR. KICHLINE. That's right. It captures the [funds raisedby] the Federal Financing Bank, for example, as a Treasury issue.MR. BALLES. How much bigger would the number be if youincluded the so-called privately owned, government-sponsoredenterprises and the mortgage pools? I have a hunch it would beconsiderably bigger, but I'm not sure.MR. KICHLINE. Yes. One of the problems here, by the way, isthat this chart covers "nonfinancial" [as defined] in our flow offunds accounts. We consider the sponsored agencies to be thefinancial sector, so we are dealing with a different concept here.But in 1980 we have sponsored credit agencies raising about $11-1/2billion of funds and in 1981, $20 billion. So [compared] to thesenumbers, you get [borrowings of] something like $87 billion under thatbroader definition in 1980 and $120 billion in 1981.MR. BALLES. That makes a difference, doesn't it?MR. KICHLINE. Oh, yes.MR. BALLES. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I have one detail question and then twosubstantive questions. This Administration forecast [that you show]is not yet published, is it?MR. KICHLINE. No, it is not.MR. GRAMLEY. This is the one coming out in July?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is this firm?MR. KICHLINE. We understand that the economic assumptionsare firm as a basis for the midyear review. What are not yet firm arethe precise outlays and receipts--the budget side associated with theeconomic forecast. But it has not yet been presented officially; myunderstanding is that it will not be delivered until July 21.MR. GRAMLEY. The first substantive question I'd like to askJerry. On the compensation per hour projection, you noted that oneelement of optimism isn't in the line shown here--the fact that itincludes an increase in compensation due to payroll taxes in 1981.So, in fact, in order to get this performance, private compensation-18-7/9/80would have to improve still more than the line indicates. But isn'tthere yet another element in it in the sense that this year we arelooking at a rise in wage rates of roughly 1 percentage point fasterthan we had in 1979? And that's not showing up in the compensationper hour figures because we're getting a shift in mix, for cyclicalreasons, that is going in the other direction. In 1981 that shift inmix will not be taking place; on the contrary, it will be reversed.MR. ZEISEL. That's correct.MR. GRAMLEY. To get the kind of performance in compensationthat's shown here we're going to have to have a very significantslowdown in the rate of increase in average hourly earnings adjustedfor overtime and mix.MR. ZEISEL. That's correct, and we do build in a calculationof the effects of mix on the compensation figures. The average hourlyearnings index itself declines between '80 and '81 by slightly morethan 1 percent. I don't have a figure for the fourth quarter '81; itwould be a bit more than that, though, as opposed to a compensationdecline over that same period of 0.3. So the point you're making isabsolutely correct. The underlying wage adjustment has to be greaterthan the compensation decline that we show.MR. GRAMLEY. The second question I'd like to direct to Mr.Kichline. In the discussion of the assumptions on the first page,you've noted that M-1A goes up by 4-1/2 percent. But the Bluebooksays something else is involved that I think we need to be aware of,namely that the assumptions about interest rates that are plugged intothe forecast include an assumption that the money demand functiondrops by 3 percentage points both this year and next. So if thedemand function had been unchanged, M-1A growth of 7-1/2 percent wouldbe required to give us the same amount of monetary stimulus. Isn'tthat correct?MR. KICHLINE. That's right. In effect, the way to view the4-1/2 percent [M-1A growth] is that it has the power of old-time 7-1/2percent money, old-time being pre-1974 money.MR. GRAMLEY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. First, I think the staff forecast is very well puttogether. My staff's forecast is close to that of the Greenbook but Ipersonally feel a little more pessimistic just because I think we'recoming out, I hope, of a very wrenching inflationary experience, whichI believe tends to lessen our ability to rely on econometric models.And I think some of our past sins, so to speak, in not encouragingenough capital formation and productivity in this country are catchingup with us. Maybe I'm just getting older, but this causes me todistrust even more than usual the figure factory, if I may call itthat, on the projections for 1981. So, I'm just a little morepessimistic personally.I have one detail question on the unified budget. You aremore optimistic than the Administration for fiscal '80. Following upon Lyle's point, is this $55 to $60 billion [deficit projected by the-19-7/9/80Administration] fairly set at this point or is the [potential]variation really more than you've indicated here? And why are youmore optimistic? Is this a shift--shall I call it a political shift--of a deficit from one period to another by the Administration?MR. KICHLINE. Well, the early number the Administration wasworking with on outlays was something like $578 billion, $3 billionhigher than the staff's estimate. Now, that may come down a little.We looked back at the last eight fiscal years, from 1972 through 1979,and the mid-session review has overestimated actual expenditures byabout $2 billion. That's about 1/2 percentage point. So we feelreasonably comfortable that we're close, given past experience. Onthe receipts side, the Administration had $519 billion as an earlynumber as opposed to [our] $523 billion. That relates, as Iunderstand it, to some tax multipliers, the response of tax receiptsto income over the last three or four months. And it's a messybusiness. So I would view [the two projections for] 1980 as reallyquite close. The real issue is 1981.MR. MAYO. Well, [comparing] the $59 billion Administration[preliminary deficit estimate], for what it's worth, and your $52billion, I take it that you feel the receipts will do a little better.That's part of it?MR. KICHLINE. For 1980?MR. MAYO. Yes, for 1980, the year we are in right now.MR. KICHLINE. Yes. We have $4 billion more in receipts thantheir preliminary number. And as I say, it's really a technicalmatter. Their forecast is not materially different from ours for thesecond and third quarters--the last two quarters of the fiscal year.MR. MAYO. This is also minor, but do your projections for'81 assume that what the Congress is trying to do on speeding upcorporate tax collection [will materialize]?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, it includes that; it excludes certainother things. It excludes, for example, the withholding of interestand dividends. We made some adjustments where we felt it was quiteunlikely that the Congress would be willing to go along with theAdministration's proposals.MR. MAYO. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our differences with the staffforecast have widened a bit this time. For 1980, we believe that thedrop in real GNP will probably be greater than the staff isprojecting. This concern stems mainly from three factors: thegrowing evidence that the international situation may be weaker thanwe've been assuming, the conditions in the construction industry--andspecifically housing--and retail sales. If you plot housing startsand retail sales in real terms opposite similar periods of otherpostwar downturns, this time they practically drop off the chart; thedrop is far greater than anything we've had before. And we don'tbelieve that that weakness has yet spread to other parts of the-20-7/9/80economy to the extent that it likely will. So, expecting this greaterweakness, we think the unemployment rate will probably be higher bythe fourth quarter than the staff is projecting, though we think therise in the deflator will be less. We have estimated the deflator at8.5 percent versus [the staff's] 9.4 percent for the four quartersending in the final quarter of this year. And in 1981, moredifferences [emerge] because we firmly believe that if we stick to ourtargets on the aggregates, as I think we will, then the outcome willbe much better than the staff is projecting. We are guessing that wemight have an increase in real GNP in the neighborhood of 6 percent ascompared to the 2.5 percent forecast by the Board staff. This wouldmean a good deal less inflation and it also should mean lessunemployment. Our forecast is a guess too, of course, but we feel[the results could be] quite different from what the staff hasprojected.MR. PARTEE. Is that because compensation goes up a lot lessin your forecast, Bob? How do you have less inflation? That's whatI'm asking.MR. BLACK. Well, we keep the money supply under bettercontrol.MR. PARTEE. I understand that. But looking at the factorsof costs and prices, is it better productivity?MR. BLACK. Yes, I would think so. If we make progress onthe inflation front, I think people's expectations are going to turnaround very markedly. And we have [projected] more private investmentthan has been assumed, offering commensurate increases inproductivity.MR. PARTEE. Well, not [until] next year, though.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. I was interested in the estimates ofuncertainties accompanying the forecast, which were based essentiallyon a number of simulations. I wonder if you'd take a minute to putthat into qualitative judgmental terms and let us know what you thinkthe chances are on the up side and on the down side of the forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In 60 seconds.MR. KICHLINE. As you know, we do recognize that forecastingpoint estimates is not the way to go in terms of associating somedegree of [certainty with the forecast]. We believe there is astandard error associated with any forecast, and that's why we'veattempted to work with the model in generating ranges of uncertaintyor confidence intervals. In that memorandum we used the model to tryto calculate the probabilities of hitting the Humphrey-Hawkins targetsas defined by the Administration's forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't clear on that. Let me make sureI understand. The Humphrey-Hawkins targets are the Administration'sforecast in the terminology you're using?-21-7/9/80MR. KICHLINE. Well, in the short term, yes. The first twoyears are defined as the short term; they represent projections but infact are short-term Humphrey-Hawkins targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say Humphrey-Hawkins targets doyou mean the Administration's projections that are in these charts?MR. KICHLINE. That's right.MR. MORRIS. That's not what Messrs. Humphrey and Hawkins hadin mind, though.MR. KICHLINE. In general, I would say that with the monetarypolicy we have assumed--looking at the model results in both years,particularly 1981--there is a fairly small probability of [an outcome]within a narrow range of those targets. I didn't go into this in thepresentation, but a good deal of the difficulty revolves around theAdministration's [forecast of] 13-3/4 percent growth in nominal GNPwith interest rates not much higher than they are currently. Thattells you something: Really, their implicit monetary [growth]assumption has to be high. So the exercise we've gone throughsuggests that there's a fairly wide range [of uncertainty] associatedwith the point estimates we've presented for the broad aggregates, for1981 in particular. And looking at the Humphrey-Hawkins targets,there's a fairly low probability of [an outcome] within a narrow rangeof those targets--particularly of hitting the unemployment and priceprojections simultaneously.MR. EASTBURN. May I follow up and ask another relatedquestion, which is a simple one? How confident do you feel in yourGreenbook projections and what side are the errors on?MR. KICHLINE. Well, given the policy assumptions, I feelfairly comfortable with the real side forecast that we have. I knowthere's been a tendency for economists to underestimate the strengthin the economy at turning points. But in general we have built invery restrictive monetary and fiscal policy assumptions relative topast cyclical experience. At the same time, on the price side I feelreasonably comfortable. I find it very difficult to expect muchgreater price improvement next year, particularly in light of what ishappening on energy; and food prices aren't going to help. Both ofthose were positive forces in 1975. So I feel reasonably comfortablewith [our forecast of] both prices and real GNP. If we're wrong, itmay well be that some of the assumptions are wrong. And I wouldprefer to stop there.SPEAKER(?). In other words, two plus two still equals fourbut maybe it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this depends upon one's judgment ofthis 3 percent shift in M1 demand. What was that shift in the pastyear, say?MR. KICHLINE. Very little, if you mean over the course of1979.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was thinking of the past 12 months.7/9/80MR. AXILROD. From reading the model--which is all this istalking about--in the year 1979 there was virtually no shift. Therewas a little downward shift, but I wouldn't take the model thatseriously on that. For the year ending in the second quarter of 1980there was a shift of about 3 percentage points, all of which occurredin the second quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. As far as the forecast is concerned, which Iview as very well done, I find myself much closer to theAdministration's than to the staff's, certainly for 1981. I think wehave to count on a high nominal GNP, quite possibly a good rise inreal GNP, and an even higher deflator than either the Administrationor the staff have. The latter is based on [our past] experience ofalways tending to underestimate inflation. We've had a very patientlabor force. Outside the strongly unionized sectors wage increaseshave been very low, and one must anticipate that at some time therewill be a concerted push to make up for that. We also have to bear inmind that, in a sense, our staff forecast is a formal exercise basedon an assumption of a given rise in money supply. And that isinterpreted optimistically with a 3 percent [demand] shift. We havenever been successful in sticking by our money supply targets and Ifear that the same thing will happen again. That means that we haveno very clear ceiling on the up side and that there's a realpossibility of going to higher rates of inflation and much higherrates of nominal GNP than any of this says.Well, let me just ask one small technical question. Jerry,you were skeptical about business fixed investment spending, partly onthe grounds of low capacity utilization. Isn't there a chance that weare once more overestimating our true capacity, as I think we did thelast time round, and that the pressure begins at lower capacity uselevels? And secondly, given the high increases in wages that firms[already have implemented] and that seem ahead, isn't it possible thatthey may put more emphasis on modernization than expansion?MR. ZEISEL. As far as the first point is concerned, it'salways possible that we are estimating capacity incorrectly. But wehave tended to scale down the effective capacity level in our index byintroducing a factor of downtime that is much greater than we hadearlier. So I think we're far more realistic in terms of effectivecapacity than we were, let's say, 6 years ago. As far as the latterpoint is concerned, certainly that [possibility] is there. Thetendency to shift toward capital because of the [high] relative priceof labor versus capital has existed and continues to exist. We havetried to build that in. What we've viewing here is a cyclicalperformance rather than the longer-term secular considerations whichreally bear upon that to a greater degree. We also are moving out ofa period in which pollution control and related expenditures haveborne such a heavy weight relative to total expenditures, as they dida few years ago. So that's a factor lowering the possibility for[business investment] expenditures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. My question has been answered.-23-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I'm curious about your projection [for theexternal sector]. I know you said yesterday that the real growth ofour trading partners was strong--and Japan's was quite strong--in thefirst quarter. But [these countries] seem to me to be subject to thesame pressures that we are: high interest rates and rising oilprices. What makes you think that we're not going to export ourrecession and have a worldwide recession, which I assume would weakenyour forecast markedly?MR. TRUMAN. I'd make several points. We are definitelyassuming that [other countries] will have a slowdown. [We expect realGNP] growth to go from approximately 4 percent in the last two years,1978 and 1979, to 1 percent. To some extent zero is an artificialnumber in this context; indeed, the same forces will be operating onthem, including higher energy prices. On the other hand, as shown inthe second [international] chart called "Activity Ratio," they alsodidn't expand as rapidly, so they in some sense are in a less stronglypronounced cyclical position than we are. As I said, for two of thecountries we are expecting what one would classify as a recession thisyear. Those basically are the answers I would give you.As far as exporting our recession, clearly [our economicperformance] has some impact on them but it's easy to exaggerate thateffect these days. We are [relatively] less important in the worldeconomy. In fact, we now account for under 20 percent of world tradewhereas a number of years ago we were a third of world trade. There'sless feedback effect on the rest of the world, with probably twoimportant exceptions. One is Canada, which had negative growth in thefirst quarter--2 percent at an annual rate. And their statistics arelooking just like ours, with housing starts falling out of bed and soforth and so on. There's Japan, too. The automobile situationsuggests--[unintelligible] other factors determining it--that theremay be a little less of an impact on Japan than one would normallyexpect because of the continued demand for small cars.MS. TEETERS. But that is one of the risks in the forecast.Things could be considerably worse--MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but we may be going through the samephenomena. I've asked the staff about that. We're worried about thatwith a nine-month lag, right? In general, we've been forecasting aslowdown in every [Greenbook] and we haven't seen it yet in thenumbers. After real growth in the first quarter on the order of 3percent, depending on how you cut the numbers--which is a healthyannual rate--we estimate that the G-10 countries will get somethinglike 1 percent growth for the year. That means growth is going tohave be something very close to zero on average [over the final threequarters].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There will be a few further complicationsif the LDCs don't get financed. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I'm fairly comfortable with the forecast. Ihave a feeling that the staff might be on the optimistic side withregard to prices. I noticed that food price increases are reallynothing exceptional at all in this forecast and intuitively I would-24-7/9/80have expected a considerable burst in food prices later this year andearly next year as animal inventories are reduced and can't go anylower and we get a very substantial reaction in meat prices. I alsoagree with Lyle that the pressures on compensation are all going to beon the up side of this forecast rather than the low side. And thenI'm not really sure about energy; that's a wild card. [The staff has]a 16 percent increase year-end to year-end, which is fairly modest; onthe other hand, one could make a case that a surplus would make eventhat a rather large increase. I'm just not sure about that. If wedid have a little more in prices, we might have a little less realgrowth, given the policy assumptions. And that would be the tendency,I think, as the year goes on. In addition, there is no allowance herefor shocks. One can't have an allowance for shocks, but in fact manyof the main features of our economy in the last few years have beenconditioned by unanticipated shocks. And there could be more in thefuture--the large country difficulties, large company difficulties,large bank difficulties, whatever they might be--that could adverselyaffect the outlook.As far as the money number is concerned, I think assumingthat 3 percent demand shift is a very conservative stance for thestaff to take. Remember what that means. If the demand shift wereless than 3 percent, interest rates would be higher than forecastgiven GNP; and they're already forecast to be pretty high. Back in'75 we didn't put in much demand shift, and we [forecast] very highinterest rates rather early on in the recovery, [and those rates]never materialized. So I think taking a sort of midpoint figure for acontinued demand shift is conservative and the proper way to go. Ifit's [more] than this, we'll have credit conditions that are a littleeasier than forecast. But given the great uncertainty in this area--and I don't understand the thing nor do I think the model is muchgood--the staff assumption seems proper and conservative. And weought to keep that in mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I think this balance sheet ratio page is tellingus something. It shows us very clearly that compared to 1974-75 thecorporate sector is less liquid, the household sector is substantiallyless liquid, and the commercial banks are less liquid. At the sametime, we are going into a recession of about roughly the same scale asthe one in 1974-75, but we are coming out with a much more sluggishrecovery than we had in 1975 and 1976. And throughout the wholeperiod debtors will be carrying substantially higher interest ratesthan they've ever carried through a recession. This seems to me toadd up to a much higher level of business failures and loan losses atbanks than we've seen before. Would you want to comment on that?MR. KICHLINE. I don't know that I'd say "before" and referto 1974 and 1975. We had very special factors then, involvingparticularly the REITs. I do think, however, that the combination ofhigh inflation, which is really the problem behind this whole chart,as well as sluggish income growth in general portends difficulties forindividual units in the business sector, in the household sector, andprobably in the state and local government sector as well. I don'tknow that I would want to [compare the current situation with] what Iwould view as a very special period complicated by the recession in-25-7/9/801974-75, but there is clearly a potential for delinquencies andbusiness failures that should not be ruled out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. I think somebody ought to be optimistic here andtry to search for what might be a more positive approach or we aregoing to have all the probabilities on the wrong side of the forecast.Your housing starts figure, as I understand it, is for single-familyhomes.MR. KICHLINE. No, it's both single-family and multifamily.MR. ZEISEL. Combined.MR. WINN. Well, the inventory of single-family homes israther a puzzle in terms of the overhanging supply, which may belarger than it seems. But in apartments and the whole commercialarea, one can't beg, borrow, or steal space. One gets the feelingthat that could snap back somewhat more quickly than it has in othercycles. So that's a positive [note].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One can't beg, borrow, or steal space, butwith the rent control laws and all that does anybody want to build?MR. WINN. Yes, it's starting to pick up in some areas. Atleast the builders and the people in the financing area are talkingabout a fairly sharp turnaround, Paul. So that's a positive. Second,if one looks at these declines, how much is psychological and how muchis real in terms of the shock effect that we had? And to what extentcan we have factors that will go the other way? For example, my guessis that while the 1972 to 1979 budget experience indicates thatexpenditures fell short [of the estimates], I have greater confidencein the Administration this year so I think that may not be the case.We may get a bigger deficit in 1980 than has been projected,[particularly] if we get the tax cut--and at least the discussions ofthat seem real. And perhaps people are not being sophisticated intheir analysis and are simply taking the present deficit and thenadding on the tax cut, whatever that may be. You talked about adeficit in the area of $110 billion for next year. In thatenvironment what kind of reaction will we get in terms of peoples'behavior? Third, [in the area of prices] I realize the animal problemgives one pause but, on the other hand, the grain prospects look quitegood. So I don't know to what extent we might get a stand-off on thefood side. Psychologically we have the problem that gasoline is aboutto run out our ears in terms of storage. What happens if we start tocut gasoline prices? I realize the Saudis and others are talkingabout raising [prices for] crude, but what kind of psychologicalimpact will we get from that kind of development and from the scare[tactics]--the "look what lies ahead with $110 billion deficits" andthat kind of talk? Will we again get some psychological reactions?We have talked about the shift in demand for money and soforth. But when we look at these capital ratios, have we madeallowance for that shift in terms of how they will behave, even thoughyou've commented on the deterioration that has occurred versusprevious cycles? So, I'm trying to search for things that could give-26-7/9/80us a positive push at this time rather than the more negative kinds ofinputs that we hear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you were going to introduce someanimal spirits to overcome the animal inventories! Well, one of thedifficulties of having so comprehensive and able a presentation isthat it provoked a great deal of discussion and [consumed] a greatdeal of time. Nothing looks very happy, except Mr. Winn's lastinterjection. As I judge this, we have a problem in that if we baseour analysis on any kind of traditional analysis, econometric orother, we run into all sorts of dilemmas. And it makes one wonder howall this can be reconciled except by saying: "Let's have a moreexpansive budget and a more expansive monetary policy and theneverything will look all right on these traditional grounds." That'sif we ignore the inflationary implications, which I take it we can'tignore. That is the dilemma we have. We don't have a situation wherewe can play the game the way we have played it traditionally. I don'tthink we can, anyway. Well, if we are going to have any coffee breakat all, we can go chew on that physically as well as mentally for afew minutes and come back and enter into the policy discussion.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We spent a long time on the businessoutlook; I think we should have spent a long time because [the staffpresentation] was interesting and illustrated some of our problemsvery amply. But I don't think we are going to get beyond the long-term ranges before lunch, so I suspect we will [continue the meeting]after lunch. We have to consider these forecasts a little, inpreparation for the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. We have some figures,as you know, from the Presidents and from the Board members, and weought to have at least a little discussion about how they came out andhow they should be presented. Let me defer that for later. I guessit could be argued that we ought to do that before the policy[decision], but I won't be that logical. I'll do it afterwards. ButI do think we need some time to discuss non-monetary policy matters.So [the meeting] may run a fair amount of time this afternoon. Iwon't try to finish before lunch; our meeting will have to continueafterwards anyway. I hope to finish [our work on] the long-termaggregates before lunch at the very least.I have the sense, as I suggested before, that thispresentation of the business outlook, which is based upon pastrelationships and past performance of the economy, does point up verywell our dilemmas and the basic issue we face. It's a philosophicalquestion almost as to how we approach a system which in some sense hasrun out of steam in terms of the postwar presumptions, if I can put itso grandly. The economy has been getting less liquid for 30 years.We have had rising inflation for 15 years, I suppose. Both of thosefactors, and I'm sure some others, have changed the nature of theeconomy and the nature of expectations, and they have implications forcyclical analysis. If one assumed that expectations were stable insome sense and weren't affected by inflation, the overwhelming thrustof what comes out of the business analysis is that we should have abig tax cut, an easier budget, and a substantial increase in themonetary aggregates, and everything will go along happily on pastcyclical grounds. We'd have room for a bigger recovery and everythingwould move as it did in previous cycles. We could look ahead, if not-27-7/9/80happily, on a more or less even course [consistent] with past history.I doubt that it will be so simple because expectations will beaffected. We will get financial market repercussions from that kindof policy that are probably inconsistent with that [historic]evolution. We'll get exchange market reactions that would beinconsistent with following that course. I don't think there's sosimple an answer. It's not the answer that our policy to date,anyway, has suggested. On the other hand, the opposite view--that ifwe just keep clamping down on the money supply all the problems aregoing to disappear nicely and the inflation rates are going to comedown much faster than these projections show and the various dilemmaswill be reconciled in the next year or two in a very happy kind ofway--doesn't leave one feeling entirely comfortable in the pit ofone's stomach. At least not me.I suppose it's a matter of raising the questions; it's notonly what we should be doing, but what we think the analog should bein other public policies, whether fiscal policy or wage-price policyor otherwise. Those are appropriate questions, particularly for me.I think they are always appropriate for the Committee but there's acertain spate of testimony we have to deliver in the next couple ofweeks on a whole range of economic problems, from monetary policy tofiscal policy, to wage-price policy, to silver, to the MonetaryControl Act and everything else. So we do have to think implicitly orexplicitly about complementary policies as well as about our ownpolicy and approaches. With that very general introduction, maybe Mr.Axilrod can set out the more specific considerations with respect towhere we go on the aggregates this year and next.Let me just say one other thing in that connection. Weobviously have to review the aggregates and announce a rather specificconclusion for this year. We also have to say something about nextyear, but the degree of specificity with which we state [ourobjectives for] next year is quite an open question. We can go allthe way from saying these are our preliminary ranges--we wouldn't sayfinal in any event--for M-1A, M-1B, M2, M3, and bank credit in amanner similar to what we would do for 1980 to the other extreme ofindicating a qualitative direction. Or we can alight anyplace inbetween those two extremes. It is an open question we should resolveregarding whether we want to go with one of those extremes or someplace in between in terms of what we say in the Humphrey-Hawkinsreport. I think it's useful to be as specific as we can be in thefirst go-around here--as specific as we can in getting individualviews, however generally we want to [cast it] as a consensus for theHumphrey-Hawkins report.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You did not consider the possibility--maybe it shouldn't be considered, but let me raise it--of correcting,in a sense, the M-1A/M-1B relationships for what has gone on so far.MR. AXILROD. Well, we did. We assumed that an unchangedpolicy from what was adopted in February meant that M-1A growth couldbe about 1/4 point below the midpoint of the range and M-1B growthabout 1/2 point above the midpoint.-28-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's not reflected in the ranges youare proposing.MR. AXILROD. We didn't change the ranges, but we spelledthat out as an assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically, we have the option of--MR. AXILROD. That's right. That's why I particularlystressed M-1A and possibly M-1B; but M-1A is a more logical candidate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to put this in context: The chartsthat you have drawn later [in the Bluebook] for the short-run rangesare based upon what we know through June. M-1A and M-1B are bothbelow the cone [for the year thus far]; in fact, they're below thechannel. If we took the estimate you have for July--which may be in astate of flux, but just so the Committee can appreciate it--M-1B wouldbe just about at the lower end of the cone, whereas M-1A would stillbe below the cone. You have M-1B almost back in the cone--not quite,I guess, but very close to it.MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Projecting M2 into July--June is already[plotted on the chart]--it looks a little more clearly above themidpoint.MR. AXILROD. That's right. We expect that by the time theyear is out, M2 will have grown [at a rate] somewhat above themidpoint.MR. PARTEE. And M3 will be just a little below the midpoint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have an M3 estimate for July? Idon't know whether you do or not.MR. AXILROD. I do have one. The July rate of growth for M3,at 5.8 percent, is weaker than that for M2 and M1 because we stillhave very weak bank credit demands and consequent reductions in largeCDs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you basically have for the Julyprojection is: M-1A below the cone, though probably within thechannel; M-1B just about at the lower side of the cone; M2 higher inthe range; M3 a little low in the range; and bank credit--what, belowthe bottom of the range?MR. AXILROD. Yes, well below the range.MR. PARTEE. After having run for a year or more above thetop of the range. It does suggest that we could reduce the M-1A rangeon technical grounds; I guess one could justify a half point reductionin the lower end.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, one of the considerations--to repeatwhat Steve just said--is that for this year one might take the pointof view that M-1A particularly should be reduced. If we do that, just-29-7/9/80keep in mind what we might want to do for '81 and what visualappearances we want to give of--MR. PARTEE. I mentioned the lower end of the range. Yourpoint about the top end is very well taken.MR. SCHULTZ. I would have some arguments against doing thatin addition to the problem that it creates for '81. Number one, thecredibility issue of having stated targets and leaving them alone atthis point is worth thinking about. The other is that if we startfooling around with these ranges and try to get them a bit tighter or[the expected outcome] a little more in the middle of the range, it'slikely to get us into trouble. We have to fight Proxmire all the timeanyway because he is always trying to get us to narrow the ranges; andat some point that is going to give us problems. I think we shouldtry to hold out for somewhat broader ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will remind you in that connection, asFred just implied, that we got some criticism last year--I don't thinkit was serious--that the logic was to reduce the width of the rangesat [the midyear review]. I don't suggest that we should necessarilydo it, but we should have that in mind. That is, we ought to rejectit consciously if we don't do it, because one can make the argument inpure logic that we ought to be a little more certain now about wherewe are going to end up at the end of the year than when the yearbegan. Let's hear what you have to say in general about this matter,Mr. Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. Well, I'd like to [harken] back [to] what yousaid earlier and what Fred just said. The thrust of your introductorycomments was that [people] behave differently these days because ofexpectations than they would ordinarily.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One might argue that anyway.MR. EASTBURN. Well, I think it's very true. In light ofthat, it seems to me that this exercise we go through twice a yeargoes beyond policymaking so far as the aggregates are concerned andgoes to the public impact in terms of creditability and expectations.I would prefer your statement to be fairly simple. I'd say, first ofall, that we are reaffirming the anti-inflation stand that we havebeen maintaining and, consistent with that, that we are going tomaintain the targets we had established for 1980. I'd indicate theuncertainties involved in doing that. We talked at great length hereabout the shifts and the uncertainties involved in the shifts; and ifwe are uncertain about them, [why] talk about that publicly at greatlength? It seems to me that would not enhance our credibility butwould create a great deal of public confusion. And I would notindulge in a lot of fine-tuning among the various averages. That tome would even further compound that problem. So for 1980 I wouldstick with what we have; I'd do any qualitative explanations necessarybut leave the numbers where they are. I would confine comments on1981 to a qualitative statement that we intend to pursue our long-termpolicy of gradually reducing the rate of growth of the money supplywithout being specific about the numbers at this time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.-30-7/9/80MR. ROOS. I am very close to where Dave is on this. I thinkit would be a terrible mistake to adjust these ranges. This probablywill be the first real test from a credibility standpoint of whetherwe are fulfilling what we announced our policy would be last October.To horse around or to adjust the range to accommodate what ishappening rather than what we set out to achieve would be verydetrimental to our credibility. I think consistency is terriblyimportant. I part company [with Dave], if I understood Steve'sremarks about the inflationary consequences of moving back up into therange, in that I think that we should say publicly--I think you shouldtell Congress--that we have fallen below the lower limits of ourannounced ranges for the narrow aggregates and that we are going to dowhat is necessary to get back within the ranges. But no one shouldconstrue that as having inflationary implications other than over avery short period of time. We are going to get back into these rangesbecause we do not want to exacerbate the recession we are in. Wedon't want to make it worse by continuing [to foster] growth of thenarrow aggregates below the ranges. And I think we should make atleast a strong statement--we don't want to be specific--that goinginto 1981 we are going to reduce gradually the rate of growth of thenarrow aggregates. Incidentally, our people did a study of M2 andthey feel that M2 is not an accurate predictor of GNP, so I'd resistmoving to place greater emphasis on our M2 targets. But I think weought to tell Congress what we are going to do--that we are going tocorrect for this [current] undershoot and that next year we are goingto continue our policy of gradually reducing the rate of money growth.We will enforce our credibility by being candid. I don't think weought to play games.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we ought to associatea change in the ranges--if we think we have good grounds for a change--with playing games or horsing around. All "B" is arguing is that atechnical adjustment is required.MR. ROOS. Don't you think, given the tendency of the OpenMarket Committee in past years toward base drift, that people--or atleast interested market participants and others--knew that we wereplaying games in those days to make ourselves look good?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is something to what yousay, looking at history. And I'm not arguing for changing the ranges;but I just don't want to associate any change, particularly in thiscase when we could argue that we have a technical reason for makingthe change, with playing games. We said a certain range was valid atone point; I don't think we can say that it's valid forever justbecause we happened to say it [once]. Don't change the ranges lightlywithout a good reason is what I think you are saying. Don't revert tochanging them automatically because we change them every quarter totake account of what has happened. I just don't want to overstate thecase for not changing. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, as to the general economic andpsychological setting, I am persuaded that we are in a situation whereour conventional belief no longer stands up that monetary and fiscalpolicy, if handled appropriately, have the capacity for nudging theeconomy along a path toward full employment and price stability. AndI am persuaded that we will not be able to achieve those desirableobjectives without engaging in some direct interference in some of the-31-7/9/80price and wage making processes. But even if that's true, it seems tome that the best contribution monetary policy can make is to behave asif that were in fact the situation and hope that somewhere along theway the necessary [steps] will be taken to address the structuralrigidities in the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pardon me for interrupting you, Ernie, butyou reminded me: I would appreciate it if people, when they aremaking their comments, would express any assumption they are makingabout fiscal policy or wage-price policies--as you have just done toan extent--and say what they think is appropriate. Your comment onwage-price policy just reminded me of it.MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, turning to what's immediately at hand, Ithink it's a close call as to whether to make any adjustments in thetargets that were announced last February. I can make a fairlypersuasive case either way, I think. It seems to me that we are underrather strong pressure to do something with the 6 to 9 percent rangeon bank credit. Of course, if we do that, then we have made a changeand that opens up the whole set of ranges for other changes. If itwere not for that, I would come out on balance for no change. If wewere to come out [for no change], we could just incorporate some wordsrationalizing that any time we are aiming at a family of targets, weobviously are not going to be able to hit all of them. And in thiscircumstance we are simply pursuing policies which, as things havedeveloped, give greater priority to the money measures than to thecredit measures.With respect to next year, we have a choice of being eitherfairly specific or quite general. If we go the route of being quitegeneral, we should reiterate with some firmness of conviction, asalready has been suggested and as we have done previously, that we areof a mind to move to lower rates of monetary growth until such time aswe get to that level of growth which is judged to be consistent withfull employment under conditions of price stability. But as next yearhas the potential of giving us a fairly unusual looking set ofnumbers, until such time as we get to the point of presenting thosenumbers it might be appropriate now to take a little time to elaborateon the point that as the new legislation goes into effect, we thinkit's going to have a substantial impact. Just by way of illustration,its impact could be such that a posture of moderate slowing in therate of growth of our narrowest money measure might bring our targetfor growth of that particular measure down to zero. So I would wantto try to get across that idea. It seems to me that if we are goingto get much benefit in the economy from monetary policy in this nextyear or so, it has to flow pretty much from getting across the ideathat we are going to impose a policy that will continue to move in thedirection of being consistent with price stability, whatever thosenumbers might be. That's all I have right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You assume a tax cut next year or thedesirability thereof?MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, I take it as a given that there will beone. It's not something that I have endorsed in any of the speeches Ihave made.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.-32-7/9/80MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I'm quite comfortable withalternative 1 as stated, [namely to maintain] the present ranges. Iwould, of course, do the proposed revision of the bank credit range.But I don't consider that in the same box as the four aggregates. Asa matter of fact, I think we have gone out of our way to make it clearto the [Congressional] Committee--I'm relying on memory here, sosomeone can correct me if I am wrong--that [our aggregates targets]would be "associated with" bank credit expansion of such and such.We've said that bank credit isn't a target in the sense that theaggregates are a target. As far as next year is concerned, Isubscribe also to the idea of [describing our objectives]qualitatively.I see no reason though, Mr. Chairman, why you in yourtestimony couldn't indicate that we are at a different point in termsof the outlook for the ranges for this year--that at this time we arecloser to the low end of the range for M-1A and a little higher thanthe midpoint for M-1B, and so forth. You could do it qualitativelywithout disturbing your credibility; I think it would enhance yourcredibility. And for next year, somewhat differently from Larry, Iwould put a little more reliance on M2 because I think it is a morestable aggregate against which to measure than M-1A or M-1B. We aregoing to have a lot of volatility and unpredictability even [thoughwe're more than] a third of the way through the year. So I would leantoward more reliance on M2 looking forward. It isn't as important incalendar year '80, but I think it is very important in calendar year'81. So, I think you can indicate qualitatively [how] we are leaningin our thinking without getting into quantities and without disturbingcredibility. Fred Schultz's point is very apt that Proxmire wouldlike nothing more than to see us try to fine-tune some of theseranges. He would say: "Aha, you are working in my direction but youare too cowardly to come out with a point estimate." I would arguevery vociferously against either fine-tuning or a point estimate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One problem you remind me of--it is moreof a potential problem--is that if we put more emphasis on M2 and alsosay qualitatively that we are going to reduce its range, my impressionis that we may maximize the tension between the economic projectionand the monetary projections.MR. MAYO. Well, you have to go further than I indicated,Paul, in that M2 has certain qualities that remove it a little fromtransaction accounts. That's why we have M1. I don't see any harm inindicating that we may not be able to reduce M2 but that we expect orhope to have slightly lower M1 ranges. I don't think that would getyou in too much trouble because M2 does include the ingredients ofhousing finance and so forth. That would not detract from thecredibility of a qualitative statement of that type.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I don't think there is acompelling case to change the ranges this year, although I wouldn'tobject to revising M-1A down by 1/2 of one percentage point. For nextyear, I disagree with most people who have talked so far. I think weought to give some numbers for next year. If we fail to do so, wecould generate some adverse psychology to the effect that the FederalReserve is not willing to speak except in very vague generalities. On-33-7/9/80the other hand, the problems of setting ranges for M1 numbers for nextyear are really formidable. I disagree with the staff recommendationthat M-1B should be boosted by only 1-1/2 percentage points next year;that's much too low. If in the current situation we are getting aboost of 1-1/4 points to M-1B and then we go to national NOW accounts,[the effect will be greater]. The NOW account is a much moremarketable concept than the ATS account; furthermore the S&Ls, sincethey do not have demand deposits, cannot [offer] ATS accounts. So the1-1/2 points seems much too low. Now, if we go with 2-1/2 points,which is closer to where I think we are going to come out, then wewill get some very strange numbers. For example, for M-1A we will geta range of -2 to +1 percent and for M-1B, 5-1/2 to 8 percent. I justthink our ability to set ranges for M-1A and M-1B next year is solimited that we'd be much better off simply telling Congress that, dueto this new technology change coming next year, we can't do a verygood job at estimating and, therefore, we are only going to set atarget for M2 next year. Now, we could add M3 to that and set targetsfor M2 and M3. And I would say for M2 that we are going to scale downthe range by 1/2 percentage point to 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. If weare not willing to make any commitment, even a tentative one, on whatwe are going to do in '81--particularly if you are [testifying] at atime when the foreign exchange markets are very turbulent--we arelikely to get adverse psychological feedback. I don't see any realhazard to [my suggestion]. We are going to have to come up with somescaling down of the [ranges] and 1/2 percentage point is about assmall as I can accept.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Despite the fact that it's inconsistentwith the economic outlook as presented? It's only 1/2 percentagepoint more inconsistent than the present range.MR. MORRIS. I don't think 1/2 point is going to make verymuch difference, Mr. Chairman.MR. SCHULTZ. Except that it is in the wrong direction.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What would you say about taxes and wage-price policy?MR. MORRIS. We ought to scrap wage-price policy. I don'tthink it has contributed anything in 1980, and in an environment suchas we are going to have in the next couple of years I think themarketplace could do a better job than presidential guidelines.Presidential guidelines might end up providing a floor for wageincreases in the kind of soft situation we are contemplating.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I infer from what you are saying thatyou are much more optimistic about the wage outlook than the forecastsuggests?MR. MORRIS. Yes, I am, because I think we can affectexpectations if we really demonstrate to the marketplace that thingsare changing, that we are doing things differently.MR. BAUGHMAN. We can't affect existing contracts.MR. MORRIS. Yes, but remember, 80 percent of the Americanlabor force is non-union. It doesn't [work under] any contract. On-34-7/9/80taxes, I would urge the Congress to set that issue aside until theycome back in the next session and treat it as a tax reform issuerather than as a consumption stimulus issue. One could make a goodcase for offsetting the increase in social security taxes for theconsumer and one could certainly make a case for investment stimulus.This, of course, is essentially what is in the package. It seems tome, again psychologically, that it would be better to do this when theeconomy is turning up rather than having the Congress make a panicky,seemingly fine-tuning, effort before it goes out for re-election.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, like several of the others who havespoken, our preference for 1981 would be the retention of the existingranges. I come out pretty close to where Dave Eastburn and Larry Rooscame out but, of course, I wouldn't want to overstate my case as yousaid Larry was close to doing. So, I feel pretty much the samewithout overstating it. Just attribute [the overstatement] to him!If we lower our targets now--and because of where we are I know thereis a real temptation to do that--people are going to interpret it asmeaning that we have just forgiven our misses as we have done in thepast. That's just one step away from their concluding that if weovershoot on the up side as we come out of this--which is where weusually have made our mistakes in the past--we will do that just asreadily [this time]. So, that is the principal reason I would stickwith these targets. But we ought to recognize that there are otheraspects of credibility involved, and one is that to achieve thesetargets--to get anywhere near the adjusted midpoints of the ranges forM-1A and M-1B--we have to have pretty darn rapid rates of growth inthose aggregates between now and the end of the year. And I'mconvinced that a substantial body of the financial public is apt toconclude that we have thrown in the towel [on fighting inflation]unless we do a very good job of explaining that. I think you, Mr.Chairman, and the rest of us will have to combat that in talks ifindeed we do decide that is what we want to pursue.I am also aware that this course will probably weaken thedollar temporarily, but if we don't go ahead and move our aggregatesup [into the ranges], the intensification of the recession here willprobably damage our trading partners to a considerable extent andthere will be feedback effects here. And those effects may even bemore serious so far as domestic activity is concerned. We also oughtto bear in mind that the real way to deal with the foreign exchangeproblem is to deal with inflation rather than to worry about temporarydifferences in interest rates. And I do think this policy will be thebest way to deal with inflation over the long run. So on thesegrounds, we would favor approaching the adjusted midpoints--maybe Ishould say asymptotically or rather slowly anyway--of the ranges forM-1A and M-1B and we would weigh M-1B considerably more heavily thanthe others. We also would favor shorter-run specifications that wouldbe consistent with that kind of long-run policy.For 1981 I think it's vital that we follow through andannounce that we have lowered our targets, as we have been promisingto do every time we have [testified]. I'd make an effort to lowerthese gradually, but steadily. I think Frank Morris made a good pointin suggesting that we ought to avoid saying much about the technicaladjustments now. I would favor lowering all of the ranges about 1/2-35-7/9/80percentage point but point out that we will have to make adjustmentslater on. I know that's not going to eliminate all the confusion thatwill emanate from this statement, but it might reduce it.So far as the last question you asked, I would not favor atax cut but it seems inevitable given the political situation, so I amassuming that one will take place. And I agree with Frank Morris thatjawboning is practically useless. I would say it might have amarginally positive effect if monetary and fiscal policy are doingwhat they are supposed to be doing. But a tax cut is probablyinevitable, so I imagine we will have it in some form.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I feel we ought to reduce the ranges for1980. I realize it looks a little like base drift in fitting thegoals to suit the achievements, but the alternative of bringing theachievements back within the ranges that were our goals could be verydamaging. That would mean a rapid [rate of] increase in theaggregates. We'd have to go for a number of months at rates of growthin M-1A, and M-1B even more so, that in the past have been regarded asindicating inflation and perhaps a reversal of our policy. We wouldhave to drive interest rates down somewhat further to severelynegative rates. And then we would have to make a turnabout at somepoint in order to get back on track; [with money growth] havingsharply risen back to track, we'd have to slow it down, therebysuddenly raising interest rates after [previously] having driven themdown. I think all these gyrations would be damaging, and we are notlikely to do them [when needed]. We will find ourselves missing orsomehow avoiding the very painful issues involved in these interestrate movements. So I would favor bringing down the M-1A and M-1Branges 1/2 point for 1980.For the next year I share the philosophy that we ought toannounce a reduction. I am very apprehensive that we will be far outof reach with regard to the development of nominal income on one sideand the reduced monetary aggregates targets are concerned. I see theadditional problem of M-1B. I, too, would be surprised if thereweren't a more rapid switch [to NOW accounts], causing M-1B toincrease more rapidly and M-1A to slow. It looks as though M-1A isreally a diminished, vanishing species as far as most people areconcerned. And I think perhaps Frank Morris' suggestion of focusingon M2 and M3 for '81 and explaining that under these conditions wecannot be very specific about M-1A and M-1B is a way out. We would dowhat we should do--indicate a reduction; that is what I wouldrecommend. But we wouldn't quite trap ourselves in so difficult asituation as we would if we named lower numbers for the M1 aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wages, prices, and taxes?MR. WALLICH. My response there is that we ought to go to atax oriented incomes policy. I see in the Washington Post today thatthey are revising--MR. PARTEE. Last gasp.-36-7/9/80MR. WALLICH. It just won't die because it's a reasonablesuggestion. As for a tax cut, if we had the choice, I would postponeit into late '81.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I'm quite satisfied with the specifications ofthe ranges at this point. Remember, they are ranges, and if we getinto the lower parts of them or the upper parts of them we've met ourtargets. We don't have to hit the 4-1/2 percent or 4-3/4 percent[midpoints] right on the nose. It seems to me that it would not bewise to lower them, simply for credibility reasons, even if we sayit's a technical adjustment. Just leave them alone. I'd also pointout to you that I don't think there is an overwhelming need to changethe bank credit number because we know there has been a tremendoussubstitution of commercial paper for bank credit. And if we take[account of] the total sources of credit in [that measure], then the 6to 9 percent range is one that is achievable. It's just a technicaldevelopment in the market rather than anything that should make uschange our targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I can just interrupt, I meant to ask--and maybe you already said this Steve, though you don't have it thisway in the table--if we keep the ranges unchanged, is the technicalcase intellectually, in the sense of your best forecast, overwhelmingfor changing bank credit or not?MR. AXILROD. Yes, our forecast for bank credit is literally4-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter?MR. AXILROD. Yes, December to December it's around 5percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's consistent with these--MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's consistent with the 4-1/2 percent[forecast for M-1A], etc.MS. TEETERS. But if you add in commercial paper what happensto it?MR. AXILROD. I don't have that rate of growth in mind, but Idon't think it would be that low.MS. TEETERS. It probably would bring growth within therange, if we [took into account] the substitution in commercial paper.MR. AXILROD. I'd have to calculate it.MR. MORRIS. It has been several billion dollars in the lastcouple--MS. TEETERS. Yes. It strikes me as the same kind of animal.[Issuers of commercial paper] have just shifted where they are getting[funds]; and due to the technicalities of the prime rate relative tomarket rates it's a reasonable thing to do. So, we could just explain-37-7/9/80that there has been a shift in the way the market is [behaving] andkeep the same range.For next year, I really am disturbed that everybody wants tolower [the ranges]. Have you not looked at what the federal fundsrate would be if we lower them? The funds rate in the fourth quarterof 1981, if we lower our targets, would be 15 percent. How muchmortgage activity do you expect to have if fed funds are at 15percent? There's a limit to how far we can push down on money growthand not just absolutely strangle this economy. And given theuncertainties of the outlook at this point, I think the safest thingto do is to say that we are going to stay within the same ranges nextyear. We have wide enough ranges to lower the actual outcome, to comein at the low end. But to set out now to push short-term rates up tothe 15 percent area seems to me outrageous, frankly. It would almostcompletely negate any real growth that we are going to get over thisperiod. The housing market certainly won't come back. The thing todo is to say that we will aim to get within the ranges and that wearen't sure we are going to hit the midpoint of every one of them.I'd stick to the bank credit range as modified, and then say at thispoint that we simply plan to continue [those ranges] through next yearrather than that our total task in life is to reduce the rate ofincrease in the money supply year after year. I don't think that'swhat it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wages, prices, and taxes?MS. TEETERS. On wages and prices, I don't see that we have ahope of getting it through Congress. On taxes I think the mostbeneficial tax cut we could get--this should sound familiar--is to cutout the social security tax increases, which would probably do more tolower unit costs than anything we could do at this point. That has adirect impact on wages. They can take out the increase in January anddress it up as a removal of health insurance [unintelligible]. And ifthe accelerated depreciation were put in, we'd probably get the bestcombination of tax reduction and one that goes directly into people'sincomes right away. It wouldn't get all tied up in a refund a yearlater, in the way it has been done several times before. So, if westate our preferences, I'd certainly go for social security relief.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Let me start with the tax issue first. I agreewith Frank that we ought to encourage the Congress not to considerthis until after the general election. I think the chances of gettinga well-structured tax cut would be much better if it could beconsidered later this year rather than in the heat of electionpolitics. I would like to see a significant part of the tax reductiongo to a reduction in payroll taxes, but not all of it. We ought tostrongly encourage the Congress to allocate a substantial share of theoverall tax reduction to business investment incentives because Ithink that's critically needed for the future. On wage-price policy,the way wages and prices behave in a complex modern economy leavesreally no alternative but to try to use voluntary guidelines tosupplement monetary and fiscal policies. I wish I could agree withGovernor Wallich that a TIP would work, but I don't see any kind ofTIP that is feasible.-38-7/9/80So far as the targets are concerned, I want to start with1981 and work backwards. If I have understood correctly, the staff issaying that if we want to keep the unemployment rate from going upfurther, from roughly 9 percent at the end of 1980, we are going tohave to provide for an increase in Ml, however defined--not worryingfor the moment about NOW accounts and so on--of roughly 7 percentunless we have a very favorable shift in money demand. And Steve issaying that the chances of not getting that favorable shift in moneydemand are not trivial. I would say that, indeed, they are nottrivial; it may not happen at all. So I think it would be a seriousmistake for us to decide at this juncture that we ought to lower thetarget growth rates for the narrow monetary aggregates for next year.I'm more pessimistic than the staff on the outlook for inflation nextyear. But we can't possibly run a viable long-run monetary strategyto reduce inflation if we follow a strategy that pushes theunemployment rate well above 9 percent. I just don't think that'sviable. Now, the logic of my position for 1980 and my interpretationof what has been happening recently says we ought to lower the growthranges; substantively I agree with Governor Wallich completely. But Idon't think we can lower them now for the rest of 1980 and then raisethem for 1981. So, I would be inclined to leave the targets wherethey are for 1980; but I would be entirely happy, unless we have areverse shift of the money demand function, to see the actual growthrate of the narrow monetary targets fall below the targets for thisyear. I would be quite prepared to explain to the Congress that whenwe have a shift in money demand to pump out enough money supply tostay within those ranges is murder. It would just ruin any chances wehave for getting inflation under control over the long run. So far asM2 is concerned, my feeling is that we have a range that looksinconsistent with the M-1A range and that we ought to be prepared toraise that. And if we are reluctant to raise the whole M2 range, thenI'd raise the upper end. It is a new kind of aggregate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you talking about '80 and '81?MR. GRAMLEY. 1980. What I would do for 1981 is simply saythat at this juncture we have no basis for changing our views on theappropriate growth rates and for now I'd leave them where they are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand you, for M2 for 1980 youwould--MR. GRAMLEY. I would be inclined to raise the range for M2for 1980. One way to do it would be simply to raise the upper end andsay 6 to 10 percent.MR. PARTEE. Or let it go a little over.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Chances are that M3 will be within [its range]and we could be a little over on M2 and a little under on Ml.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd be prepared to [accept] that, too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.-39-7/9/80MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, my posture would be to emphasize therapidity of change we've experienced and the likelihood that we mayencounter continued rapid changes down the road. I'd indicate thekinds of changes that have taken place and that may take place in thefuture. I would keep monetary policy unchanged but stress thatmaintaining policy might involve some fluctuations in interest ratesahead, some of which may be adverse. In view of the rapidity ofchange and the many uncertainties, I would be extremely hesitant to bevery specific about next year. Inflation developments may go one wayor the other in the fall, which may influence [our decision]. We havethe technological changes with nationwide NOW accounts. We have theuncertainty with respect to taxes and a whole set of [unintelligible].So I would be more concerned [about making sure] that policy isappropriate with respect to the changed circumstances, whatever theymight be. And I'd say that [ranges] will be announced in February,with the thought of then being very specific.With respect to taxes, I would be inclined to talk about taxreform, not just the deficit side of the picture, and to stress theimportance of waiting until there is a chance to consider those movesdeliberately rather than hastily. I am very sympathetic to the socialsecurity tax problem--what it means cost-wise, income return, and allthe impacts--and the need to do something on the investment incentiveside. That may require a cut in expenditures, depending on thecircumstances when [the Congress] starts to consider this. So I thinkthey are caught in that. As for wage-price policy, I don't feel thatdoes much good; I'd [rely once again on] market forces.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, earlier on you raised the questionof the Proxmire resolution and didn't get much of a response. I wasmulling over the opportunities as well as the risks of supporting thatresolution and I would come out recommending that you support it ifyou're forced to take a position. If at some future date the Congressgoes down the road that you fear it might and begins talking aboutsetting interest rate levels, we could resist that kind of resolutionat the appropriate time. To resist the current proposed resolution Ithink would be a mistake. Such a resolution would strengthen our handin terms of not following a usual vigorous countercyclical policy inview of the ongoing very serious nature of inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just make clear my own positionat the moment, which is always subject to change, it is not to resistit or to support it. In other words, if I get asked "Is this a goodresolution?" I'd say it's a fine resolution. But I'd try not to beout there in front.MR. BALLES. Yes, I think that would be wise. The dilemmathat you so well described earlier is going to come home to roost,obviously, in your testimony. I agree with a number of otherobservations made around the table a little earlier that the markets,both domestic and international, are going to be extraordinarilysensitive to all the nuances of what you have to say. And I think itis quite important to separate policymaking from public perceptions atthis point because the impact of the announced ranges on inflationpsychology and what is assumed to be the course of actual growth isgoing to be extraordinarily important. I certainly agree that we-40-7/9/80ought to resist any narrowing of those ranges, if you get pushed intospeaking to that either in your testimony or in response to questions.We should try to keep the maximum flexibility because of all thechanges going on both in the economy and in financial innovations;with nationwide NOW accounts pending we are going to need thatflexibility I am sure.You asked us to speak about assumptions on tax cuts and wage-price policy. I am pretty cynical regarding the ability of wage-pricepolicy, if it's continued, to do anything realistic to change the waythe world runs. If I were a betting man, I'd bet that there will be atax cut sometime in '81. If we have an opportunity to speak to how itought to be structured, I would certainly support the statementsothers on the Committee have made that we ought to aim for tax reformdesigned to stimulate productivity and capital investment and take theedge off the impact of high and rising payroll taxes. My own hunch isthat there is going to be little, if any, real restraint on the fiscalpolicy side in terms of the actual budget or even the high employmentbudget. That's because if you look back at what happened to theunemployment rate during this period of expansion that ended lastJanuary, we never even got close to getting down to a 5.1 percentunemployment rate. So I think that rate is very unrealistic whencalculating the impact of a full employment budget. That leads me tothe conclusion that monetary policy is still about the only game intown in terms of exerting any anti-inflation effect. But we are facedwith the usual dilemma that there is a long lag between the time wemove toward restraint and when it shows up on the price front, whichmay not be until several years from now.Having wrestled with whether or not to change the ranges, Ithink we would be well-advised just to keep the present ranges and notchange their width either. There would be too many problems toexplain if we begin tinkering with the ranges for 1980; therefore, Iwould [support] the views already expressed not to fuss with them.But, of course, in terms of policymaking in future months, we want toreserve for ourselves the right not to hit the present midpoints forall the reasons that have been set forth.With respect to 1981, I would also agree with the viewexpressed earlier by many other speakers that we should avoid gettingoverly specific and try to avoid getting pinned down to explicitnumbers, especially in view of all the uncertainties connected withthe impact of pending nationwide NOW accounts. I favor keeping [ourtargets for] 1981 as much as possible in qualitative terms but I hopeon balance that your testimony would imply, if not make explicitlyplain, that in terms of longer-run strategy we are still working veryhard at getting the inflation rate down, even if that involves moreaggregate growth for next year than we may have for this year. That'sabout all I have on that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, my point of view is strongly driven bysomething that we haven't talked about yet, and that is that we arestill kind of on a honeymoon and that the tough times are ahead. Thetechnique that we are using implies that at some point in time, whenthe economy begins to strengthen, unemployment will still be high andprobably rising and interest rates will begin to go up. And that is-41-7/9/80when the moment of truth will arise. That is the period that GovernorWallich is afraid of in that he thinks it will put us in the cowardlycamp. I don't believe that's correct. But it is important that wefollow a strategy that gives us the best opportunity to stick to ourguns in spite of what may be at that point considerably more pressurethan we are presently feeling. Therefore, my approach would be tohold to the present targets and to ease toward them reasonably slowly,which would mean aiming to reach them in December. I would not liketo see us [promote rapid growth] to reach them in September, whichwould mean that the fourth quarter would be the period in which wewill start to see interest rates rising rapidly. It would put us inthat box quickly.For 1981 I believe the 4-1/2 percent figure is sufficientlyrestrictive for us to be using in our thinking at this time. However,it's very important that we give ourselves as much leeway as we can.I would like to suggest that for 1981 we comment along the lines thatthe aggregates will be generally at or below the present targets. Weare all very uncertain about the state of the economy. We allrecognize how difficult forecasting is currently and it would not helpus much at this point to be specific. I would like to see us have theopportunity to have a little more running room at the end of the year.So far as the bank credit figures are concerned, I don't think theyare very critical. The monetary aggregates are much more important.I certainly would not be opposed to Governor Teeters's approach thatwe say [bank credit] is running below the target range but that'sbecause of a shift in the type of debt [being used] or something likethat.So far as wage and price guidelines are concerned, I don'tthink they make much difference at this point. There is a possibilitythat somewhere down the road they may make some difference. There issomething to be said about rational expectations in terms of gettinginflation down over time and, although we can't have a social contractlike they have in other countries, I believe that some wage-priceguidelines together with a variety of other things can make adifference. As far as the tax cut is concerned, I favor one; I favora tax cut that will help on inflation and help in terms of savings andproductivity. Therefore, I would agree that we ought to do somethingabout depreciation or investment tax credits or something in thatarea. I agree the timing would be much better if it could be put offuntil next year. If it can't, let's have it as late as possible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I agree 100 percent with Nancy. I would use thesame ranges again, recognizing that for 1980 we expect--and to someextent plan--to come in at the bottom end of the range on M1 and maybewell up in the range on M2. I think that's probably better thanmaking any kind of technical adjustment. And I agree that we canexplain bank credit by emphasizing [commercial] paper, the way Nancydid, rather than corporate debt generally because people understandthat paper is a direct substitute for bank borrowing, depending onrate relationships.For 1981, I agree with both Nancy and Lyle. I don't see anychance of reducing these ranges without possibly having considerableimpacts on the economy. Now, a number of people have said they don't-42-7/9/80know what to do with M1, so let's reduce M2. But M2, as somebodypointed out earlier, is a source of housing credit in substantial partand has the money market mutual funds in it, which are still growingpretty rapidly. The top end of our range now is 9 percent. We can'tignore the fact that nominal GNP is going to have to go up quite a bitbecause, much as we dislike it, there's going to be quite a lot ofinflation. And [reducing the M2 range] isn't the way to stop thatinflation. Therefore, it seems to me that we'll be lucky if we cankeep M2 within that 9 percent [upper limit] next year. The strategy Iwould follow would be to say that 1981 is a long time off but weanticipate having something like the same kinds of ranges for 1981that we have had this year and we would hope to reduce growth withinthese ranges as inflationary pressures abate--assuming they do. Youcan make that comment: We will do it as we are able to do it, asinflationary pressures are reduced.On wage-price control, I would get rid of that program assoon as possible. I think it is totally discredited in the countryand it is best to get rid of [that bureaucracy] and let it rest for ayear or two and maybe try something better next time. We can say thatmarket forces are going to lead toward more moderate settlements inlabor [contracts] later. One of the difficulties in continuing theprogram is that we have to recognize the cost of living. And if wedo, that's going to lead us as it did this year to raise the ReserveBank budgets rather than reduce them. The change in the wage-priceguidelines led us to increase Reserve Bank salaries and that's a veryfine example of a counterproductive effect from that [program]. It'sour own salaries that have to be limited--not somebody else's, buteverybody's in this room.I don't see any sense in arguing the tax issue. There willbe a reduction next year. It needs to include some consumption taxreduction because consumers are too hard pressed, but I like the ideaof making it a payroll rather than a general income tax reduction.MR. RICE. I agree with everybody. It's obvious to me thatthere is going to be a tax cut next year. I just hope it's a goodone--that is, one that consists in part of a reduction in payrolltaxes but also increases investment incentives. From my point of viewit should have at least these two objectives: To increase investmentincentives, and hopefully have the effect of increasing productivity,and to reduce the payroll tax burden. I would also add that it'sterribly important to get people to start to think in terms of taxreform as soon as possible. This is separate, of course, from theimmediate tax cut issue that is going to have to be dealt with. Butthe sooner we begin to think in long-range terms about tax reform, thebetter, because it has all kinds of implications for productivity andstimulating investment, and so forth.With respect to wage-price policies, I have a good deal ofsympathy for Henry's tax-based incomes policy. I don't think there ismuch chance of getting it, but I certainly would have a good deal ofsympathy for it. Absent a high probability of getting it, I wouldprobably find myself agreeing with Governor Partee that we should justforget about the wage-price guidelines. But, again, I don't know howpolitically realistic that is at the present time.-43-7/9/80With respect to the aggregates, I would favor maintaining thecurrent ranges for the reasons that have been given already. I thinkthe credibility problem--I'm speaking now about 1980--is a real one.We ought not be in a position of having it said that when theaggregates move in a way that's uncomfortable for us we adjust theranges. I don't think we ought to tamper with the ranges for 1980.Therefore, I would support alternative I, maintaining the presentranges, and not worry too much about where the aggregates come inwithin those ranges.With respect to 1981, I would favor strategy 1, again forreasons that have already been given. We ought to say that we have noreason at this point to adjust the ranges downward in 1981. I hastento add that six months or a year from now, when we are consideringthem again, we might well want to adjust the ranges. But I see noreason to commit ourselves now to reducing the rate of growth in theaggregates. To do so would run the risk of reducing the rates ofgrowth in money at a time when unemployment is rising. That is arealistic possibility, it seems to me, and I would not want to be in aposition of mechanically having to follow a policy which requires usto reduce money growth at a time when unemployment is still rising.So I would favor stating that we see no reason at the present time tochange the targets for 1981; however, if the situation unfolds in sucha way six months from now or a year from now that it seems necessaryor feasible, we will certainly consider it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me that the question isnot what assumption the Federal Reserve is making in regard to taxpolicy, but how you will answer questions on policy recommendationsthat the Committee will ask you. Substantively I certainly agree withLyle Gramley and a lot of others that the responsible thing to say--and I hope you will say this, Mr. Chairman--is that the size and thecomposition of the tax cut should be considered early in the year.However, I'd like to make a point which I sometimes think the Americanpublic doesn't quite understand [regarding] why, if everybody says atax cut is inevitable next year, it shouldn't be legislated now. So Ithink you have to point out two factors: One, that the tax cut andthe composition of that cut can't significantly affect the course ofthe economy for the rest of the year; and secondly, if you choose to,and you may not choose to, that the politics involved in an electionyear are not conducive to the kind of carefully studied anddeliberately planned tax cut that is appropriate.I also feel that wage-price guidelines, even though they havenot been very effective in the last two years, are an absoluteessential. I think it's appropriate to point out that they worked inperiods during the '60s, that there will be an opportunity forwhichever Administration is in power to start with a fresh slate, andthat certainly if they can be made much more effective they will addboth to a better recovery and higher employment as well as a lowerinflation rate. And they should go hand-in-glove with considerationof the tax-cut policy.As far as the aggregates go, I also share the overwhelmingconsensus [developing] here that we should not change the aggregatesfor 1980. But I think it's important to point out at least that we-44-7/9/80expect M-1A and M-1B to come in toward the lower end of their ranges.If we don't say that, we may get a very adverse market impact.As for 1981, I am similarly concerned about what the marketimpact will be both in domestic markets--[that is], long-term marketrates--and the foreign exchange markets if we fail to say or at leastto imply that there will be some edging down of the targets. In acertain sense, it has almost become widely expected of the FederalReserve. I'm not disregarding the substantive problem that Nancy andChuck pointed out, and I realize that we shouldn't lock ourselves intoanything. Certainly we should not be specific, but I am a littleconcerned about the market impact. If we were to fail to [saysomething of that nature], that would be a noticeable omission, and Iwould hope that with your usual skill you will be able to waffle. Ihope you will bear in mind that we are talking with one eye on themarket. I guess that pretty much summarizes [my views].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would just note in connection with thatlast comment that it is not a question of my dancing around andanswering the questions. That is one thing. But in our lovely staffreport we have to put in black and white what we believe the prospectsare for next year, however vaguely that is stated. The officialdistillation of our intentions for next year is going to be there in asentence or two or three sentences or whatever. It's a little harderto waffle without being obvious about it.MR. PARTEE. Perhaps we could invent a typo for this andscramble the sentence--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we heard from everybody except ourFirst Vice Presidential associates?MR. ALTMANN. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Perhaps I shouldbegin by saying that when Governor Partee talks about Federal Reservesalaries I would take some exception, but perhaps I'll save that foranother forum.MR. PARTEE. That's what everybody always does when they talkabout their own salary.MR. FORRESTAL. With respect to the longer-term targets for1980, Mr. Chairman, I think the choice is a difficult one betweenmaintaining the status quo and lowering them. I have some sympathyfor the view Governor Wallich has expressed, but on balance I wouldprefer to see the targets remain unchanged for 1980. Having saidthat, I do think we ought to strive to come in at the lower end andcertainly not exceed the midpoint of those ranges. And we shouldstate publicly that we will be coming in at the lower end so as toavoid any market misinterpretation of our ultimate motives.With respect to 1981, my present feeling is that we shouldprobably reduce the ranges, but I think it's premature to be veryspecific about our intentions because of the uncertainties thateveryone else has [mentioned]. I think a tax cut is inevitable in-45-7/9/801981. My own preference would be to have it in the form of tax reformand be later rather than sooner, but in the present politicalenvironment I expect a tax cut will come at least in 1981 if notsooner. On wage and price policy, I don't have much to say exceptthat I don't think that policy has been very effective and the soonerwe dismantle the bureaucracy that's administering those programs thebetter off we'll be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gainor.MR. GAINOR. With respect to wages and prices, I agreeentirely with Bob Forrestal that the best thing we could do isdismantle the program as soon as possible and I'd recommend that. Onthe issue of a tax cut, we assume a cut of the magnitude projected,around $28 billion. We'd prefer that we not have it. If we have tohave it, though, we'd like it to be deferred, preferably until afterthe election.With respect to 1980, we favor continuation of the existingranges, alternative I. I think that's consistent with what we toldCongress and everyone else earlier in the year and we should followthrough on that commitment. As to 1981, we favor strategy 2, whichsupports the concept of an orderly reduction over time in the rangesthat we're aiming toward. In deference to the point that Ernie madeabout legislative uncertainty and so on, it's probably better towaffle on how we state our plans for 1981 but I definitely thinkstrategy 2 is the right one.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Czerwinski.MR. CZERWINSKI. Mr. Chairman, there is little that I can addto what has already been said. Our position with respect to wage andprice policy would be identical to what Bob Forrestal has enunciated.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the First Vice Presidents'position on wage-price policy is related to their dislike of wage-price policies by the Federal Reserve Board.MR. RICE. I don't understand the implications. We don'thave to raise them as much.MR. CZERWINSKI. With respect to taxes we, too, think that acut is inevitable and would prefer to see it come late in 1981 ifpossible. On the long-run targets for 1980, our preference would beto maintain the existing [ranges]. For 1981, we would favor someslight reduction.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, would you just record me--becauseyou hadn't asked the question on wage and price controls--as beingstrongly opposed to them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a big surprise!MR. BLACK. I think he understated his case, Mr. Chairman!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to summarize so we canconclude, if feasible, before lunch. On taxes, first of all, let mejust say that I [expect] to be asked to testify formally on taxes, as-46-7/9/80it will be coming up before other committees. In a sense, what I saywould be my personal testimony, but the question is to what extent Ican speak for a wider group if asked. There seems to be a consensus,though not everybody spoke to the point of what we want as opposed towhat we expect, that there is no eagerness for moving on taxesimmediately in a broad-brush way. There may be differing degrees ofsympathy for a tax cut eventually. I think everybody would say itdepends partly on conditions. But the idea of trying to [delay itsenactment] is certainly widely accepted [by this group] as nearly as Ican see [as is the view that] the cuts ought to be gauged as much aspossible in terms of their direct impact on prices and costs andproductivity. There is considerable sentiment--I don't know what Ithink about this frankly--[for reducing] the payroll tax. I recognizethe benefits but I also worry about the future of the social securitydiscipline if payroll taxes are [not imposed] directly. But Irecognize that it is a major avenue to look at in connection with thetax cut program. I could probably speak pretty broadly by saying thatthere is a desire for this to be looked at later and not right now andnot be too definite about the later. The later could conceivably meanat least September but preferably after the election.On the wage-price issue, there's a greater difference ofopinion, obviously. I don't have any set view on this at the momentbut I have a feeling that the pessimism [about the effectiveness ofthe program] that has been expressed by the staff is widely acceptedin our thinking in terms of the difficulty of [making progress on] thewage side of the [equation]. I'm not sure there's anything to belost, frankly, by saying that if you people in the Congress aretalking about a tax cut, a pre-requisite you ought to think aboutamong other things, is a concord between labor, business andgovernment on a guideline that's substantially below the presentguideline. [This has to be done] in the context of all the problemswe have, including the potentially inflationary implications and allthe rest. I don't think it does much good to talk about guidelines inthe present area. But I'm not sure there's anything the matter withstating that as an objective at the moment. And to the extent weraise the issue, it may even slow down the immediate drive for a taxcut until we all see how things develop over the remainder of theyear. Now, that's purely a personal reaction at this stage, but I'mnot sure there's anything to be lost by it. I'd go all the way bysomehow relating it more specifically to wage increases but I don'tknow how to do it. If anybody had a bright idea on that score, itprobably would have been thought of already. Not that your ideawasn't bright, Henry. I don't suppose I could speak more broadlyabout that approach but I have some sympathy for putting it that wayas part of an argument for deferring consideration of the tax cut atthe moment.On monetary policy itself, the consensus is pretty clearly tokeep the ranges unchanged for 1980. I basically agree with that interms of simplicity in presentation. It bothers me a little becausesome things are going on that would justify a change, and in ordinarycircumstances they ought to be recognized. Even on a technical level,on the relationship between M-1A and M-1B--which is a pretty darntechnical matter due to the NOW accounts--ordinarily we would say we[now] have more experience and we ought to adjust that relationship.But I recognize the arguments that were presented pretty fully aroundthe table for taking the simple approach. Most people suggested, and-47-7/9/80I would certainly agree, that consistent with that approach we wouldnot be disturbed if, as is likely, the M1s came in at the low end ofthe ranges. We might also say that it's possible M2 will come in atthe upper end of its range and that M3 will be in the middle or lowerpart of its range. But the ranges are there and we are not changingthem partly because they are ranges. Nevetheless, we don't considerit undesirable or inconsistent with our intentions if we have thatkind of pattern among the ranges. In fact, if we don't say that,we're almost forced to change the ranges because of the apparentinconsistency in the relationships among the different Ms. On bankcredit we may be able to finesse along the lines that have beensuggested. That's a little harder to do than if we hadn't put so muchemphasis on that measure in connection with the credit controlprogram, but let's suggest that bank credit may come in even below thelower end of its range. However, due to the rise in commercial paperand so forth that does not disturb us so greatly that we have to takeit into account.Let me just stop there. Does all that express the consensusfor 1980 clearly enough? We don't change the ranges, but explicitlyin my comments we say that we are satisfied with a low M-1A and alsorecognize that M-1A probably should be low relative to M-1B in termsof the ranges but that this is a technical matter. Thus the M1sgenerally might well come in quite low in their ranges and that wouldnot disturb us. M2 similarly could come in high in its range and thatwould not disturb us, and M3 may be near the middle of its range. Andthat is the basis upon which we are reaffirming the ranges this year.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if we are satisfied that M-1B willcome in fairly low in its range, are we going to be willing to have itcome in higher in '81?MR. PARTEE. It's going to have to.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can reopen the question of '80, but atthis stage before considering '81, have I captured the consensus forthe staff and the writing they have to do for the testimony? In avery formal sense the numbers are the same, but the interpretation isof some considerable importance here.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that captures it exactly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. For '81 I think we are in much moredifficulty, frankly. We have a real dilemma, inconsistency, tension,or whatever you want to call it between the projections and what we'dlike to see happen in the economy. If the staff estimates meananything, in a very straightforward way what they imply for theaggregates--I'm not saying we should accept it--is higher [rates ofgrowth]. On the other hand, we can express the conflict very directlyby looking at this resolution that Mr. Proxmire has prepared, which Iwas urged to accept and I'm prepared to accept. The final clause ofthat resolution says we are going to gradually reduce the rates ofgrowth in monetary and credit aggregates in a firm and stable manner.If we accept that resolution one day, that presumably means we shouldbe reducing the monetary and credit aggregates in a firm and stablemanner, including in 1981. I take it that virtually everybody--therewere one or two contrary opinions--in resolving this dilemma said [weshould express our targets for] 1981 in qualitative terms and in-48-7/9/80effect waffle a bit. I think I agree with that. I will just tell youthat it's easier to say it around this table. When we say that inpublic, people will ask: "You've been putting more emphasis onnumbers and you've said you were going to reduce the ranges, so why doyou now refuse to say more straightforwardly that you are going toreduce them even by 1/2 or 1 percentage point or something? Youcouldn't possibly have been suggesting that you were going to go moreslowly than that." I attach great significance to that [argument] andI think there will be a market reaction, too. The market will attachsome significance to the fact that we are not willing to go up [to theCongressional hearing] and say we are putting forth a lower number.It's not that I really disagree with the fact that we had better bequalitative. But it's not as easy [to carry out] as the commentsaround here suggested; that in itself will have some implications forhow our actions are interpreted. Dave?MR. EASTBURN. I think you're entirely right. It's not easy.On the other hand, if you surround your discussion of 1980 with a gooddeal of qualitative explanation about the uncertainties regarding theshifts in demand for money, and so forth--and extend that into 1981--you will have provided the background for a good deal of waffling.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that avoids the problem,but I agree with what you are saying. Whatever else we say about '81we ought to say that there is a lot of uncertainty about the M1s andparticularly about the relationship between M-1A and M-1B. Somebodyhere put it very dramatically with zero on one and 7 percent on theother or something like that. I don't know where we will come out atthe end of the year when we have to make those projections, but thereought to be some discussion of that problem and the fact that thoseparticular numbers may look quite different but in a meaningless wayin a sense. When we actually put forward the numbers they might lookdifferent--both of them--from what we had in '80. One may besignificantly lower and the other may be significantly higher.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One possibility would be to say thatour presumption at this very early stage is that the Committee willwish to continue its long-run fight against inflation by some gradualreduction of the aggregate targets but, given the uncertainties on allthese technical aspects such as the shift in the demand for money anda few other things, we feel it's definitely premature to come up witheven tentative or preliminary [numbers].MS. TEETERS. [Unintelligible.]MR. SCHULTZ. Either that Nancy, or leave the top where it isand drop the bottom a little and that will make it look as if we'recutting it down some.MS. TEETERS. Look, one of the problems we are likely to facenext year is that we will be tempted to set a target that is too lowand we will exceed it. And it seems to me that our credibility in thelong run is going to be worse off if we exceed it than if we arerealistic about what we can accomplish. Given the fact that it's 12to 18 months off, it seems to me very reasonable to widen the rangesat both ends at this point.-49-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do we have to say in the directive,Mr. Secretary, about 1981? Nothing, do we? This isn't a directivequestion, is it?MR. ALTMANN. I can answer that perhaps by telling you whatwe said at this time last year. After citing the ranges for 1979, thedirective said: "The Committee anticipates that for the period fromthe fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980 growth may bewithin the same ranges, depending upon emerging economic conditionsand appropriate adjustments that may be required by legislation orjudicial developments affecting interest bearing transactionaccounts." That language was in the directive adopted [in July 1979]and was repeated each month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In what [part of the] directive does thatappear--in the operating [paragraphs]?MR. PARTEE. It's in the longer-term paragraph, isn't it?MR. ALTMANN. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do we need it in there now?MR. ALTMANN. That was the decision made at the time that theCommittee considered it.MR. PARTEE. I thought that's what the Humphrey-Hawkins Actcalled for.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It calls for a decision, but I don't knowthat it says how it has to go in [the directive]. We have to put downsome language in the report anyway, but I don't quite see why it hasto be in the directive.Steve has some [suggested] language. Let me just try it outin terms of the tenor of it. "Looking ahead to 1981, the Committeedecided to work toward a further slowing in monetary growth rates thatis consistent with an orderly reduction in the rate of inflation,while taking into account the impact on individual aggregates of theintroduction of NOW accounts on a nationwide basis, a change in publicpreference for deposits and closely-related assets and emergingeconomic conditions." I suppose it's that last phrase that--MR. PARTEE. And of the need to keep some of our [citizens]employed.MR. MAYO. I think you forgot to include the internationalconsiderations.MR. GRAMLEY. I'm not sure I would want that first sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just looked at this language a minuteago. It takes the approach of saying we would like to get them lowerbut then putting a caveat on it. I suppose the question is whether wewant to say---50-7/9/80MR. GRAMLEY. Suppose M-1A comes in at 3.55 percent for 1980,just within the lower end of the band. Would we really want to saythat for 1981 our objective is to get a lower figure?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it probably will be for M-1A; M-1Bis going to give us the trouble, I think.MR. GRAMLEY. M-1A would come in better only because of whathappens to NOW accounts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, only because of what is--MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] talk about ranges. We mightwant to have somewhat [narrower] ranges but even that is too risky, Ithink. But certainly we wouldn't want to say that in 1981 growth isgoing to be lower than the point estimates that we have for 1980.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can get a certain amount ofleeway in the M1s because of the technical problem. I think we justought to say flatly that in the case of M-1A and M-1B, NOW accountsare likely to have a big influence. So M-1B could well be above whatit was this year and M-1A might be below. But that's just takingaccount of the shift between the two categories; it somewhat obscureswhether in fact it's lower on the average, if we want to take thatapproach.MR. BLACK. If we have the maximum shift on M-1B of 5percentage points, with a midpoint of 5-3/4 percent the midpoint couldbe 10-3/4 percent. If we have the maximum shift on M-1A, the midpointwould be 1-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because of that complication for nextyear, which we can explain without quantifying, we in a sense get offthe hook. The real bind is M2, which isn't changing in concept, isn'tsubject to these distortions, and isn't subject to the same so-calleddemand shift as M1. I'm not sure we can say this, but at one point Ithought we might say that in general we are moving these ranges lowerand we are going to move as fast as we can but it may not be possibleto do that next year for M2. That implies it's possible for M1, butnobody will ever know what M1 is because of all these shifts. But itgives some warning that we may not reduce the M2 range.MR. MAYO. We still have the housing market out on M2. Wewouldn't want to emphasize reducing that on a long--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm saying we would tell them we maynot reduce M2 and leave every implication that we're reducing M1.Then when they ask by how much and we have to give them some figuresthat are affected by NOW accounts and one can't tell--MR. MORRIS. M-1B is going to be increased.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will be. We would explain that M-1Bwill go up because of [the NOW accounts], but it's not a realincrease; it's only a statistical increase.MR. SCHULTZ. I think the markets would like that even lessthan if we were more general. That may get us in trouble.-51-7/9/80MS. TEETERS. May I ask a technical question? Is it possibleto target on M2?MR. AXILROD. Oh, sure. We were giving some consideration toelevating M2 in emphasis in our targeting procedures this time. Inthe end that seemed [unlikely to] solve the Committee's problem and itinvolved a little more difficulty in terms of the continuity of thepresentation. As you say, next year there's an obvious case for it.But, again, I would stress that money market funds are in M2 and RPsare in M2, and we don't have a lot of experience with how thosecomponents are going to behave.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can target on M2 but of all theaggregates it's the least easily controlled, and we're going to havemore misses.MS. TEETERS. We have enough trouble with the M1s. Why go toM2 when it includes two things we have absolutely no control over?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One way we can resolve this target fornext year is the way Fred suggested. I don't know whether we want [toor not]. It's fairly straightforward to say the [1981] targets aregoing to be at or below [the 1980 targets]. I think it's a [choice]between saying that and saying in effect what this other statementsays, which is that we'd like to be a little below [1980] but we arenot sure we can be.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to emphasize whatGovernor Teeters said. There's a real trap in setting M2 targets thatwe think we can achieve because, with these new monetary instruments,we can't. As Steve just pointed out, M2 is loaded with [components]over which we don't have even indirect control--the money marketfunds, overnight Eurodollars, RPs, and what have you. I think that'sa real snare that we ought to be very cautious about.MR. MORRIS. I question that proposition. I don't think M2is going to be any more difficult to control than M1.MR. BALLES. Well, we have a difference of opinion. That'swhat makes horse races and stock markets.MR. WALLICH. Well, M2 is getting more stable. In the pastit has slowed when interest rates went up. Money market mutual fundsare likely to go up when [rates rise] so that's a stabilizing element.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are two conflicting forces working.It's less directly controllable in one sense, but it has a much morestable relationship with the economy than--MR. MORRIS. And these shifts in balances tend to take placewithin M2 rather than out of it into something else.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, for '81 the consensus [though we'renot unanimous] is that we have to be qualitative rather than preciselyquantitative about it. Nobody wants to propose an increase. I wouldsuggest, and it seems to capture the majority but not the fullconsensus, that we make subtle noises about how we'd like to get [theranges] down but heavily qualify it. The alternative is to be more-52-7/9/80neutral about it and say we're either going to have [the ranges] thesame or lower.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I make an observation? On M-1B, if we had known when we set these long-run targets that we wouldhit the midpoint or the revised midpoint of 5-3/4 percent, I think wewould have been reasonably happy with that. We had expansion of M-1Bin 1978 of 8.2 percent and in 1979 of 7.6 percent. And if we get itdown to 5-3/4 percent [this year], that degree of deceleration seemsplenty rapid to me. If we do that, then I don't have any problem withdecelerating further in 1981. But if it comes in at 2 or 3 percent orsomething like that [in 1980], we have a problem for 1981. I wouldlike to see us push that [growth rate] up toward the midpoint [while]we're in a recession which I think is probably going to be as seriousor more serious than any postwar recession. And then next year, Ithink we can do what we said we would do.MR. ROOS. I agree with you totally, Bob.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you ever formulate the preliminarytargets for [the year ahead] in relation to the targets rather thanthe performance?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we are relating it now to thetargets, which I think is part of the difficulty. Where we would wantto come out in terms of changing [the ranges] and the actual number wewould want next year does depend upon where we come out this year. Ifgrowth in the M1s comes in very low this year, as is possible,certainly we might want [their growth] to be higher next year. And itwould not be inconsistent with this gradual deceleration notice. Butwe really are talking now about the imagery of target against targetrather than target against actuality.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That was my presumption until I heardBob's comments just now. Of the two choices you've put to us--hope toget [growth] down but heavily qualified as against being neutral--Iprefer the [former]. My reason is that if it's heavily andsufficiently qualified, it's not a constraint on our flexibility to dowhat we decide later on has to be done in view of the situation atthat time. But I think it will come as a bit of a shock to the marketif we are neutral, for the reasons I [mentioned] earlier. So it seemsto me that in this imperfect world we live in, we're better off makinga bound in the right direction even though it's qualified enough sothat we reserve the flexibility of the Committee to do what it thinksbest--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest that whatever we decide weput a footnote, in effect, in the report--I don't know that itliterally would be a footnote--noting that we are talking about atarget here. We don't know where 1980 will come out but if M1 did infact come out very low in 1980, [our] target in 1981 may in fact [beconsistent with] a higher M1 in 1981 than in 1980. So we wouldencompass that possibility, which I think is very likely to happen.MR. PARTEE. I think we're better off just talking about theranges, Paul. It will exacerbate Tony's problem if we have a footnotethat says we may have a higher M1 and we may not.-53-7/9/80MR. ROOS. Why don't we do what is necessary to keep M1 wherewe want it, in the middle of the range? Why do we feel that we haveto wait and see where it comes in when, indeed, through open marketoperations we have it within our ability to have it come in, at leastover a period [of time], roughly where we want it?MR. WALLICH. Would you do that even if the last two monthsrequired us to go to some fantastic growth rate, say, 20 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can resume with that as thesubject of our agenda immediately after lunch. I think we agree, atleast tentatively, on an unchanged range [for M-1A] this year and forexpressing the view that it might come out in the lower part of thatrange.MR. WALLICH. But I understood the consensus to imply that wewouldn't do anything extreme to force M-1A into the range if ithappens to grow slowly all the rest of the year except the last coupleof months.MR. PARTEE. By "anything extreme" what do you mean otherthan to reduce interest rates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can only answer that question with asubsequent discussion [in which we characterize our views] withprecision. It's a little difficult because we don't have precisewords in front of us. I suppose Steve's formulation of words, hastilydone, is one option in which we express a hope but not a commitment toget [growth in the aggregates] down next year. But the approach thatTony just supported seems to be consistent with what a lot of peoplesaid. Let me ask: How many people would rather do it that way?SPEAKER(?). Which way?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That we say in general terms that we'dlike to see the aggregates lower but whether it's possible or notdepends upon a reassessment at the end of this year in the light ofall the circumstances, and we are going to look at it [then].SPEAKER(?). That's really the point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. ALTMANN. Now [the question is] whether we put it in thedirective.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me worry later about whether weput anything in the directive. The [policy record] is going toinclude a discussion of the difficulties surrounding M1 next yearanyway because of the NOW accounts problem. All that should be inthere in qualitative terms in any event. But just in terms of givingthe thrust, our basic policy over a period of years is to reduce these[ranges]. We're not exempting '81 from that approach, but we're notcommitting now to saying that it can be done. We'll decide moreprecisely six months from now in the light of all the circumstances atthat time.-54-7/9/80MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, how does that differ from four yearsago when Arthur Burns said in commencement addresses that we're goingto gradually reduce the rate of money growth and we equivocated andprocrastinated and that's why we're in this pickle today?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that particular respect, it does notdiffer. It's the same as what he used to say four years ago. But Iam assuming that the Committee is not prepared, which I think is thequestion you asked, to say right now that tentatively the ranges [for1981] will be X, Y, and Z and that those ranges are lower than theones for this year. I excluded that [option] because there wasn'tmuch support in the Committee for it.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, don't the facts indicate that theCommittee has not equivocated in that respect? If I remember thenumbers right, in 1977 the growth rate of M-1A was 7.7 percent; in1978 it was 7.4 percent; in 1979 it was 5.1 percent; and in 1980 itwill undoubtedly be less yet. The problem is, Larry, that money andprices do not track closely together. And while that deceleration inmonetary growth was taking place, the rate of increase in pricesaccelerated. That's what we have to live with, whether we like it ornot.MR. ROOS. But, Lyle, we believe that there is a directtracking of the rate of growth of money and prices and also the rateof growth of money and output.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have lunch approaching.MR. SCHULTZ. Before we got into that discussion, what yousaid just prior to that sounded pretty good to me. It was somewhat inaccordance with your talents: It was even more waffling than whatSteve had to say!MR. PARTEE. Steve is not waffling enough for me.MR. SCHULTZ. I would like to waffle a bit more than whatSteve said, and I thought you had done that very effectively.MR. GRAMLEY. I could certainly agree with your waffle. Yourwaffle I like.MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Has my waffle been recorded?SPEAKER(?). Just put a little syrup on it and we'll--MR. PARTEE. That's what you're likely to do!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was somebody listening to that [closely]enough to try to [put some wording together] after lunch?MR. AXILROD. I would suggest that your waffle, Mr. Chairman,is probably one that would fit better in the policy record. And theCommittee could be silent in the directive.-55-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure why we need anything inthe directive. It's not a decision. This kind of vague statementisn't going to affect what we do before the next meeting anyway.MR. PARTEE. I'm told that my subommittee, of which you werea member at the time, proposed that it be in the directive. I can'tremember why.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't remember why either. Unlesssomebody can think of a reason, let me propose that it be in thereport but not in the directive. I don't see off-hand what purpose itserves in the directive since it's a vague statement anyway.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Coming back to this proposed waffle:Before you ask for a show of hands you ought to make people understandwhat the alternative is--the second thing they're going to be asked toshow their hands on--which I gather is a completely neutral statement.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Completely neutral? It's not neutral inthe sense of raising the range, but neutral as between changing it ornot changing it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. Even though I welcome theadherence of Chuck and Lyle, I'd like to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That makes you suspicious of it?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what you said in yourreformulation of Steve's [wording] is that consistent with our long-run policy, we would like to see the aggregates lower in '81 as well,but we don't know if we can make it for such and such reasons. What Iwould like to suggest we say--again because I'm thinking of the marketimpact, which could be very damaging to all of us--is that consistentwith [our long-run policy], it is too early for us to indicateanything specific because there are too many caveats and we just don'tknow where we are going to come out. In other words, to say to themarket that we don't know if we can make it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is not the language that Iwould use. I would suggest, particularly since it's 2 o'clock, ifthere is a willingness to work in this direction--and that seems to bethe consensus--that we see if our staff can come up with a formulationbefore the end of the meeting that incorporates words that we can lookat a little more specifically. We can't resolve it just--MR. ROOS. We're not committing to the waffle, though, bydoing this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not at this stage, no. Why don't we havea few sandwiches for the time being.MR. SCHULTZ. We're suggesting that the staff, rather thanhave lunch, eat their work!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have sandwiches right next door,I believe.-56-7/9/80MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, with regard to PresidentSolomon's point on--MR. PARTEE. If we work on this waffle, it finally will be apancake.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to have waffles for lunch!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Open Market Committee will beknown as the International House of Pancakes!MR. AXILROD. Tony, the law says the Committee has to saysomething about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It does? In the directive?MR. AXILROD. No, not in the directive, but in the report.[Lunch recess][Secretary's note: Typically, after lunch the Chairman would havecalled the meeting to order and made some opening comments. No suchremarks by the Chairman were captured on the tape and included in theraw transcript.]MR. ROOS. I don't want to get there by September; that'swhat has me--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, growth may [not] even be to themidpoint in September [but] then it would have to slow down afterSeptember.SPEAKER(?). Is that what it says? I didn't recall that.MR. PARTEE. You made me think that this [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, at least to the midpoint [by the] endof the year. But [alternative B] brings us to the midpoint at the endof year. If you're satisfied with [ending] up below the midpoint--SPEAKER(?). Then you are between "B" and "C."MR. SCHULTZ. I don't mind that much, but I don't want[growth] to get too high in September. That makes me nervous.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't make a subtle [technical]statement without you here, Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. We've been waffling.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume you've been waffling. Butlet's leave the waffling until a little later and go to the short-rundecision, which may confirm or not confirm the decision on the long-run for 1980. When I look at the alternatives put down for us [in theBluebook] for these ranges on the monetary aggregates, I would rejectalternative A on a number of grounds, including the immediateimplications it may have for the market. But perhaps even equallyimportant is the consideration that Governor Schultz and others-57-7/9/80mentioned about going full speed ahead with a high aggregate figure atthe moment and a low interest rate only to have to screech in theopposite direction in a relatively short period of time. I have someof the same reservations about "B." But "B" brings us, if Iunderstand this correctly, arithmetically to the midpoint of theexisting M-1A range--MR. AXILROD. Well, to 4-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --or just a hair below the midpoint of theexisting M-1A range by December. It's not much, if at all, above theJuly figure, I guess. It would surround the July estimate, so thatdoesn't change it much. Alternative C would bring us inside the rangebut not to the midpoint by the end of the year, if I am correct.MR. AXILROD. Under "C" [growth for the year] would be 3-1/2percent.MS. TEETERS. "C" is below.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not below the range.MS. TEETERS. Yes, it is.MR. PARTEE. By the end of year, he said. You'd have toextend [that growth rate for the period from] September to December.MS. TEETERS. If I read that chart right, "A" gets us to themiddle of the range by the end of the year, "B" gets us just barely[in] it, and "C" gets us below [the range].MR. AXILROD. No, by year-end--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The chart shows a September plot.MR. AXILROD. By year-end "C" gets M-1A to the bottom of therange, 3-1/2 percent. Continuation of that 6 percent [growth rateresults in] 3-1/2 percent growth for the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would reject "A" myself. If I do that,I can see two ways of proceeding, though I would have a rather strongpreference for one of them, that seem consistent with what we've justsaid about the longer-term ranges--namely, that we won't change theranges this year, but we would not be disturbed by being in the lowerpart for M1, particularly for the M-1A number. Consistent with thatapproach toward the longer-term ranges, it seems to me we couldtheoretically operate on "B." And if we didn't like the results wewere getting in one direction or another, we'd accept the shortfall.I say in one direction or another, which operationally in the shortrun might mean running into the lower federal funds rate constraint.Alternatively, we could adopt "C" for the initial path-makingexercise, [using] the same approach as we did in June when it workedout, maybe by coincidence, to everybody's satisfaction. That involvessetting a minimum growth path, which is again consistent with what wejust said about the long-term, but if the number comes up higher--consistent with both the growth path and the federal funds rateconstraint we set for ourselves--we'd accept the higher growth, forawhile anyway. Presumably we wouldn't accept it forever if it gets-58-7/9/80too high. But in the short run, presumably until the next meeting,we'd accept it unless it was very violently high. If we look at theperiod since May, that's what we did. It happened to come up,although we may have had some recent [revisions] so it's a bit higherthan what we were projecting at the time. It certainly came up higherthan we projected it for June. Essentially we did not permit thefederal funds rate to rebound up to the point it would have reboundedhad we held June to the number we notionally had in mind for thatmonth. The results that were achieved, both in terms of the interestrate pattern and the aggregates pattern, seemed to me to put usfurther toward our ultimate objectives than we might otherwise havebeen. It worked out very well.I would interpret "C" in a modified way as a kind of minimumgrowth path we'd set, should we adopt that. It's not really "C" in asense; it's an indication of the minimum growth path, and we'd acceptin the short run any upward deviation in that--within some reasonablebound--by readjusting the path consistent with the interest rateconstraints of the type we now have. That's what I would feel mostcomfortable with. We may achieve the same result, but with differentkinds of risks, by starting with "B" and saying in effect that wewould undercut "B" if we ran into the interest rate constraint on thedown side. We would be more likely to run into the interest rateconstraint on "B," assuming we have a constraint in the generalneighborhood of where we now have it. It seems to me that those arethe two practical choices to focus on, consistent with our presentstand on the long-run ranges. Let me put them on the table and seewhat your reactions are.MS. TEETERS. Well, when we were talking about getting intothe lower [part of the] range, I didn't mean the bottom. We don'thave to slide around the bottom of that to say we're still in it. I'drather go with "B" and make sure that we're approaching it. I don'tthink it would hurt us to have an 8 percent rate of increase in moneysupply over the next several months.MR. WALLICH. I think it would look terrible. Nobody wouldremember that we had a shortfall before. Besides, they'd say that wasjust the way things should be. It's like somebody who is dieting andhas missed a few meals and therefore feels he has to catch up on thecaloric quota by eating something extra.MS. TEETERS. But, Henry, that is just the reverse of whatyou used to argue. You always had to offset the overshoots.MR. WALLICH. In this particular case I think we have had ashift in the demand function.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say what I think is going to berelevant here, whatever [route] we take: The proposal I made for "C"suggests we'll probably exceed the 6 percent [shown in the Bluebookfor "C"]; the suggestion I made with "B" is that we wouldn't be abovethe 8-1/4 percent [shown] so, therefore, we might be below it.MR. PARTEE. I don't think it means we would exceed [the 6percent]. We would target on that and if we went over it, as we didlast time--I agree with you that it worked out very well even though Ivoted against it--7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just mean in terms of a frequencydistribution. I don't know whether we would exceed it but presumablywe bias [the outcome] in that direction. Let me just say that ineither event, I think it's crucial where we put the federal fundsconstraint, if [we have one] at all. That is a variable that will beprominent in our discussion for the next few meetings, I suspect.MR. WALLICH. I have one problem with the approach. "C" iswhat I'd like in principle; but the technique of accepting, by raisingthe path, whatever actual level of reserves is realized does get usback into a federal funds rate target with a very narrow range. Themarket thinks [we're doing] that already, and they're going to have itconfirmed if we do it for a second period.MR. MORRIS. It's not likely to recur in this period, though,Henry. That occurred because we gave the manager specificinstructions that if [money growth] was coming in on the high side tolet it go. I don't think we want to give him those instructionstoday.MR. WALLICH. Well, if we were to limit the excess over "C"in a plausible way, I could see it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't mean to imply--maybe I did--thatwherever [growth] goes above "C" we would accept; I just meant withinsome reasonable range. If we had a 10 percent growth rate in onemonth, we might well accept that. Ten percent in two months we mightnot. At least it would raise a question; we'd have to decide that.MR. GRAMLEY. What would this mean if the Board staff'sprojections on M-1A in July turned out to be correct? They're nowprojecting 8.7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd accept it.MR. GRAMLEY. We'd accept it?MR. PARTEE. That's what [Henry] means--that it really doesmean sort of running on the funds rate so long as the aggregate isreasonably--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I cannot deny that we'd begin running tosome degree on the funds rate.MR. GRAMLEY. That doesn't bother me when we're looking at anunstable money demand function. For a month or two, or maybe for thewhole quarter, we may have to do that until we see how this goes.MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, we could accept the logic you'repropounding here and come up with [a set of targets] halfway between"B" and "C" but keep the 8-1/2 to 14 percent [funds rate range of"B"]. That's the way I would lean. I'd say 7, 8, and 8 percent--tothe extent that we like point targets [for M-1A, M-1B, and M2] and weseem to have gone toward point targets in the short run forsimplicity--as long as we understand what we are doing.MR. PARTEE. That was my inclination, too; I would go alongwith Bob on that.-60-7/9/80MS. TEETERS. Are you sure you don't want to drop the fundsrate range on that one?MR. MAYO. I don't want to change it.MR. PARTEE. I'd leave it at 8-1/2 to 14 percent. That'swhat it is now, isn't it?MS. TEETERS. An alternative is to go to 8 to 14 percent.MR. PARTEE. The funds rate is well above 8-1/2 percent now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a blended proposal here. I justwant to make sure I understand you. You're clear on the funds rangeat 8-1/2 to 14 percent and clear on the numbers, which are basicallyhalfway between the numbers [shown in the Bluebook for alternatives Band C]. What is not clear, for instance, is whether you would acceptright now that 8.7 percent or whatever is projected for July. Inother words, would you allow a little tolerance on the up side shouldthe figures come out that way? What we're talking about is from nowuntil August--when is the next meeting scheduled?MR. ALTMANN. It's August 12, in five weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. August 12. We are talking about the nextfive weeks literally.MR. MAYO. I don't see any problem in accepting the 8.7percent for July if it turns out that way.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm trying to refresh my memory--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the latest data tend to shadethat down, don't they? The data ordinarily are not very good but theyare worse than usual today because of July 4th, as I understand it.But [the recent information seems] consistent with a somewhat lowerestimate for July, I take it.MR. AXILROD. That's right, and [money supply growth] haseven weakened a bit more since I had a first report earlier today.It's in such a state of flux I hesitate to mention it at all.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the operational paragraph do youhave to give pinpoint percentages for the third quarter or could yougive a range? The way I read the language for the third quarter itsays at annual rates of _ percent, __ percent and _ percent [forM-1A, M-1B, amd M2].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do what we want to do, butthe [practice] has been to give a single point. We've often said"about" or "around" or we've given a percentage rate and said "orabove." Consistent with what I said, certainly if we took "C" wewould say at that rate or above, which we've said on a number ofoccasions. I don't think we've ever given a range.MR. AXILROD. We need a number to construct a path.-61-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we need a number to construct a path.And in a way a range sounds as if we're being very precise in thatwe're not going to accept anything below or anything above. So Ireact a little adversely to a range. But we have often used wordslike "about" or "above" to convey some [sense] of that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'd go along with Bob Mayo'ssuggestion, which Chuck supported, about taking the arithmetic averagebetween "B" and "C."MR. MAYO. I'd round them off, too. [Using] quarters on thegrowth rate percentages strikes me as silly.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do we do about M2, though?That's all right for M-1A and M-1B.MR. MAYO. We could use 8 percent for M2, couldn't we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just presumed that if this table waslogically put together and we compromised on the others, we'd end upcompromising on M2, too.MS. TEETERS. But M2 is running high; if anything, we'd haveto make it a little higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, this is the staff's projection ofwhere it will run. The projection may be wrong, but I assume thistakes account of the staff's best judgment of what is consistentbetween these numbers, looking ahead.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.MR. ROOS. What are the figures, Mr. Chairman?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Bob proposed 7, 8, and 8 percent. Isuppose we would say "about" 7, 8, and 8 percent consistent with that.I take it that doesn't give us any great problem in July; if anything,those July projections are going to be reduced at the moment you haveto go make up a path.MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. BLACK. That suggests to me, Mr. Chairman, that we oughtto take a look at the low end of that funds rate range. We may not begetting the shift in demand that we thought; we may have our equationsmisspecified.MR. PARTEE. Undoubtedly we do; it's just a question of howmuch.MR. MORRIS. We can change that during the month if we findthat to be the case.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would suggest that we have a realproblem in lowering that at all significantly now, in view of both thedomestic uncertainty but more precisely the exchange marketuncertainty at the moment. My own feel for this situation, though onenever knows, is that if the exchange market begins running--and it's-62-7/9/80on the verge of it now--that will raise the question and force it toour minds. I'm sure we'd have differing opinions about whether wehave to make some overt "tightening" move to deal with the exchangemarket situation; I think that would be more inconsistent with whatwe're trying to do than accepting this delicate business of trying toskate through this period without getting the psychological screwsloose. And they're very close to being loose.MR. SCHULTZ. At some point it would be very nice if we couldget the discount rate down a little more. I think we need to be socareful that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say a word about the discountrate, too, because I think it's relevant here. The logic is to get itdown for basically two reasons. I don't see any reason why we shouldin concept have the discount rate impede reductions in the prime rate,which at some point it may do psychologically. Beyond that, assomebody alluded to this morning, if and when we get a reversal ininterest rates, the question is [whether] that might occur in a timeperiod we are worried about. The discount rate then does haveoperational significance because it tends to put a ceiling on thefunds rate or at least slow down any increase in the funds rate. Andsince presumably we don't want a big reaction upward in the funds ratefrom a fairly technical and maybe passing change in the money supplynumbers, it would be nice to get the discount rate lower. It would bemore than nice; I think we ought to try to do it.The problem we run into again involves domestic andinternational psychological problems. We've done a little explorationamong the foreign central banks in the last few days to see what thechances are for taking the curse off a further movement [down ininterest rates]. If [such a move] is interpreted as an easing,whether it's the discount rate or something else, what are theprospects that this would be hidden or submerged in other ratechanges? The answer, I think, is ambiguous at the least. It'sanother dimension that can be thrown in here. It is not an irrelevantconsideration in the framework of the next week or so because I can'tsay there is no possibility. If it doesn't happen pretty soon, Ithink [our foreign colleagues] will all go away on vacation and itprobably won't happen until September. But it is a matter that isunder consideration in a number of countries--so far with a negativeanswer. The situation is such that if one country moved, everybodyprobably would move; but nobody wants to lead the parade.SPEAKER(?). Would they follow us?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I think we're irrelevant to this.We're not totally irrelevant, but they consider us off on a course ofour own and somewhat irresponsible anyway. Whether we move or notdoesn't have the same bearing as somebody important within Europemoving, or even if the Japanese move. I don't think there's muchchance of the Japanese leading the parade, although they might.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The logical one to move would beFrance because she's also at the top of the EMS.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are all sorts of conflicts involved.They are in the same dilemma as we are basically. They'd like to move-63-7/9/80in terms of the business outlook but they don't want to give any senseto their own public, externally or internally, that they've given upon inflation. They're very sensitive to that. And the Germans are ina peculiar position because they're at the bottom of the EMS exchangerate [band]. So they ask how they can go first when the DM is alreadyweak in their terms. The currency that is strong in the EMS is theFrench franc. The trouble with the French [making a move] is thatthey have a rising inflation rate at the moment. They're about theonly country left where inflation is still rising. And while theyhave a sluggish business situation, they also say: How can we give asignal about inflation when the inflation rate is still rising?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They have a correlation between moneysupply and the rate of inflation. Both are running 13-1/2 percent.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, if we show a willingness to tolerate an 8percent funds rate before we do anything on the discount rate, itclearly limits our ability to move on the discount rate. So I wouldthink that we would want to keep the 8-1/2 percent [lower limit] atthis point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My own feeling about the discount rate isthat we ought to move as soon as it's--I was going to say "safe."It's not going to be safe; as it stands we can't be sure there's goingto be no reaction. But as soon as we feel there's enough protectionsomehow and that the risks of setting off something in the exchangemarket are minimized, we ought to go. I don't know when that will be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we're so close to the logicallevel of, say, 10 percent that it would make a lot of sense given theenormous instability right now in the exchange markets. We've spent$600 million [in exchange market intervention] in the last three days;we ought to consider moving half a point, rather than a full point.We don't have the kind of spread that we had before.MR. PARTEE. Except that we're in great jeopardy that theprime rate will be below the discount rate. I think we're 2 pointstoo high on the discount rate. It ought to be 9 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Two points?MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, it would be nice to move a full point butwe just don't know whether we can or not at this point. We're arguingin a vacuum here because we don't really know.MS. TEETERS. Well, as long as we keep it above the marketrate, we've going to have no borrowings at all. That's going toinfluence our paths and everything else that--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we get the discount rate down intwo moves, to 10 percent, they may very well be in the same range. Wedon't know what the fed funds rate is going to be.MR. MAYO. Well, I didn't mean to get us off the track.-64-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we ought to debate thatprecisely, but those are some of the background considerations towhere this federal funds limit is set. What we have on the table is7, 8, and 8 percent [for the monetary aggregates] and 8-1/2 to 14percent [for the funds rate range].MR. GRAMLEY. Could we have some more explicit comment by theproponents of this proposal as to what we would do if in fact theaggregates exceed these amounts by 1 percentage point, 2 percentagepoints, [etcetera]. I don't want to see the funds rate go below8-1/2 percent, but I certainly wouldn't want to see it go to 14percent between now and [our next meeting].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know about the proponentsbut I would operate this [along the lines of] what I said on "C,"which is that we would tolerate some increase over 7 percent--just tolook at that particular number--in the short run before the nextmeeting without pushing the federal funds rate up to anything like 14percent. Now, [the interval before] the next meeting is so short thatI really can't conceive of these numbers getting to the point wherewe'd want to exert very strong restraint, but I suppose they could.To try to be specific, suppose we got a fairly big July--significantlybigger than this [projection]--and we were coming into August, but[before the] meeting, and the August projection was for a 12 percentincrease. I suppose we'd let the federal funds rate begin to go upand we wouldn't fully adjust the path to take care of a 12 percentincrease, say, on top of a 10 percent increase--just to pick twonumbers out of the air.MR. BLACK. Steve, what does July look like?MR. WALLICH. I think it would be helpful if the lower limitwere a little higher. We're going to be operating as if we were on afunds rate target even though we're not. Then at least the marketshould not get the signal that we've lowered these targets. I thinkthey suspect that 8-1/2 percent is the lower limit, so if we went to 9to 14 percent--MR. PARTEE. But they're going to read on Friday that 8-1/2percent was the lower limit [set at the May meeting]. It has--MR. WALLICH. Well, they will know it [for that meeting], butthey won't know [what it is] for the future.MR. PARTEE. Will they think that we've raised the limit?SPEAKER(?). They may think we've lowered it.MR. WALLICH. I wouldn't want them to think we've lowered itand I'd rather not have them think that it is 8-1/2 percent at thispoint.MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I understand the thrustof this, if the Committee opts for 7 percent and we wake up tomorrowand it looks as if our best projection is 8 percent, we'll set a paththat will achieve 8 percent but the funds market can behave prettymuch as it has been behaving. If [our projection] goes up to 9percent, [the funds market] may still be behaving that way but we'll-65-7/9/80be getting to the point where we'll have to consult with you to see ifwe're getting outside the bounds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we'd probably accept 9 percent--I'm just giving a qualitative judgment--provided the federal fundsrate is behaving as expected. If growth began getting above 9percent, I think we'd probably have to consult.MR. AXILROD. The problem that might come to the Committeemore immediately is weakness because that would get reflected rathermore quickly in a drop in the funds rate, and we won't know where itwill stop.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we'd be operating at the constraint;that's why the constraint is important.MR. AXILROD. That's right. So the constraint could becomeoperational if there's any weakness right away, and we'd have to comeback to the Committee [almost immediately].MS. TEETERS. Is July a particularly difficult month as faras projections are concerned?MR. AXILROD. We've done research on that and they all aredifficult! [Laughter]MR. ROOS. I agree completely with the staff.MR. MORRIS. None is as [difficult] as April, though.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, we've talked about the impact on theinternational scene, which I recognize. Is there any impact on fiscalpolicy in terms of what we do in this period? For example, if [moneygrowth] comes in low and we don't lower the funds rate, are we reallypinning ourselves to the wall in terms of people saying we are notgoing to support anything [to spur the economy], so it has to be donewith fiscal policy? Then we might get a bigger tax cut than we'dotherwise get. I don't know the answer to that, but we don't want tomiss that side of the equation either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My general answer would be that whateverinfluence [our actions] have on that is going to be related more towhat happens to interest rates than to what happens to the moneysupply in a very short-run perspective.MR. WINN. Well, let's say the money supply falls short.MS. TEETERS. I think it's going to be more influenced bysome of the other data. If we get another 8 to 10 percent [decline inGNP and] an increase in the unemployment rate, we won't--MR. WINN. That's right; I mean that whole area.MS. TEETERS. And if we get a sharp revision in the second-quarter number or something of that sort, that's going to put morepressure on fiscal policy than a one-month miss on the money supply.-66-7/9/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't understand Henry's point. IfI understand you correctly, you feel that maintaining the 8-1/2percent floor [on the funds rate range] would give the impression thatwe've eased policy. Why?MR. WALLICH. Well, it increases the perception, or themisperception, that we're operating on a funds rate target.MR. PARTEE. Then we ought to lower it, shouldn't we, to getit away from where the money supply is?MR. ROOS. Is that a misperception, Henry?MR. WALLICH. Well, it depends on how one looks at it. Ishare your doubts.MR. ROOS. There's a fellow in Florida who always [proposes]as a toast "Confusion to the enemy." Maybe we'll do that, Henry;we'll confuse the enemy this time.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the funds rate hasn't been at thefloor. After all, we're always looking at the weekly averages. Theweekly average has run 9 to 9-1/2 percent in the last few weeks. Wehaven't been at the 8-1/2 percent floor even though we've beenfollowing the reserve paths.MS. TEETERS. I certainly wouldn't want the record to showthat we raised the floor after the second quarter we've had.MR. ROOS. If we were to adopt "C" or anything like "C," therecord would show that we took action in terms of the monetaryaggregates that would definitely deepen and lengthen the recession.We can be pinned on being too restrictive at this stage, too, whichworries me.MR. WALLICH. If we are too easy now, we'll soon have to facehigher lower limits than we do now. Suppose the aggregates developsome momentum and then we have to slow them down in the last fewmonths [of the year].MR. PARTEE. We could then [let the funds rate] move upthrough that range of 8-1/2 to 14 percent. We'd have to change thelower limit [if we ease too much in the near term].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If the staff is anywhere near right,"B" assumes we get to 4-1/2 percent [M-1A growth] by December and "C"assumes we get to 3-1/2 percent by December. If we're taking a middlefigure, we're definitely coming in somewhere along those lines, asPaul said, consistent with the earlier statement we agreed on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the various considerations havebeen pretty well laid out. Let me see what the sentiment is for 7, 8,and 8 percent--using the word "about" in the directive--with thesenumbers for the federal funds range, which are unchanged from a monthago.MR. ALTMANN. From May 20.-67-7/9/80MR. GRAMLEY. In this 7, 8, and 8 percent, with 8 percent forM2, is the M2 going to mean anything or is it going to be a throw-inas I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it means something. It doesn'tmean [anything for the path]; the path is not set on that number. Butfor purposes of an example, suppose M2 came in very high relative tothis [8 percent] number and the M1 numbers came in significantly low.I think that would affect our judgment as to how hard we pushed on M1because we would be running high on the one and low on the others.MR. GRAMLEY. Would we give these about equal weight?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say there's an approximation here.MS. TEETERS. To me it would depend on why M2 was going up;if it were money market funds going out the window, I'd say no.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, if money market funds were going upinstead of people holding demand balances, I'm not at all sure theimplications of that are bad.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One might argue that if money market fundswere going up, that ought to be weighed because they have some of thecharacteristics of a transactions balance.MS. TEETERS. What are we going to do about it if [M2] goesup?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Squeeze down harder on the others.MS. TEETERS. Which may make the money market funds go upeven faster.MR. PARTEE. What will look better will be the 2-1/2 yearcertificate. Money market funds have been doing very well; theyprobably won't do that much better. But the 2-1/2 year certificatecould improve and could give us expanded--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't been this precise recently; weused to be. But let me further amend the motion and say as anapproximation that we will put some weight on M2, maybe 50-50.MR. PARTEE. Well, 50/50 is a lot. It's not consistent withthe reserve targeting process that we have.MR. GRAMLEY. One thing we want to remember about giving M1and M2 50/50 weight is that if M2 consists about half of M1, a 50/50weight means we're giving independent components of M2 a 25 percentweight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's much less. M1 used to be half of M2;it's not anymore.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that fraction has changed some.MR. SCHULTZ. One of them is about $400 billion and the otherone is almost a trillion dollars.-68-7/9/80MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm using very rounded numbers.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the [tenor] of this discussionmeans that when M2 is running a lot stronger than the targets--let'ssay it's running 12 percent and the target is 8 percent and it's all[caused by] money market funds--and everything else is runningstronger, the staff has not in such a situation in the past cut backon reserves because the multiplier in M2 was off. If we did, asGovernor Teeters said, interest rates would go up faster. And as aconsequence of that, money market funds would go up faster and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then interest rates would go down moreslowly.MR. AXILROD. Well, either way. But, for example, in thelast [intermeeting] interval we could have been cutting back onreserves because the money market funds were growing very rapidly.[Had we done so] interest rates would be higher and the MMFs would begrowing even more rapidly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we may be a bit inconsistent insaying this. I have to amend this motion further. The conflict comesbetween saying equal weight and saying we are going to tolerate anoverrun. And I guess I've said both. So in a sense we wouldn'ttighten up, even if consistent with tolerating an overrun the M1sarithmetically came out on target. We'd let them go for--MR. PARTEE. It's only five weeks until the next meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's an asymmetrical equal weighting.SPEAKER(?). Sure! What is that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We probably ought to avoid trying to betechnical about equal weighting. But [M2] is a consideration. Let'sjust end it there. So with these [nuances], the directive would sayabout 7, 8, and 8 percent, 8-1/2 to 14 percent [for the funds rate]and there's an understanding of some tolerance of being above [thegrowth rates cited]. And we don't ignore M2--that is the way to putit--when we're judging how much above to tolerate.MR. WINN. Why don't we move the M2 rate up to 9 percent andmake it 7, 8, and 9 percent?MR. BLACK. It's easier to remember!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have no basis for doing that. Thestaff tells me that this is the most likely relationship, and I don'thave any independent--MR. WINN. But they tell us that M2 is going to be out ofline, so what the heck.MS. TEETERS. We could move it to 8-1/2 percent.-69-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what the staff has said is that M2has been rising relatively rapidly compared to these others, but theydon't expect that to be the case in the future.MR. ROOS. Has the staff said that 8-1/2 to 14 percent on fedfunds is consistent with 7, 8, and 8 percent [which are] compromises?MR. AXILROD. Well, at the time we wrote the Bluebook if wehad had to say something--it would have been fine-tuning of a sillynature--we would have raised the lower limit from 8-1/2 to 8-3/4percent or something like that. Given the data I now have on theaggregates, I wouldn't have. The data are in a state of flux; that'swhy it's better to have this meeting on a Tuesday.MR. ROOS. What is the rationale, though, on preferring thecompromise over alternative B?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have to push so hard.MR. PARTEE. It's a little lower number but it's a tolerablenumber, Larry.MR. ROOS. I'd prefer "A," obviously, beause it would get us[there] theoretically. We know that. The question is how much--MR. SCHULTZ. And then we'd need at least $40 billion tosupport the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how many people find the proposalthat is on the table acceptable?SPEAKER(?). Voting members?MR. ROOS. This is an acceptance with a waffle.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks nearly unanimous, doesn't it? Ithink enough hands were raised that we can vote. We are voting now onthe short run.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesPresident Winn YesPresident Balles YesUnanimous, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, after that display of unanimity,let's return to the long run. I would interpret that vote asconsistent with what I said earlier about the long-run targets for-70-7/9/801980, if we can call 1980 long run at this point. I don't knowwhether I can repeat what I said [with regard to] keeping the rangesunchanged numerically. We will explain that there are technicalproblems with the M1 relationships, but that's not central. We're notrecognizing here that the ranges are [unintelligible]. We understandand accept that and we even think it's likely that the M1 number willcome in toward the lower part of the range we have targeted. We thinkM2 will probably come in toward the higher part of the targeted rangeand that M3 will be someplace in the middle. We think bank credit maycome in low and we'll explain that. I think that's the substance for1980. Since we're just reaffirming numbers, maybe we can have a voteon this one part.MR. WALLICH. This is a sort of [unintelligible]. The shortrun wasn't very good but one goes along with it and now here comes thesecond shoe.MR. SCHULTZ. That's a Solomonic tactic. This is the Arabian[Solomon] of the Arabian Nights.MR. PARTEE. We will assert that these are consistent withthe Administration's targets?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's a very respectableposition.MR. PARTEE. We have to do that. We have to say whether theyare consistent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a little discussion aboutthat whole issue. It's going to be even more relevant for '81. Insubstance that is what we're saying.MR. WALLICH. After all, these longer-run targets are mostlyfor '80. We're not talking about '81 now?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm dividing it into two pieces just tomake it manageable, I hope. It's not really a Solomonic tactic; it'sa manageability tactic. Can we have a vote on '80? Do you understandwhat it is? Numerically it's just where we are, but the discussionimplied [nuances] which will appear in the report.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesPresident Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoPresident Winn YesPresident Balles Yes-71-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For 1981 we have a more difficult problem.I don't know whether you have any language for us, Mr. Axilrod. Haveyou had a chance--?MR. AXILROD. I have around 15 lines of language, which I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of language or anguish?MR. AXILROD. Both! It might be worth my reading it to youto see if it's even worth typing up and distributing.SPEAKER(?). Humility.MR. BALLES. It depends upon how many nuts you threw intothat waffle!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we get to the language, [let'sreturn to our earlier] discussion about what [needs to be] in thedirective. In substance--but the lawyers may want to talk to this--Idon't see why we need any [elaboration] in the directive. Andtherefore, I would say we're talking about the language that willprovide the core of the report for talking about '81. But [thedirective] could be further elaborated with language, particularlywith some mention of NOW accounts and all that business and why wearrived at this conclusion.MR. MORRIS. Is this something we have to take a vote on?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we necessarily have to takea vote on it, frankly. On the other hand, the argument for taking avote is that the law specifically asks us to state--I forget the[precise wording of] what the law asks us to do. It asks for aCommittee judgment--MR. PRELL. It asks for a statement of the Committee's plansand objectives with respect to money and credit growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We must give the Committee's statement ofits plans and objectives, so I lean slightly--but I don't think it'scompelling--toward having a vote on it as a Committee statement. Butwe have to have some method of indicating it's a Committee consensus.Maybe we can just indicate that this is the Committee's consensuswithout arguing over it.MR. PETERSEN. I think that would be legally acceptable asfar as the rules of procedure of the FOMC and the Humphrey-Hawkins Actitself are concerned. Going back to the earlier point on thedirective, there is no requirement in the Humphrey-Hawkins legislation[regarding what you include] in the directive. Nor is there such arequirement under our rules of procedures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know why it was in there before.I may have had some very persuasive reason myself; I don't evenremember the discussion. But it doesn't seem to be operative in termsof anything we're doing now.MR. BLACK. All I can conclude is that the other members ofthat subcommittee were more influential than the two who are here!-72-7/9/80MR. ROOS. What would happen though, Mr. Chairman, if youwere asked in your testimony whether this was unanimous? How wouldyou answer [if] we didn't take a vote? In other words, there is adifference of opinion, I'm sure, on this '81 situation. How do weresolve that in terms of reporting to Congress?MR. MAYO. We talk in terms of consensus.MR. SCHULTZ. Why don't we see how close we can come to aconsensus? If we can get a strong enough consensus, maybe we'll takea vote; if not, we--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no doubt that I have to be able tosay it's a consensus. Now, I don't know if we have to take a formalvote to say it's a consensus.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. After all, the very fact that it's afairly general statement and a very preliminary one makes it morelogical that it was a consensus view rather than a vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, [not having] a vote doesn't say itwasn't a consensus. [Whether or not] we're voting, that's what thisis.MS. TEETERS. Yes, but it's not as [unintelligible].MR. MAYO. If we try to sharpen this pencil too much, we'regoing to be voting on what words you use in the testimony. I thinkthis is getting ridiculous.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. I'd like to stop short ofthat, frankly.MR. MAYO. Yes, I think this is putting the Chairman in avery peculiar position.MR. GRAMLEY. I really thought we had enough agreement insubstance to leave the drafting of the words to you and the staff, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm happy to accept that view without evenintroducing the complications that can be quibbled about. If it isthe consensus that it can be left to the staff and myself and theunderstanding is that it's--MS. TEETERS. As long as you don't commit us to lowering theranges.MR. PARTEE. On that we want a vote.MR. WALLICH. Do you accept that we will try to lower theranges but that the announced--MS. TEETERS. No, I don't, Henry. I'm really not committedto that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's not "committed." [The Chairman]will use that earlier language that we talked about.-73-7/9/80MS. TEETERS. I'm not sure I even want to try to lower them.MR. ROOS. Obviously there are some, Nancy, who are committedto a consistent lowering [of the ranges]. So how do we--MS. TEETERS. No, we are not committed to a consistentlowering.MR. PARTEE. He said some of us are.MR. ROOS. I said there are some.MS. TEETERS. Some of you are, but I'm not, frankly.MR. ROOS. And how is that difference--the fact that it isn'tunanimous one way or the other--described in the record?MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that we could say we will worktoward lowering the ranges. Whether this will be possible and to whatextent can only be determined in the light of the circumstances thatwe meet then. That wouldn't be a commitment as far as you'reconcerned.MS. TEETERS. That's further than I want to go, Henry.MR. GRAMLEY. Couldn't we put out a statement which said thatit's the consensus of this Committee that policy in 1981 is going toaim toward contributing further to a reduction in inflation. Withthat in mind, the Federal Reserve will adopt its specific targets forthe aggregates at the beginning of next year, but the objective willbe to follow a policy which extends money and credit at rates that areconsistent with a further reduction of inflation. We could all agree[on that] and make the specific decision later on. I think that[squares] with what everybody is saying.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that's saying almost nothing.MR. GRAMLEY. I agree, but I think maybe we can get away withthat.MR. WALLICH. Inflation would probably rise next year.MR. BAUGHMAN. He will be asked the question of whether thatmeans lower numbers.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, then he can talk about the technicalitiesof M-1A and M-1B and so on during periods of--MR. RICE. Do we have to reflect unanimity on this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think so. We'd like to haveit all the time but if there's a real difference of opinion, I thinkwe're stuck and we just don't reflect unanimity.MR. RICE. Well, I'm afraid there is [a difference ofopinion].-74-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I [suspect so], too. I don't think this[draft language] quite does it, Steve. It talks a lot about thetechnological complications, which I think should be in the statementsomeplace, but it doesn't seem to me to reflect adequately the viewsof all the members of the Committee in that there is a realuncertainty involved in the economic outlook itself. And that's goingto affect--MR. AXILROD. I was a little afraid that would argue stronglyagainst lowering [the ranges]. It makes it very clear.MR. GRAMLEY. Couldn't we adopt Governor Schultz's earliersuggestion? Could we agree on that--that we all want aggregatetargets for 1981 at or below the 1980 ranges?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would hope that that's a minimumwe could agree upon. The real [problem] is that I am not sure that'sright. I'm not sure that goes far enough for some people. I admitthe difference isn't very large but I suspect it's real. And the onlyway I can see going further--just to try again out loud--is to say itis the general policy and intention of the Committee to seek lowergrowth rates over a period of time consistent with counteringinflationary forces. The Committee will be examining 1981 in thatlight specifically, but the extent to which progress toward thatobjective can be made in 1981 will have to be evaluated in the lightof all the circumstances at the time.MR. ROOS. Doesn't this get us to the nub of the wholephilosophical issue of whether we put a greater priority on reducinginflation and enduring a certain amount of pain or bitter medicine--which are words we've all used regarding that process--or whether wewill opt, if push comes to shove, for bringing relief to the economyat the risk of perpetuating inflation? It's very fundamental it seemsto me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is part of it. The other partis how much one is persuaded about monetarist doctrine in general. Ithink those two considerations are entering in here, which makes itdifficult.MR. ROOS. I don't know if you hear this, Mr. Chairman, or ifit is just a product of where I live and work. But we hear constantlythe overpowering, almost pleading, request from the groups we bringin, including labor leaders: "For heaven sakes, do what is necessaryto bring down inflation, even if it means high unemployment for awhile." There is a passionate pleading of that sort, and I reallydon't exaggerate when I say that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's easy to be influenced by theshort run, and I recognize the trap that we can conceivably get intonext year. But I feel uncomfortable right at this stage. It seems tome that it's perfectly illustrated by this [Proxmire] resolution,which presumably I have to support, however lukewarmly. If we comeout with a statement for '81 that somehow seems inconsistent withthat, there will be a lot of explaining to do that seems troublesometo me in terms of questioning our whole outlook [and] modus operandi.-75-7/9/80MS. TEETERS. Can't we put it in terms of not really knowingwhat is going to happen in the next six months?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm willing to go so far [and make]the kind of statement I just made: That while this is our generalintention, specifically how far or whether we can do it in 1981remains to be seen. Nevertheless, our bias is in that direction.MR. SCHULTZ. Can't we even say that the Committee iscommitted to bringing the money supply growth down to non-inflationarylevels over time and that for 1981 we will have the monetaryaggregates generally at or somewhat below the figures for 1980depending upon conditions in the economy?MS. TEETERS. But you're getting yourself into a box, Fred.We've been bringing the rate of the money supply growth down for thepast four years and inflation has been going up. What is a non-inflationary rate of growth in the money supply?MR. ROOS. There's a lag though, Nancy, isn't there?MR. RICE. We don't know; we will keep bringing it down untilwe find out.MS. TEETERS. We don't know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It must be lower than what we've had.MR. PARTEE. Or we have to do it longer.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if we don't at least hit that lowerpart of the ranges--and in fact if we begin to report month by monthwhat the market is apt to perceive as pretty rapid [money growth]rates--I think we will have an extremely severe credibility problem.MR. SCHULTZ. Say that again.MR. BLACK. I'm saying that during the next few months, if[money] growth comes anywhere near what we're projecting, as weapproach the midpoint of the target range we're apt to have a problemif we don't explain very carefully that we're just trying to getgrowth back up within the target range. If we do that and then whenPaul testifies he doesn't say something about a lower range for nextyear, we're going to be hit by both sides on the credibility problem,I'm afraid. I'd really want to emphasize lower [ranges] if we couldpossibly persuade everybody to do that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to get to the substance, whatever theexact words are, my own feeling is pretty strong that we have to saysomething about a bias toward lowering the ranges next year. I'mwilling to put in an escape hatch that says in the end it may not bepossible. But there has to be some minimal expression of a bias inthat direction--looking at both sentences in effect--or we will getourselves in a difficult problem in the short run. We will anyway, Ithink, with the escape hatch, but it would be moderated. I recognizethat when one looks at these projections of the economy and all therest, one has to wonder how the hell we can do it. But I'm saying-76-7/9/80we've got to face up to that question. Put off the problems oftomorrow until tomorrow, right?MS. TEETERS. Yes, but even with a 4-1/2 percent rate ofgrowth in the money supply we'd have a very anemic recovery.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know, but it's still all a projectiontoo, and--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I find it ironic that we've reachedagreement fairly quickly on 1980 and the next quarter and we're havingso much trouble on the longer term with very general language. Webasically have had three points of view expressed. There are thosewho would like to say simply that we'll be reducing the aggregatetargets next year. There's the other extreme, which stays basicallyneutral and says we don't know yet. And there's the middle one, whichyou put forward, which shows some bias and some hope but not acommitment [to reduce the targets] and says that the situation has tobe assessed at the time. It seems to me we ought to take a vote onall three or get enough people to raise their hands in support of themiddle ground.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to think that we're probablygoing to have to--or maybe should--end up with a vote. What I wouldpropose is that we put together what you describe as the middleground, indicating a bias but with a caveat. I can circulate thelanguage and get a reaction to the precise language. If you don'twant to bias it in that direction and feel strongly that you want amuch more neutral statement, vote against it. And if asked whetherthis was unanimous, I'd say "no;" some people were doubtful and enoughdoubtful that we were going to make progress in that direction nextyear that they wanted to allow themselves, in effect, a bigger escapehatch. That may reflect the reality. I think we're better off doingthat than trying to waffle on the whole point of [consensus].MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, if we expressed the intention toreduce the aggregates next year and conditions in February were suchthat it was just unreasonable, couldn't we take our action at thattime instead of expressing the caveat and reluctance now? After all,this is purely a projection. If conditions deteriorated to where wewouldn't want to act on that projection in February, we'd still havethe option of not making the reduction, would we not? I don't knowwhat we accomplish by--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure. We can do anything in February wewant to do in the end. This obviously biases what we do in February.I'd just like to get a showing of hands on this and maybe [consider]some kind of voting procedure. We don't want to take a formal action,or a final action anyway, right now. I will circulate some languagein any event. I will attempt to reach the widest area of agreement[along the lines of] what was described as the middle course: Somebias about [lower targets for] the long term, which encompasses 1981,with a statement that whether that will be possible specifically in'81 is going to depend upon an evaluation not only of all thetechnical factors but also an evaluation of economic conditions andthe relationships between money and the economy when we have to make afinal judgment in February or January or whenever it is.-77-7/9/80MS. TEETERS. You can try another caveat in that we reallydon't know what fiscal policy is going to be; that's still a wide-openarea.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, that can be implied, too.MR. BALLES. Paul, there's another phrase you might want touse and that is: "It's the present intent of the Committee..."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me worry about the preciselanguage. It will be circulated. Do I capture a sufficiently widearea of Committee opinion to make this the likely candidate to beworked on, subject to fiddling around with the language?MR. RICE. So long as it's not assumed that this is ourexpectation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you'll have to judge that in itselfin the end. Some people may want to [express] a different opinion.I'm trying to say something here, though not very much. I'm trying toexpress a bias without locking us into it. That's the intention.MS. TEETERS. Yes. I don't want to be faced in February withhaving it said that in July I promised to do this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's clear that nobody is going tobe faced with something like "I promised to do it." But I still wantto maintain the bias. I sense that that's likely to capture thebiggest number and come as near to a consensus as we can get. It maybe a complete consensus. Is that right? Is that near a consensus?MR. WALLICH. I can go with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That seems to be the case, so let'soperate [on that assumption]. We'll get some language out before theend of the week and have some form of assent or vote or something sothat I can say that it's a consensus of the Committee. Okay. Doesthat complete the meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's just one minor technicalpresentational point, which I think is worth calling to yourattention. The way the operational paragraph has been drafted, byputting M2 for the first time down at the bottom of the paragraphinstead of saying M-1A, M-1B, and M2, it will give the markets theimpression that we're downgrading M2. That's not the intention fromthe discussion, I gather. What was the reason for that switch?MR. ALTMANN. It's not the first time. This is a reversionto what was the regular practice until the last meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was not intended to downgrade M2, Itake it?MR. ALTMANN. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Up until the last meeting it was done thatway?7/9/80MR. ALTMANN. It was changed at the last meeting becausethere were no numbers in the directive at the last meeting. We simplyhave reverted to what has been the practice.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had the same question Tony did when Iglanced at it. But if it was just a reversion to what was done in allthe meetings up until the last one, I don't think it's a--MR. GRAMLEY. If in fact we're going to give M2 some weightin the decisionmaking process, then I think Tony's suggestion ought tobe considered. Maybe we ought to put it in the body of theoperational paragraph instead of hanging it on the end.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to give it some weight, yes.I can do it either way. I don't think it's important that we'vealways done it the other way. I would go along with that; it'sprobably slightly better. This is just a question of whether we listM2 along with the M1s. Is that agreeable? Okay, the only other itemon the agenda is that the next meeting is August 12th.MR. GRAMLEY. What about the forecasts?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes, thank you--the forecasts. Do youwant to hand those [tables] out? I don't know that we have to spend alot of time on this but we'll see.SPEAKER(?). You're just trying to get the range, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll show you. Do you all have copies?MR. KICHLINE. No, they're down at that end of the table.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we've done, as you will see, is totake the numbers that you submitted and that the Board members talkedabout. The Chairman exerted his prerogative of not putting downprecise numbers. But we've divided it up to give a little sense of[the views of] the Board members, the voting Presidents, and the non-voting Presidents. My overall impression is that, for some reason,not voting may breed irresponsibility or something. But the rangesare very similar and fall within the range of the Board staff'sprojections for the major variables in both '80 and '81. There were acouple of outliers among the non-voting Presidents. We are notcommitted to any particular treatment of this in the report. What wedid in the last two reports, I believe, was to show a range for Boardmembers. I was asked the last time why we didn't include allCommittee members. I didn't commit myself [to a change], but Iacknowledged that that was a reasonable question. So my presumptionis that we might as well show the range for all Committee members thistime. I'm not sure there's any particular point in dividing it upbetween Board members and others. We could include non-votingPresidents or not, but the specific request was "Committee members" somy [suggestion] would be to combine the Board members and thePresidents and say this is the Committee's range. We've never triedto narrow the range very far. We've had among the Board members somediscussion of whether the more outlying [views] couldn't convergesomeplace. There were some problems that arose when we discussed thisamong the Board, which relate to the problem that Chuck just raised,and I think we ought to discuss this a bit. We decided on the ranges.-79-7/9/80We're a little vague about next year, but we have to discuss theirconsistency with the forecast of the Council [of Economic Advisors]Mr. Kichline says on the basis of his scientific investigation thatthey are consistent, with a low order of probability. What do we sayabout that? How do you feel about the way we present these forecasts?And do any of you want to change your mind about the numbers you'vealready submitted very tentatively?MS. TEETERS. Are you likely to be asked the question--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excuse me, Nancy, but while I think of it,the most important question presentationally seems to me whether wepresent these forecasts with no tax cut, with a tax cut, or both. Iam afraid, frankly, of just presenting a projection which says "with atax cut" because I don't know how to avoid the implication that theFederal Reserve takes it for granted that there will be a tax cut andthat it's desirable. The only argument against presenting it at leastboth ways is that the numbers look so sour without [a tax cut].There's the problem of presenting a very sour economic forecast. Howthat gets resolved is beyond me. But that's the most importantpresentational issue.MR. PARTEE. Also, if we do it both ways, one can subtractand see what the effect of a tax cut is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we do it both ways [the questions is]why not have the tax cut. It's as if all these projections surelyshow: Mirabile dictu! If we have a tax cut, we get more growth andno more inflation, and anybody except a damn fool would have a taxcut. In fact, instead of a $30 billion tax cut, why not make it $60billion because then we'd get still more growth and--MR. PARTEE. Yes, why not make it twice as big?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, I would suggest that we presentprojections assuming no tax cut and then go on to say that if there isa tax cut of, let's say, $25 to $30 billion, then the picture wouldchange. How it would change depends upon the composition and thetiming of implementation because that makes an enormous difference asto how much stimulus would occur in fiscal '81. I'd give them someranges. There is a good deal of uncertainty depending on thecomposition of the tax cut, so I'd make that a little more general.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would prefer to approach it theway you are approaching it. But how does one handle this question?It sticks out even more sharply than it otherwise sticks out that ourprojection is for an extremely sour business picture and a very highunemployment picture for another 18 months, so why aren't we usingpolicy--?MS. TEETERS. The question you're going to get on this,regardless of how we present it, is how much of this is due to thedifference in our fiscal policy assumption and how much is still dueto the difference in our monetary policy assumption, because the CEAhas a much easier monetary policy assumption than we have. That couldbe almost as embarrassing as whether we have [assumed] a tax cut.-80-7/9/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is the CEA assuming an easier monetarypolicy or do they have a different assumption as to that wonderfuldemand shift that's--MS. TEETERS. Oh, they have lower interest rates.MR. PARTEE. 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have lower interest rates. How dothey get them?MR. GRAMLEY. The public projection that goes up to Congresshas an interest rate forecast now that's purely fictitious. That is,they are using a rule of thumb which says that for interest rateprojections we will adopt the rule that real interest rates areunchanged. That [procedure] was adopted two years ago when they hadto discontinue using the old rule, which was that nominal interestrates were unchanged. So to keep from having to forecast interestrates they said: Let's switch to a rule of real interest rateassumptions. And that's all that this monetary policy assumptionmeans. It isn't a real assumption; it's just a plug.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Another question that arises in ourprojections, now that I think of it, is that they show very littleimprovement on the inflation side--MS. TEETERS. Very little improvement on anything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --from year to year. In fact, for thenon-voting Presidents the range is exactly the same and for the votingPresidents it's exactly the same.MR. KICHLINE(?). We excluded some outliers like--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm looking at the wrong comparisonshere. They're not exactly the same, but there's little difference;they show a decline [in inflation] of a quarter percentage point fromyear to year.MR. BALLES. Well, it is an opportunity, Mr. Chairman, foreducating the [Congressional] Committee about the long run.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at the wrong numbers again;they show a difference of one half percentage point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the unemployment figures don'tlook that bad. This says without a tax cut the range is 8-1/2 to 9percent but with a tax cut--depending upon the composition--itprobably would be a percentage point lower than that for the fourthquarter of 1981. So it's down to 7-1/2 to 8 percent.MR. MAYO. But at the risk of more inflation in '82 and '83perhaps. I think that has to be put in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look at the unemployment rate under any ofthe projections for next year. I don't see how we can talk about atax cut without, in effect, saying we should have a tax cut.-81-7/9/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we're not saying that weshouldn't have a tax cut. We're saying we should wait a while and seewhat the numbers are going to be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [But their question would be]: Why do wehave to wait, if that's your--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's why I said earlier that youhave to stress that the composition of it and possibly the magnitudewill be affected by events in the economy over the next few months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is filled with booby traps, butwe can't avoid them all. Along the same line, we used the CPI thelast time. For technical reasons the CPI comparison from '80 to '81will look less good than the other [measure], theoretically; I don'tknow how it will come out. We just thought tentatively that we'd notgive the CPI [forecast] even though it's very good at the end of thisyear in some people's opinions. Well, we don't have to resolve thisfinally today but if anybody has great suggestions--and particularlyif anybody wants to change his or her projection in a way that wouldaffect any of this--let Mr. Kichline know in the next day or two. Isuppose you just have to leave it to us as to how they're presented.Also, please convey any bright ideas on what we should say about theconsistency of our whole approach to the CEA's [projections]. Theysay our computer tells us it's inconsistent, but we know it'sconsistent.MR. KICHLINE. Certainly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take this silence as assent that we willwork out the problem.SPEAKER(?). It seems it's late in the day.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now where are we?MR. WINN. I think it's time for a compliment. I'd like tocompliment the Bluebook this time. I thought it was very helpful andvery good.MR. SCHULTZ. On that note, I move we adjourn.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me say in that connection that Ithought the presentations this morning were very good. The Bluebookwas well developed. I shudder, as I do every time, when I look atthat Bluebook and all that stuff coming out of these computers aboutthe more increase in money supply we have and the more tax cut we havethe better everything looks!MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, that is not, I insist, what theBluebook says.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may not be what the language says, butif one looks at those pages with all the alternatives, that's theconclusion--MR. AXILROD. Well. I don't think that's what the numbers sayeither. We'd say it even more obviously if we had put '83 in there.7/9/80But we tried to compare a tax cut strategy with a no tax cut strategyand to look at that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that [the outlook is worse]if one looks at a long enough period and all the rest, but I stillwould hate to see that Bluebook get into the press.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Shouldn't the Bluebook have aparagraph in it about the fact that the reaction of the financialmarkets may throw this whole scenario off?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the Bluebook always should have aparagraph in it saying that there are those who think this is all alot of baloney and that everything is going to work out much betterwith the more restrictive policy.MR. BLACK. They called us outliers and then took our[projections] out of the figures.MR. SCHULTZ. While we're on the subject of the books, whatabout the Redbook?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've had a little discussion aboutthat. I asked Carl Scheld to look at that. Frankly, I find theRedbook less useful than it might be--not in the sense that it's not avery good idea to get these kinds of comments fresh from the market,but in its organization. It goes District by District and it'sawfully hard for me--I never get through it, frankly--to get somesense of what is happening in a particular sector of the economy orwhat the latest feel is, which is what the Redbook is supposed togive, because the information is so dispersed. I'd like to see somereorganization, maybe only in the summary, so that it comes through alittle more clearly. What should be clear, looking at all thesereports, is that this is the latest feel we have for residentialconstruction or for business investment and that these are the nuancesin different areas or sectors of the economy. It's just a matter oforganizing the material.MR. GRAMLEY. I would hope that would be done just in the[summary], because I wouldn't like to lose that District [by Districtinformation].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's pick up these papers with theprojections; people are worried about these [getting out]. I worry alot more about the Bluebook, frankly, than these wide ranges but--MR. PARTEE. These ranges are so wide that a reader wouldhave to conclude that the Committee didn't know--MR. SCHULTZ. And that is an entirely reasonable conclusion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's all right, I don't think we need abreak unless people want to break just for a minute or two. We wantto discuss the Monetary Control Act a little and questions that arisewith respect to that.MS. TEETERS. Couldn't we have a seventh inning stretch?-83-7/9/80 -84-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can have a seventh inning stretch.We'll have a 5 minute break and come back for other [non-FOMC]matters.END OF MEETING