
<START>Manufacturing activity in the region hit a soft spot in the fall, as I indicated in previous meetings, but our most recent Business Outlook Survey, in January, presented somewhat positive but also somewhat mixed signals.<END>
The general activity index returned to positive territory with a reading of plus 8, indicating a slight increase in manufacturing activity, and there was a significant rebound in shipments.
New orders, however, remained close to zero.
That’s somewhat of an aberration because new orders and shipments tend to move very much together, and so there are some inconsistencies there, which is why I said the situation is a bit mixed.
According to our survey, however, the firms expect a rebound of general manufacturing activity and orders January 30-31, 200756 of 255over the coming six months.
Indeed, most of our business contacts see moderate growth in the region continuing for the foreseeable future.
Their positive attitudes are consistent with the recent positive news we’ve had about conditions in the nation.
<START>Firms remain concerned about their ability to hire both skilled and unskilled labor.<END>
Labor markets are tight for many of the reasons that President Minehan described in New England;
we have some of the same things going on in the Third District.
Regarding national conditions, the unusually warm weather in December may have temporarily buoyed some of our numbers;
but based on incoming information, I’ve become increasingly confident that the national economy has a positive underlying momentum.
At the time of our last meeting, there was a contrast between the mixed data on consumption and production and the relatively strong indications from the labor market.
The picture that appears to be emerging from the latest economic information is one of stronger underlying growth that has been temporarily weakened by housing and autos.
There is little, if any, evidence that the housing and auto corrections are spilling over into the other sectors of the economy.
We’ve been looking for those spillovers for the past six months and have yet to see any significant evidence that they are occurring or are about to occur.
Of course, spillovers may yet materialize with a long lag, but that likelihood to my mind is diminishing as we have begun to see some hopeful signs of stabilization in housing.
Labor market conditions remain firm, and manufacturing indicators improved in December as did capital goods orders.
Although I didn’t talk to the chairman of Disney, I did talk to a small manufacturing firm with total revenues that come to $2 million.
He has been very positive about the outlook.
<START>His sales depend a lot on construction, and he said that, after the most miserable August and September he had ever seen in his twenty years of running the business, the pickup began in late November, continued through December, and has continued into January as January 30-31, 200757 of 255well.<END>
Other contacts from banks, particularly credit card issuers to whom I’ve talked, suggest that banks are seeing numbers coming across their books on credit card purchases continuing to be strong even after Christmas.
So that also is good news.
All of this suggests that the downside risks to growth have receded since our last meeting.
I believe this is the market’s assessment as well, as expectations of future policy firm.
My outlook is that the economy will return to trend growth, which I put at about 3 percent this year, and will continue at that pace into 2008.
Of course, as everybody has indicated, that’s a little stronger than the Greenbook’s outlook, and it is, again, based on my view that potential growth or trend growth is somewhat higher than the Greenbook has stated.
I expect the unemployment rate to rise slightly, maybe to 4.8 percent by the fourth quarter of this year, and then to stabilize into next year.
I think this is going to be accompanied by employment growth of nearly 1 percent, and again, that’s what accounts for the difference in the trend growth.
I anticipate a decline in core PCE inflation of about 0.4 percent by 2008.
I would like to underscore that this forecast is not driven by a lower pass-through of oil prices, which have declined.
My reading of the empirical evidence, including work done by some people on the Philadelphia staff, is that it’s very difficult to attribute movements in core inflation of six months to twelve months or longer periods to changes in oil prices.
In fact, there’s growing empirical evidence that neither movements in oil prices nor Phillips curve type factors significantly improve our root mean square error forecasts of core inflation two or more quarters ahead.
I note that this refers to forecasts of six months or longer and not to short-run high-frequency movements.
<START>This suggests that we should be careful in the language we use describing the reasons for our projections of future inflation to avoid perpetuating views of inflation processes that we can’t empirically substantiate.<END>
January 30-31, 200758 of 255In my view, core inflation will not come back down until monetary conditions, which I believe have been very accommodative over the past few years, have tightened sufficiently.
The Greenbook forecast has a slightly smaller decline in core PCE inflation to about 2 percent in 2008, but incorporates a less restrictive monetary policy than I believe is likely to be appropriate given my view of the strength of the underlying economy and of the fundamentals that we are seeing.
<START>Indeed, over the past two meetings, my feeling was that the slowdown in economic activity that we might be seeing, combined with a constant fed funds rate, might have been enough to bring inflation back to a more acceptable level.<END>
Now I’m less convinced that price stability will be achieved without further action on our part some time later this year.
But I will leave that discussion to the policy go-round.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>Mr. Vice Chairman.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Charlie, I’m not sure I understand your thinking.
You said that you expect what sounded like a pretty significant moderation in core PCE, but that’s on a monetary policy assumption that implies further tightening.
MR.
PLOSSER.
That’s right, somewhat tighter, somewhat more aggressive than what’s in the Greenbook.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Though I don’t want to pin you down, that sounds sort of modest.
You are saying that with another 25 basis points you’d get what core PCE inflation over the forecast period?
MR.
PLOSSER.
The path I was thinking about as I was doing the forecast and trying to determine the appropriate policy here
—my desire is to get inflation down lower, and that’s reflected in my forecast
—is one in which the fed funds rate goes up somewhat from where it is today, January 30-31, 200759 of 255perhaps to 5½ or 5¾ percent.
But then by the end of ’07 and into ’08, it’s coming back down again to more of a steady-state level, and then we can talk about what the real neutral rate is.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Just in orders of magnitude
—if we did another 25 or 50 basis points and there were some sort of associated changes in overall financial conditions so that that was reinforced, you’d get a core PCE inflation forecast that would go how far down?
Would it go to 1.5?
MR.
PLOSSER.
<START>Well, there’s some uncertainty about that.<END>
I think it would get to between 1.5 and 2 percent.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
It’s 4:30.
Why don’t we take a fifteen-minute coffee break?
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Would you come to order, please?
Thank you.
We are ready to recommence with the go-round.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, now that I have everyone’s attention, [laughter] I’m going to start with some information on the District and then talk briefly about the national economy from my perspective.
Let me begin by saying that the District’s activity did slow over the second half of 2006 in line with the national economy itself.
The slowdown was most apparent in housing and manufacturing.
However, the most recent data that we have from November and December indicate a pickup in some of the activity.
Moreover, reports from our directors and our business contacts suggest a considerable degree of optimism among them going forward, more than we expected actually.
One area in which we are seeing signs of improvement is housing itself.
<START>While new construction activity does remain subdued in our region, sales activity has picked up, and the inventory situation appears to be improving in our major markets.<END>
Nonresidential January 30-31, 200760 of 255construction remains strong and is offsetting some of the weakness on the residential side.
District employment growth has risen in recent months, and labor markets remain tight for us.
<START>In addition to continuing shortages of skilled workers in a large number of technical and professional areas, we have recently received reports that the hospitality and recreational sectors are experiencing difficulty in finding lower-skilled workers as well.<END>
We have also received numerous reports from directors in District businesses indicating higher year-end wage and salary increases.
The situation in agriculture is somewhat mixed.
The sharp increases in crop prices, especially corn, driven by exports of ethanol and exports of corn itself, have caused the USDA to boost estimates of 2007 farm income rather significantly.
However, higher crop prices are also eroding profitability of livestock producers and processors in our region, which is a fairly important sector.
One important sector in which activity appears likely to slow in 2007 is energy.
The District economy has benefited tremendously over the past few years from the rise in energy prices, which has spurred increased production of traditional products
—and that includes oil, gas, and coal
—as well as alternative fuels like ethanol and biodiesel.
<START>According to reports from a couple of our directors, however, the recent decline in energy prices has already led to a reduction in drilling activity and is likely to cause some cutbacks in new investment in alternative fuels as well.<END>
Turning to the national outlook, I, like others, have noted the recent strength in the economy and have raised my estimates of growth for the fourth quarter and somewhat raised them for the first quarter.
I continue to expect growth to rise over 2007 modestly toward what I think is potential, in the neighborhood of 3 percent.
However, now I expect it to occur a little more quickly than I did at the December meeting.
Accordingly, recent economic information has led me to reassess the balance of risks to the outlook.
I believe the downside risks from the further slowing of housing January 30-31, 200761 of 255have diminished somewhat.
<START>Moreover, I share the view that the recent weakness in manufacturing activity reflects a better balancing of production and inventories rather than a fundamental weakness.<END>
Going forward, the improved outlook for energy prices should support consumer spending by improving consumers’ disposable income, and we may see additional fiscal stimulus resulting from the more-favorable budget positions of the state and local governments.
Finally, in terms of the inflation outlook, my views have not changed materially since the last meeting.
I’ve been encouraged by the recent inflation data, and I continue to expect inflation to decline over the forecast period.
I expect the core CPI to be in the 2.3 percent range and core PCE inflation to be about 2 percent for 2007.
<START>However, as others have noted, core inflation is too high, and considerable uncertainty remains about whether the recent progress will be sustained.<END>
<START>Particularly, it is not clear how the opposing trends of lower energy prices and greater resource pressures may play out over the next few quarters.<END>
Consequently, it seems to me that there is upside risk to the inflation outlook.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Barron.
MR.
BARRON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thought I’d focus a little more today in my comments on the State of Florida as it relates to the housing sector.
We’ve heard a lot more positive comments in just the past few minutes about housing.
So let me offer a contrarian view, if you will.
Florida accounts for about 41 percent of our District employment and 6 percent of overall U.S.
employment.
As for housing, Florida represented 8 percent of U.S.
home sales in 2005 and 6 percent in 2006 as sales and construction continued to decline.
To put these numbers in perspective, single-family existing home sales in Florida have dropped 40 percent since January 2005 versus an 11 percent decline in the United States as a whole.
Anecdotal reports are that builders are continuing to work down existing inventory and are not starting new projects.
In most areas of the January 30-31, 200762 of 255state, starts have fallen even more than sales, which should lessen the run-up in housing inventory over the immediate future.
Permit issuance for single-family homes is down 54 percent in Florida since January 2005 compared with 28 percent in the nation as a whole.
There are certain encouraging signs from reports noting, as mentioned earlier, that buyer traffic is better in some areas, and several of the building contacts that we spoke with expect or, perhaps I would note more accurately, are hopeful that new home sales will improve by the second quarter of 2007.
Home prices have declined modestly but remain well above the levels implied by the pre-2003 trends in most areas.
This places housing affordability at a relatively low level by historical standards.
As I noted at previous meetings, the demand in coastal markets is being constrained by the steep rise in homeownership insurance that has caused monthly housing costs to rise sharply, even as house prices moderate.
We’ve heard reports that in markets where prices accelerated the most in recent years, such as south Florida, employers are struggling to recruit staff because of the high housing costs, with some firms electing to leave south Florida and others beginning to convert corporate owned land to corporate housing just so that they can recruit employees.
As I reported at our last meeting, the decline in housing activity continues to have a negative effect on housing-related sectors specifically in the South because of our concentration in the carpet and other related industries.
Housing-related employment is no longer a net contributor to year-over-year employment growth in the United States, even though overall job growth has remained very firm.
District banks reported that credit quality has softened but remains at very strong levels.
However, banks are beginning to be a bit more vocal in expressing concern with regard to the possibility that builders will face financial problems in the coming months.
In addition, banks express concern about the number of speculative condominium projects in south Florida.
District banks have lower earnings targets for 2007, and the expectation is that bank merger and acquisition January 30-31, 200763 of 255activity and layoffs will increase in the coming year.
<START>Some banks are even putting out the “for sale” sign in the hope of cashing out now, noting that things could get ugly over the next two years in some areas.<END>
Outside the housing sector, indicators of economic performance in the District were mixed.
Reports on holiday-related sales were on the positive side, whereas tourism remains relatively mixed across the District.
Reports from the manufacturing sector were also mixed, with a weakness in the housing-related industries offset to some extent by the expanding activity in industries related to defense and energy.
For the U.S.
<START>economy as a whole, the drag from housing that we experienced over the second half of 2006 does not appear at this time to pose a serious threat to the overall economy, although some forecasters anticipate below-trend real GDP growth for the end of 2006 and the first quarter of 2007.<END>
Most would say that this situation is temporary and would anticipate that real GDP growth will rebound and be close to the trend rate of 3 percent for the rest of 2007.
Our staff projections of real GDP growth have had about the same tone as those of the external forecasters.
Our staff believes real GDP growth will be sustained in 2007 by job creation that should match the experience that we’ve seen in 2006.
Measured core inflation was well in excess of 2 percent at the end of 2006.
The staff forecast is that core inflation will continue to hover just above 2 percent for all of 2007.
The expectation is that price growth in services will continue to dominate core inflation going forward.
In my comments I’ve focused a bit more on housing.
I would just close by noting that my continued concern would be the lack of impetus to drive down inflation over the long term.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Poole.
January 30-31, 200764 of 255 MR. POOLE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have to start by saying that it’s hard to compete with my colleague Richard Fisher, with his stable of contacts.
I have perhaps just a slight amendment on Wal-Mart.
My contact there said that he has observed in recent years a changing pattern of holiday shopping, with shoppers procrastinating and putting their shopping closer to Christmas, and that might have moved some sales from November to December;
also the growth of the gift card business moved some of those sales into January.
Those circumstances might explain a bit of what we’re seeing.
He said that it looks as though the January same-store sales growth will come in at 2½ to 2¾ percent.
I’m sure that’s consistent with Richard’s information.
My contact points out that, although those numbers are a little better than what they had anticipated a month or two ago, they are still 200 basis points below the original plan, which was set about a year ago.
For February their plan is 4½ percent, but he believes that anything north of 3 would be good performance.
His view is that he doesn’t see a lot of momentum one way or another, that things are pretty steady, and that there’s been no particularly significant change in the situation.
My FedEx contact sees business as very steady.
There was a very strong peak season, pretty much on projection.
<START>The one negative he sees is in the less-than-truckload business, and that confirms information coming directly from a trucking industry source as well.<END>
Basically, the outlook is good, steady, and very confident.
As for capital expenditures, FedEx is expecting to have 15 percent above this fiscal year in the next fiscal year, which starts June 1.
My contact does not see any particular labor market pressures.
My UPS contact said that the company is cutting its cap-ex, and they are actually cutting capacity.
He said that they are cutting out twelve flights, I think it was, that they had just added in June.
The cuts are basically a consequence of a careful analysis of their express business, which showed that a lot of it is just unprofitable, January 30-31, 200765 of 255particularly the shipping of packages to individual homes.
They are renegotiating contracts with online retailers and mail order retailers, and they’re trying to shed some of that business.
My trucking industry contact says that things just don’t look very sound.
Freight volume, which would be full truckloads, is actually off 4 percent year over year in January.
Shipping rates are flat, but there are intense pressures from their clients to cut rates.
Driver turnover is up because the drivers are not getting enough business to eat well, and so they are shopping around for other companies.
<START>So they are losing some drivers, but they’re not too worried because they have plenty of drivers at the moment.<END>
The intermodal business is holding up well, my contact said.
I’d like to just make one brief comment on the national outlook.
<START>I think it’s pretty clear, and it’s reflected around the table, that the outlook for real GDP is a bit stronger than it was at our December meeting, and depending on your perspective in reading the data, maybe the inflation picture is a bit better, too.<END>
But I would emphasize that, compared with past revisions of the outlook, these are really marginal and not material revisions.
There hasn’t been any really big news here.
We don’t want to get carried away with a flow of data that is only slightly stronger.
Let me also comment, along the same lines, about what has been going on with longer-term interest rates.
At the time of our December meeting, the constant-maturity ten-year rate was 4.49.
At least that’s what I have in my spreadsheet.
On Friday, it was 4.88.
There has been a lot of comment to that effect.
I think that change is due partly to the string of marginally stronger news and partly to a change in the market’s assessment about our likely future behavior.
The market has simply taken out the expectation of a rate cut in the near term.
<START>The market has looked again at where we are to a much greater extent than we ourselves have.<END>
Thank you.
January 30-31, 200766 of 255 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
MR.
LACKER.
Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
Do you think that’s because they have changed their minds about our reaction function or about how the shocks are likely to come in between now and then?
MR.
POOLE.
I suspect that it’s a combination.
But I also think that a number of us in our speeches have been saying things such as that we think policy is at about the right place.
If we repeat that often enough, the markets begin to think that we’re not about to cut rates.
MR.
LACKER.
So what about our statement in October?
Did they miss that?
MR.
POOLE.
I guess that it’s a consequence of the interaction between what we’ve been saying and the flow of data.
You have to be careful about double-counting here, but the flow of data has perhaps convinced the market that what we were saying is right because the market, I think, had developed a somewhat different sense of where the economy was going than they had thought that we held.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Does Mr. Lacker have an alternative explanation?
MR.
LACKER.
I think he’s right.
He is suggesting that his belief is that the reaction function they hold to hasn’t changed much in the past month or two but that the shocks have come in more consistent with our assessment of how they were going to come in.
Is that fair?
MR.
POOLE.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a few quick points.
<START>We feel somewhat better about the outlook for growth and inflation, but we haven’t really changed our forecasts for ’07 and ’08.<END>
So just as we expected over the past few cycles, we January 30-31, 200767 of 255currently expect GDP to grow roughly at the rate of potential over the forecast period, which we believe is still around 3 percent, and we expect the rate of increase in the core PCE to moderate a bit more to just below 2 percent over the forecast period.
<START>We see somewhat less downside risk to growth and somewhat less upside risk to inflation than we did, but the overall balance of risks in our view is still weighted toward inflation<END>
—the risk that it fails to moderate enough or soon enough.
The basic nature of the risks to both those elements of our forecast hasn’t really changed.
As this implies, our forecast still has somewhat stronger growth and somewhat less inflation than the Greenbook does.
The differences, however, are smaller than they have been.
We see the same basic story that the Greenbook does in support of continuing expansion going forward.
We have similar assumptions for the appropriate path of monetary policy
—at least two, perhaps several, quarters of a nominal fed funds rate at current levels.
The main differences between our view about the economy and the Greenbook’s relate first, as they have for some time, to the likely growth in hours;
we’re still not inclined to build in a substantial reduction in trend labor force growth.
Second, our view is that inflation has less inertia, less persistence, than it has exhibited over the past half-century.
Third, we tend to think that changes in wealth have less effect on consumer behavior than does the staff.
We have seen a general convergence in views in the market, as we just discussed, toward a forecast close to this view, close to the center of gravity in this room, and a very significant change in policy expectations as well.
We can take some comfort from this, but I don’t think we should take too much.
<START>Markets still seem to display less uncertainty about monetary policy and asset prices and quite low probabilities to even modest increases in risk premiums than I think is probably justified.<END>
January 30-31, 200768 of 255 Let me just go through the principal questions briefly.
Is the worst behind us in both housing and autos?
Probably, but we can’t be sure yet.
If we get some negative shock to income
—to demand growth
<START>—we’re still vulnerable to a more adverse adjustment in housing prices with potentially substantially negative effects on growth, in part because of the greater leverage now on household balance sheets.<END>
How strong does the economy look outside autos and housing?
Pretty strong, it seems.
<START>We see no troubling signs of weakness, despite the disappointment on some aspects of investment spending.<END>
<START>What does the labor market strength tell us about the risk to the forecast?<END>
<START>It seems obvious that on balance it justifies some caution about upside risk to growth and more than the usual humility about what we know about slack and trend labor force growth.<END>
<START>But I don’t think it fundamentally offers a compelling case on its own for a substantial change to the inflation forecast or the risks to that forecast.<END>
Is there any new information on structural productivity growth?
Not in our view.
We’re still fairly comfortable with the staff view of around 2 percent or 2½ percent for the nonfarm business sector.
I’m not a great fan of the anecdote, but I’ll cite just one.
<START>If you ask people who make stuff for a living on a substantial scale, it’s hard to find any concern that they are seeing diminished capacity to extract greater productivity growth in their core businesses.<END>
That’s not a general observation, just a small one.
<START>Have the inflation risks changed meaningfully in either direction?<END>
I think the recent behavior of the core numbers and of expectations is reassuring.
<START>The market doesn’t seem particularly concerned about inflation, and the market is therefore vulnerable to a negative surprise, to a series of higher numbers.<END>
Can we be confident we’ll get enough moderation with the current level of long-term expectations prevailing in markets, with the expected path of slack in the economy, and with the range of potential forces that might operate on relative prices
—January 30-31, 200769 of 255energy, import, and other prices?
<START>Again, I think this forecast still seems reasonable, but we can’t be that confident, and we need to be concerned still about the range of sources of vulnerability of that forecast.<END>
<START>Another way to frame this question is, Is the inflation forecast consistent with the current expectations for the path of monetary policy acceptable to the Committee?<END>
We haven’t fully confronted that issue because we don’t get much moderation with a monetary policy assumption that’s close to what’s in the markets.
But I don’t think there’s a compelling case to act at this stage in a way that forces convergence on that.
In other words, how tight is monetary policy, and how tight are overall financial conditions today?
I don’t think there’s a very strong case for us to induce more tightness or more accommodation than now prevails.
<START>There’s a good case for patience and for giving ourselves a fair amount of flexibility going forward, within the context of an asymmetric signal about the balance of risks and a basic judgment that we view the costs of a more adverse inflation outcome as the predominant concern of the Committee.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In preparation for submitting my forecast, I looked at my previous forecasts
—a humbling but instructive experience usually.
<START>[Laughter] Going back a year, I found that, based on the staff’s estimate for 2006, inflation and growth had each turned out within a quarter point of my projections.<END>
I’m quite certain that this is not a consequence of any particular expertise on my part.
Rather, it is indicative that, in a broad sense, the economy is performing remarkably close to our expectations.
President Poole was making this point.
<START>Even going back a few years to when we started to remove accommodation, despite large fluctuations in energy prices in recent years, huge geopolitical uncertainties, and a housing boom and bust the dimensions of which we really didn’t anticipate three years ago, the economy January 30-31, 200770 of 255is in the neighborhood of full employment, and core inflation is at a fairly low rate by historical standards.<END>
Now, the surprises last year were the surge of inflation in the spring and early summer.
That has not been entirely reversed.
<START>The extent of the slowdown in productivity growth, both in terms of trend and of actual relative to the lower estimated trend, and the related decline in the unemployment rate suggest that we are entering 2007 with a higher risk of inflation than I had anticipated a year ago.<END>
Given this risk, it is especially important that economic growth be no greater and perhaps a little less than the growth rate of potential, and that is my forecast
—a small uptrend in the unemployment rate.
The issue I wrestled with was how fast the economy will be growing when the drag from housing abates.
In early December, the debate might have been about whether demand would be sufficient to support growth as high as potential.
<START>But given the stabilization of housing demand, the strength of consumption, and ongoing increases in employment, I asked myself whether we might not find the economy growing faster than its potential beginning in the second half of 2007 and in 2008, thereby adding to inflation pressures.<END>
A couple of forces, however, gave me a little comfort in supporting my projection of only moderate growth.
One is the modest restraint on demand from the recent rise in interest rates, especially the restraint on the housing market, and the dollar exchange rate.
Another is the likelihood that consumption will grow more slowly relative to income and will lag the response to housing as housing prices level out and as energy prices begin to edge higher.
Consumption late last year was probably still being boosted substantially by the past increases in housing wealth and by the declines in energy prices, which combined with warm weather to give a considerable lift to disposable income.
On the housing wealth factor, I think our model suggests that it takes several quarters for a leveling out in housing wealth to build into consumption.
In January 30-31, 200771 of 255fact, the data through the third quarter suggest that prices were really just about leveling out in the third quarter.
So it may be a little early to conclude that, just because we’re not seeing a spillover from the housing market to consumption, there isn’t going to be any.
I expect some, though modest, spillover.
Moreover, some of the impulse in the fourth quarter was from net exports.
<START>These were spurred in part by a temporary decline in petroleum imports and an unexpected strength in exports.<END>
Those conditions are unlikely to be sustained.
In addition, business investment spending has been weaker than we anticipated.
Now, I suspect this is, like the inventory situation, just an aspect of adapting to a slower pace of growth, and investment will strengthen going forward.
But it does suggest that businesses are cautious.
<START>They are not anticipating ebullient demand and a pressing need to expand facilities to meet increases in sales, and their sense of their market seems worth factoring into our calculations.<END>
<START>Finally, the fact that I would have been asking just the opposite question seven weeks ago suggests that we’re also putting a lot of weight on a few observations, [laughter] whether regarding the weakness then or the strength more recently.<END>
<START>I do continue to believe that growth close to the growth rate of potential will be consistent with gradually ebbing inflation.<END>
For this I would round up the usual suspects, reflecting the ebbing of some temporary factors that increased inflation in 2006.
One factor is energy prices.
Empirical evidence since the early 1980s to the contrary notwithstanding, the coincidence that President Lacker remarked between the rise and fall in energy prices in 2006 and the rise and fall in core inflation suggests some cause and effect.
The increase in energy prices into the summer has probably not yet been completely reversed in twelve-month core inflation rates, so I expect some of that to be dying out as we go into the future.
Increases in rents are likely to moderate as units are shifted from ownership to rental markets.
The slowdown in growth relative to earlier January 30-31, 200772 of 255last year seems to have made businesses more aware of competitive pressures, restraining pricing power.
When we met last spring, we had a lot of discussion about businesses feeling that they had pricing power
—that they could pass through increases in costs.
I haven’t heard any of that discussion around the table today.
The recent slowdown in inflation is encouraging but not definitive evidence that the moderation is in train.
The slowdown could have been helped by the decline in energy prices, and that decline won’t be repeated.
Goods prices might have been held back by efforts to run off inventories, and that phenomenon, too, be temporary.
would As I already noted, the initial conditions
<START>—the recent behavior of productivity and the relatively low level of the unemployment rate<END>
—suggest upward inflation risks relative to this gentle downward tilt.
To an extent, the staff has placed a relatively favorable interpretation on these developments.
They haven’t revised trend productivity down any further.
They expect a pickup in realized productivity growth over this year.
They see a portion of the strength in labor markets as simply lagging the slowdown in growth
—a little more labor hoarding than usual as the economy cools, along with some statistical anomalies.
<START>Thus, in the Greenbook, the unemployment rate rises, and inflation pressures remain contained as activity expands at close to the growth rate of potential.<END>
President Yellen at the last meeting and Bill Wascher today pointed out two less benign possibilities.
<START>One is that demand really has been stronger, as indicated by the income-side data, and that the labor and product markets really are as tight as the unemployment rate suggests.<END>
In this case, the unemployment rate wouldn’t drift higher with moderate growth.
Businesses might find themselves facing higher labor costs and being able to pass them on unless we take steps to firm financial conditions.
The second possibility is that trend productivity is lower.
In this case, actual productivity growth might not recover much this year.
Unit labor costs would rise more January 30-31, 200773 of 255quickly.
Given the apparent momentum in demand, we might be looking at an even further decline in the unemployment rate in the near term.
Now, my outlook is predicated on something like the staff interpretation, but I think these other possibilities underline the inflation risks in an economy in which growth has been well maintained.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Like several of you, I’m going to focus on housing and what we’re seeing in the banking sector and in mortgage performance.
Since the last meeting, I am feeling better about the housing market in the aggregate.
It looks as though home sales are stabilizing for the fourth quarter.
On the whole, home sales actually did go up a bit.
The inventory of new homes for sale has now fallen for five months through December, and mortgage applications for home purchases continue to move above the levels of last summer, when they hit bottom.
The National Association of Realtors is estimating that existing home sales have already bottomed out, and homebuilder sentiment improved in three of the four past months.
But even if sales really have stabilized, the inventory of homes for sale still must be worked down before construction and growth resume in this market.
Given that some existing homes have likely been pulled off the market in light of slower sales and moderating housing prices, this inventory correction period will probably continue into 2008.
I think this is particularly true in markets such as Florida, as First Vice President Barron mentioned, where a large amount of speculative investment occurred during the boom period
—with three to five years of excess construction from the investor side.
So those homes still have to be worked through.
Asset quality in the consumer sector as a whole is very good.
We have come through one of the most benign periods.
The exception, as Bill mentioned in his presentation earlier today, is January 30-31, 200774 of 255the subprime market.
When you dissect it, you see that prime mortgage delinquencies are flat and subprime mortgages at a fixed rate are flat.
The whole problem is in subprime ARMs, which are running into difficulties.
The four federal regulatory agencies are looking harder at some of these subprime products.
We started reviewing 2/28 mortgages, and now we’re looking at and testing some other products.
We’re finding that the issues are getting more troublesome the further we dig into these products.
To put the situation in perspective, subprime ARMs are a very small part of the whole mortgage market.
As Vincent mentioned, subprime is about 13 percent, and the ARM piece of the subprime is about half to two-thirds, so we’re talking perhaps around 8 percent of the aggregate mortgages outstanding.
We’re seeing that the borrowers who got into these during the teaser periods now are seeing tremendous payment shocks.
For example, 2/28s that are going from the fixed two-year period to the adjustment period basically had their interest rates double, so they’re going from a 5 percent handle to a 10 percent handle, and the borrowers don’t have the discretionary income to absorb that.
This type of mortgage was sold to a lot of subprime borrowers on the idea that they are lending vehicles to repair credit scores.
You will show that you are going to pay during the early period, and then you can refinance and get a lower long-term rate, so you’ll never pay the jump.
<START>But we’re finding that some of these mortgages have significant prepayment penalties, and so to refinance and get the better terms, some borrowers are getting into difficulty.<END>
Because of the moderation in housing prices, these borrowers haven’t built up enough equity to absorb the prepayment penalty.
So the problem stems from a combination of factors.
There are a lot of spins on these products, but we’re trying to take an approach based on principles in looking at what’s really happening.
I also want to mention that, although the ownership of the mortgages is very diffuse and so we’re not seeing any real concentrated risk, particularly in banking, we do need to pay more January 30-31, 200775 of 255attention to where the mortgage-servicing exposures are.
The servicing of these mortgages that are securitized is concentrated in certain institutions.
Clearly, when you have such a high level of delinquencies and potential defaults, all profitability in servicing is gone.
So there could be some charge-offs in these securitized mortgages.
Also, I think all of you have noticed the number of mortgage brokers that have closed up shop in the past six months because they couldn’t get enough liquidity or capital to repurchase the early defaults of these recent pools.
That is really shrinking the origination pocket.
<START>I should also say that, with the exception of the subprime ARM mortgages, we feel very good about overall credit quality.<END>
When I look at the economy as a whole, I also see that except for housing construction and autos, the rest of the economy is sound.
The recent growth in employment and the strong wage growth give me comfort that the income growth of consumers is there to mitigate some of the wealth effects that we may have with moderating housing prices.
<START>But I also share the concerns that some of you mentioned here, and that President Yellen spoke of in a speech, about the issue regarding productivity trends and wage growth, and determining how fast the economy is growing.<END>
Productivity is going to have to grow faster to absorb the higher wage growth, particularly as employment growth continues strong, and I think the slack in the skilled labor force is getting very, very limited.
<START>When I think, in aggregate, about the data since our last meeting, I feel a little better about inflation because it appears to be moderating, but I’m not jumping for joy because we need a few more months.<END>
However, the growth information has been, instead of mixed as at the last meeting, generally stronger, and that does make me feel better.
<START>In net, then, based on the recent information, I’m even a bit further along on the side that the risks have moved higher for inflation than on the side of the risk of a slowdown in the economy.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
January 30-31, 200776 of 255 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thought I’d provide just a couple of perspectives, first on the 2006 economy and then, by extrapolation, on the trends in ’07.
With respect to 2006, I think the economy outperformed market expectations and Greenbook expectations, for probably at least four reasons.
The first is the underlying strength of the employment market, which has been much discussed today.
Second, the strength and durability of household finance, which, as Vice Chairman Geithner said, turned out to be far more determined by W-2 income than some of the household balance sheet items like home equity and stock market effects.
But we need to take another look at that trend in 2007.
Third, the economic outperformance in ’06 had much to do with the resilience of the U.S.
capital markets as evidenced in credit spreads and other financial instruments, particularly in the face of some rather seismic events
—one-time, potentially systemic events like the Amaranth Advisors collapse;
cyclical price spikes with respect to commodity prices that may well have been somewhat demand-driven;
a series of supply shocks driven by oil;
and a seeming transition to slower growth in the middle of the year.
Fourth were the continued powerful sources of liquidity that smoothed the transition over the several bumps in the road.
<START>I also looked at what the most reliable and the least reliable indicators of the state of the economy in ’06 were to see whether those signposts might hold for ’07.<END>
I think the tax receipt information that we saw in ’06 was telling us that incomes were likely ahead of trend
—tax receipts for ’06 were up a total of 11.6 percent.
Corporate profits, which were up 92 percent in the past four years, had another remarkable year, up in the mid-teens.
Stock prices, obviously closely related to corporate profits, were up 84 percent in the past four years and up about 15 percent in 2006.
Credit spreads continued to trend tighter;
high-yield spreads were down about January 30-31, 200777 of 255100 basis points from September.
<START>Another couple of reasonably reliable indicators for ’06 were the household survey of employment, which suggested early and often that employment growth was likely to be ahead of expectations, and merger and acquisition pipelines, which suggested a degree of confidence in the markets by business leaders and other folks involved in finance.<END>
A less reliable indicator for 2006 growth was the shape of the yield curve, and the suggestion from most of us around the table to the markets was that the yield curve wasn’t predicting much by way of recession in the short term.
Another less reliable indicator was the consumer confidence and business confidence surveys, which seemed to snap all over the place, perhaps more because of geopolitical events and some short-term data than any really driving profile.
<START>With respect to inflation, it is hard to find any indicators that were very good at telling us its path, but I do think that the TIPS spread, even when there was much talk in the spring and the summer about rising inflation, seemed to stay relatively well anchored and not to move too much based on some of that noise in the data.<END>
So that indicator seems to have been reasonably good.
As was mentioned earlier, monthly CPI and PCE core measures seemed to be moving around rather significantly, so it was hard for us to determine too much from them as 2006 went forward.
Taking all of that into account, as I think about 2007, I find that analyzing those indicators is not without significant peril, but let me attempt doing so.
<START>The trends appeared supportive of strong, balanced economic growth for 2007, and although inflation expectations are well anchored and recent high-frequency data appear promising, I remain much more concerned about inflation prospects than about growth.<END>
<START>Having said that, I do think that as an institution we go into 2007 with probably even heightened credibility on the inflation front and in terms of our perspectives on the economy, which should help us over the next twelve months.<END>
January 30-31, 200778 of 255 Two key themes summarize my views on 2007.
First, strong employment trends should continue to support consumer spending.
Second, strong corporate balance sheets and balanced global growth should support capital expenditures.
Now, of those two themes, I would note that I have considerably more confidence in the former than in the latter.
I’ll spend another moment on that shortly.
The tone of the markets appears to be exceptionally strong.
Spreads have tightened, even as yields have trended back to 5 percent.
Over November and December, we had three weeks, each with more than $11 billion being priced in the high-yield market.
Just to give some perspective on that fact, for the year 2000 there was a total of $50 billion in the high-yield market.
But what has happened in the past six weeks that might be able to inform our judgments?
Double B spreads have tightened about 25 basis points, single Bs have tightened 50 basis points, and triple C spreads have tightened 70 basis points in the past six weeks, all of which continues to signal to me that the economy maintains a relative strength and that investors feel confident about the bets that they’re making.
In summary, I would say there are significant tails on both sides of this rather strong base case for the economy, but the economy is more likely to track above the expectations of the Greenbook.
Let me spend a couple of moments on the consumer.
Contacts from two large credit card companies to whom I spoke last week expect and have seen in January the same kind of strength that they saw in December.
The first three weeks of January look to be a continuation of the late but positive trend in the fourth quarter.
For what it’s worth, the contacts’ own projections are that the first quarter will be rather strong, much like the fourth quarter ended up being.
<START>Today, we’ve all tried to wrestle with what the Greenbook referred to as the “unexplained strength” of household spending during 2006 to determine its effect on ’07.<END>
Let me spend a couple of January 30-31, 200779 of 255moments on a hypothesis that the contacts proffered regarding that strength, which the Greenbook references in its “buoyant consumer” simulation.
What that strength may well prove is that employees worked more, earned more, and had more savings from their household balance sheets to fund consumption than the data to this point are suggesting.
I think that could turn out to be the case in 2007.
First, people worked more.
The benchmark payroll survey on total job creation may well be revised upward again significantly, like the revision of last year.
<START>Gains in service jobs may well be less counted than some of the losses in other kinds of jobs<END>
—another bias for upward revisions.
The JOLTS data to which President Pianalto referred continue to be very positive, suggesting a real dynamism in the economy that may well be accelerating.
Participation rates may continue their recent spike as new workers selectively choose to enter this marketplace.
Average hours worked moved up in the fourth quarter to an annual rate of 2.2 percent, and that trend could continue.
So monthly employment gains have not proved much harder to achieve as we approach what we thought was full employment, and the NAIRU may be lower than estimated.
Second, people certainly may well have earned more.
Average hourly earnings were up 4.2 percent for ’06, an acceleration that was rather widespread from ’05 measures.
Though the data on compensation continue to be mixed, they do seem to be trending in that direction.
The divergence between profits and compensation suggests to me at least that there is large upside potential for unemployment to stay low and for wages to accelerate, perhaps in a catch-up for wage gains that we didn’t see earlier in the cycle.
Third, as a result of working more and earning more, I suspect that workers may continue to spend more, particularly with the gift of what seems to be relatively low oil prices, in the mid-fifties.
The oil price seems to me to have less of a risk premium and now January 30-31, 200780 of 255appears to reflect some elevated supply and at least modestly lower demand.
In sum, with respect to the consumer side, I am reasonably well confident.
I’ll spend just a moment on the business side of the equation.
Fourth-quarter profits appear to be quite good, with two-thirds of companies beating estimates.
As many of these companies are challenged to have double-digit earnings in 2007, they may look for other avenues in which to buy those earnings
—in the M&A world
—or increase cash outlays through share repurchases from their excess cash on the balance sheet to maintain earnings per share growth in the double digits.
Another alternative is that they might choose to increase cap-ex as many of us, including myself, would have expected them to do earlier in this cycle.
<START>Doing so could have a negative effect on short-term earnings but would show some real confidence in their long-term investment and growth plans.<END>
As already mentioned, shipments and orders fell in the fourth quarter, and our working explanation is that much of that fall is really an inventory adjustment.
We’ve had that discussion for a while.
I would expect business investment and industrial production to pick up.
If it doesn’t do so in the first quarter, my confidence about this side of the economy, about this leg of the stool, will be significantly reduced.
<START>Between now and the next time we meet, we will have a better sense of whether that turn on the business side of the economy is real or whether we just saw a false start in December.<END>
So I think we’ll be able to come to a much firmer view when we meet in six weeks.
All in all, I remain reasonably confident and optimistic about the forecast.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kroszner.
MR.
KROSZNER.
Thank you very much.
Well, the data have come in so far according to plan, and you can thank Chairman Bernanke for doing that.
I think he has some special relations with the BEA and others.
[Laughter] Exactly as we had hoped they would and said January 30-31, 200781 of 255they would, the data show moderation in growth with a prospect for accelerating growth through 2007 and moderation in inflation
—again, according to plan.
I think my views are similar to those that President Stern put forward:
The economy has shown an enormous amount of resilience.
I want to talk about a few possible puzzles in the way the data have evolved and could perhaps deviate from plan as we go forward.
One puzzle is the great strength of the consumer.
The consumer has been very, very strong for the past five years, and it seems that no matter what has happened
—whether a housing downturn, an equity-market downturn, or a September 11
—the consumer has come through rather strongly and continues to be strong.
We certainly have had a slowdown in the housing market, and maybe we’re waiting to see its effect on the consumer, as Don Kohn mentioned.
But it may just be that some special factors have come in;
for example, we have had very strong international economic growth, and perhaps that will persist.
When you talk to officials and business people outside the United States, whether in emerging market economies, in the Gulf region, or in industrial economies, they are extremely optimistic, much more so than I have ever before seen, and that may continue.
Obviously, there is a risk factor here.
The recent strengthening in equity markets perhaps offsets some of the reduction in the asset values of homes.
<START>Lower consumer energy prices, of course, have been an offsetting factor, and labor market strength and increases in compensation have been very important.<END>
<START>But there’s an upside risk that we will continue to have very, very strong consumption instead of having our error correction go back toward more saving.<END>
Second, with respect to investment, we have had orders above shipments for quite some time, but we have had investment actually declining, or at least not growing as we would expect.
<START>Overall in this recovery we have had weaker investment growth, and we have had very high January 30-31, 200782 of 255profitability.<END>
That raises another puzzle for me:
<START>Why have we seen somewhat weak investment over the long run and especially more recently, given that most measures of consumer confidence and business confidence have been positive, equity markets seem to be positive, spreads seem to be low, and so forth.<END>
Why are we not seeing more investment?
Investment may turn around in the next quarter or so, and then we’ll be out of the woods.
<START>But I think the conditions that we predict will lead to an investment turnaround have been there for quite some time, and we haven’t seen the investment turnaround;<END>
and that is a puzzle to me.
<START>Third, with respect to inflation, obviously we are all pleased that the numbers have been coming out with greater moderation.<END>
But I have a discomfort about exactly what is driving that moderation.
<START>We have good short-term stories about how the slowdown in energy prices in the second and third quarters and some other temporary factors with respect to owners’ equivalent rent could be bringing down inflation.<END>
But when we consider a longer period and try to look at the systematic data, we don’t see those kinds of relationships.
Are we just in some sort of regime shift?
Are those correlations not very good because we just haven’t had a lot of variation in the data over the past ten to twenty years, and so those forces are actually there, but we just find it very difficult to pull them out econometrically?
For me that is a puzzle, to be able to tell a short-term story with each of these pieces, but when I go to the staff and ask, “Well, what is the systematic evidence on it?” they say, “Well, it really isn’t there.” That is a bit disturbing for me in trying to figure out where things are likely to go.
Things have moved in a benign way.
I don’t think there’s a strong expectation that they would move in a nonbenign way.
But I don’t have a lot of confidence that I understand why they have moved as they have.
So my concern is that various shocks or other factors could come in to move them in a way that is not nearly so benign.
Broadly, however, I share the views that most January 30-31, 200783 of 255people have expressed around the table that we have good growth prospects going forward and so far reasonable moderation of inflation.
<START>But precisely because we have those good growth prospects and because we may have had some temporary factors that have kept down inflation, we have to be ever mindful of the upside risk to inflation.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Mishkin.
MR.
MISHKIN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, I’m last in this line, and I’ll try to be brief so that we can get to dinner soon.
I do see signs of stabilization in the housing market, and the way to think of it in terms of spillovers is that we do expect some spillovers through the natural effect of weaker housing on aggregate demand and on wealth.
But we’re not seeing anything out of the ordinary or a persistent pattern, and that gives me more confidence that nothing really bad is going to happen here.
My view is that the risks to the downside have decreased substantially.
Also, the tone of the recent data actually indicates that what is happening concerning aggregate demand is stronger than we would have expected.
As a result, I’m a bit more optimistic than the Greenbook in terms of what is going to happen next year with aggregate demand.
Actually, I see, if anything, a little more risk to the upside, so I slant a bit in that direction.
The inflation numbers have been very good recently, and one view is that they are just temporary blips in the data.
<START>I tend to be a little more sanguine here because I think that there are good reasons for inflation to gravitate toward what are solidly anchored inflation expectations.<END>
<START>That has been very important in terms of the cycle and is one reason that I’m a little more optimistic than the Greenbook on inflation.<END>
I do think that inflation expectations are strongly grounded around 2 percent on the PCE deflator.
As a result, I expect us to go to 2 percent inflation over the next year and then stay there but not go below there.
I don’t actually like to January 30-31, 200784 of 255think of this in terms of “persistence.” It is one reason that I’m unwilling to think that things will get better than that.
<START>But I do think that we will likely have a more benign path of inflation than we might have thought earlier.<END>
<START>Even if you think that there’s a more benign path to inflation, which I’m willing to consider though we’re not sure about it, it is still true that aggregate demand has blipped up recently.<END>
That is an indication that the neutral real interest rate has moved up, which is very much reflected in the Greenbook assessment.
<START>That’s important because, even if you’re happy about what’s happening with inflation, you have to be more worried about the fact that the economy is going to be stronger.<END>
That does have some implications for the way we think about policy going forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
This was an exceptionally interesting, useful discussion.
I thought I would try to summarize what I heard around the table.
If you have comments on that, please give them to me, and then I’ll add a few comments of my own.
Members noted considerable economic strength during the intermeeting period.
Labor markets remain taut, with continuing wage pressures in some occupations.
<START>Consumption grew strongly in the fourth quarter, with some momentum into the first quarter, reflecting a strong job market, lower energy prices, and higher profits.<END>
Overall, investment seems likely to grow at a moderate pace given good fundamentals.
Business people seem generally optimistic, and financial markets are robust.
We still have what people have been characterizing as a two-track economy.
Housing, although a drag for now, does show some tentative evidence of stabilization.
However, some warned about drawing too strong a conclusion about housing during the winter months.
Some also noted issues of credit quality.
The general view was that housing would cease to subtract January 30-31, 200785 of 255from growth later this year.
Some softness in parts of manufacturing, especially in industries related to housing and automobiles, still exists.
But in part this weakness may be an inventory correction that may be reasonably far advanced at this point.
<START>Despite the weakness in housing and some parts of manufacturing, there are yet no signs of spillover into employment or consumption, although some raised the possibility that we may see those later on.<END>
<START>Some, but not all, members agree with the contour of the Greenbook that has economic growth somewhat slower in the near term, strengthening later this year, with a modest increase in unemployment.<END>
The Committee is generally more optimistic about potential growth than the Greenbook, mostly because the members assume that labor force growth will be greater than the Greenbook assumes.
<START>Overall, downside risks to output appear to have moderated, while an upside risk has emerged that growth will not moderate as expected.<END>
<START>On the inflation side, people noted that recent readings have been favorable, although there was disagreement about the cause, whether it was energy prices, well-anchored inflation expectations, less structural inertia, or perhaps just statistical noise.<END>
Most still expect gradually slowing inflation but are cautious and consider upside risk significant, perhaps even greater than late last year.
<START>The primary upside risk to inflation is economic growth above potential in tight labor markets, which may lead to inflation in the future if not in the near term.<END>
<START>Others noted that inflation expectations may be too high to allow continued progress against inflation.<END>
<START>So overall, the general tone was for a somewhat stronger economy, perhaps a slightly improved outlook on inflation, but, in any case, a clear view that the upside risks to inflation are predominant.<END>
Are there any comments?
Let me add just a few points.
Everything has really been said, but not everyone has said it, as they say.
<START>[Laughter] Our goal has been, in some sense, to achieve a soft landing, and the January 30-31, 200786 of 255question is whether we have missed the airport.<END>
[Laughter] We have seen a good bit of strength in the intermeeting period, and I think the real crux of the issue is what’s going to happen to the labor market.
<START>If the labor market continues where it is or strengthens further, we will see both stronger growth, because of the income effects and job effects, and continued pressure on inflation.<END>
Again, the central issue will be whether we will see enough cooling in the economy to have a bit of easing in the labor situation.
This is, obviously, difficult to say.
I do believe that the most likely outcome for the first half of this year is for some moderation in growth, perhaps to modestly below potential.
If you look at the various components of spending and production, you note, for example, that personal consumption expenditures are likely to slow from the very high levels we have just seen recently.
In particular, a lot of the spending recently was for durable goods, which tend to be more negatively auto-correlated
—that is, they tend to drop more quickly when they are high in the short run.
We have seen some moderation in investment, in both equipment and structures.
Net exports were a major contributor to growth at the end of the year;
that should probably reverse, as the Greenbook notes.
A special factor there is that the good weather reduced oil imports, which led people to spend on domestic production rather than on foreign production.
If that situation reverses and we go back to normal net exports, that will subtract from GDP.
Also, the staff noted some likely reversals in government spending.
So my sense is that we’re likely to see something a little less hectic in the first half of this current year.
I think it also remains reasonable that growth will return close to potential later this year.
There is certainly uncertainty about that.
Clearly, we have seen some signs of stabilization in the housing market.
I was going to note the effects of the winter months and the weather.
I think that we should acknowledge that stabilization but not ignore the possibility that we may see further deterioration there.
<START>January 30-31, 200787 of 255 Against the view that growth may moderate this quarter, or next quarter perhaps, there is opposing evidence that consumption and employment are awfully strong.<END>
Economists tend to think of consumption, in particular, as being a very forward-looking variable, and it’s consistent with views that we see, for example, in consumer sentiment that people do feel reasonably optimistic about the labor market and about the state of the economy.
So I agree that there is certainly some risk that the economy will be stronger going forward than we have been projecting.
I don’t have an answer other than to say that we obviously have to monitor the situation very carefully and continue to be willing to reassess our views as the data arrive.
Let me say a bit about inflation.
Recent readings have been favorable.
A couple of aspects of inflation I do find encouraging.
First is that the moderation we’ve seen in inflation the past few months has happened despite the lack of any substantial moderation in shelter costs.
Owners’ equivalent rents are actually a constructed, imputed variable.
They are not seen by anybody.
Nevertheless, they are essentially the entire reason that inflation is remaining above our target zone at this point.
I know it’s a bit of a joke that I always refer to the short-term inflation numbers, but I’ll do it again anyway.
[Laughter] Just to illustrate, over the past three months, core CPI inflation excluding just owners’ equivalent rent was 0.2 percent at an annual rate.
Over the past six months, it was 1.20 percent at an annual rate.
Over the past twelve months, it was 1.82.
We also get numbers for PCE core inflation excluding owners’ equivalent rents that are all below 2 percent.
Obviously that is just carving the data, and there are lots of problems with doing that.
But to the extent we think that rents will continue to moderate, and I think there is scope for them to do that, that’s one factor that should make us a little more comfortable.
Another factor is that there is a fairly broad-based slowing.
<START>I won’t take a lot of time to go through the evidence, but particularly in the CPI there are some encouraging January 30-31, 200788 of 255developments on the services side in terms of inflation to go along with the slowing in goods prices.<END>
Now, I am the first to acknowledge that lots of interpretations of the recent developments are possible.
We hope that favorable structural factors are at work.
One possibility certainly is that the wage increases are a catch-up for previous productivity gains and that we’re seeing a normal restoration of capital-income/labor-income relationships.
<START>In that case, this may be in some sense a transitory adjustment that will restore those relationships and not necessarily contribute to inflation going forward.<END>
Another possibility is that energy price effects are somewhat larger than we thought.
There seems to be some evidence that they are.
A third possibility is that what we saw earlier last year was, as Governor Kohn mentioned, a transitory upside, some of which has simply passed, and we are going back to the more fundamental rate of inflation.
<START>So there are some structural reasons that inflation might be moderating.<END>
My having said that, we should certainly acknowledge the statistical noise that is inherent in these measures.
The monthly standard deviation of core inflation in 2006 was about 8 basis points.
<START>If the true underlying inflation is 0.2 percent, then you have a very good chance of getting either 0.3 or 0.1.<END>
Therefore, we and the financial markets ought to be braced for the possibility that we will get 0.3
—I hope not worse
—in the next few months.
I agree with the view that has been expressed that the trend has not yet been established, and we’ll have to follow its development.
Another very important point that has been raised
—President Moskow, I think, the first to raise it
<START>was—is that, given the lags from economic activity to inflation that we see in standard impulse-response functions and so on, these improvements may be real but nevertheless temporary and the underlying labor market pressures and so on may lead to inflation problems a year or eighteen months from now.<END>
<START>I agree that it is a concern, and it goes back to my point January 30-31, 200789 of 255earlier that we need to be very alert to changes in the pattern of aggregate demand going forward.<END>
As President Poole mentioned, one element that will help us is the endogeneity of financial conditions.
We haven’t done anything since the last meeting, but long-term real interest rates rose about 30 basis points.
The yield curve is still inverted by about 30 basis points.
<START>So I think even the markets themselves have the ability to raise real rates quite significantly, enough certainly to make a difference in the mortgage market if the data continue to be strong and if inflation does not continue to subside.<END>
Then we would have a bit more latitude as we try to determine whether the fourth quarter was a blip or a trend.
I think that’s still an open question.
So let me just say that I broadly agree with what I heard.
The economy does look stronger.
That is an upside risk to which we need to be paying close attention.
Inflation looks a bit better, at least in the short term, but there are some long-term considerations that we need to keep in mind.
<START>Finally, the basic contours of the outlook are not sharply changed, but I agree with the sentiment around the table that upside risk to inflation remains the predominant concern that the Committee should have.<END>
Are there comments?
Yes, President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
We have two important pieces of information coming in at 8:30 tomorrow morning.
I hope the staff can give us a quick first read to start our meeting.
I know that instant analysis is risky, but I ask for it anyway.
[Laughter] MR. STOCKTON.
And I will provide it.
[Laughter].
Whether it’s worth anything or not, I don’t know.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
We’ll start the meeting with the data.
Anything else?
There’s a reception and dinner in Dining Room E. It’s for those who wish to attend.
If you have other plans, please feel free to pursue them, and we’ll see you tomorrow morning at 9:00.
[Meeting recessed] January 30-31, 200790 of 255January 31, 2007
—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Good morning, everyone.
Let’s start with asking Dave Stockton to report on this morning’s data.
MR.
STOCKTON.
So, Mr. Chairman, this was sort of done on the fly.
Unlike the BEA, I won’t be able to go back and revise these remarks.
[Laughter] Total GDP this morning came in at 3½ percent.
That was 0.9 percentage point stronger than we had forecast in the Greenbook.
There were really two sources of our miss in the fourth quarter.
<START>Of that miss, 0.5 was the net export component, which Karen will speak about in a second, and 0.4 was nonfarm inventory investment.<END>
So perhaps Karen will give the quick story on the net export side, and then I’ll complete the report.
MS.
JOHNSON.
The net export numbers are based on trade data only for October-November, and we each make an estimate of what December is going to be.
Perhaps half of our miss, or not quite half, was due to differences of opinion about December.
Looking at what they’ve done for December, we will take some information from that.
Some of what they’ve put in December is information that we didn’t otherwise have.
To some degree, it’s statistical and not really about trade.
It’s something called a territorial adjustment.
Maybe a quarter is differences about things in December for which we are not prepared to change our minds at this point.
So we would not go to as strong a positive contribution from net exports as they go because we retain some difference of views about what the December numbers will turn out to be.
The other bit of news we received was very strong exports of services.
We’ll take that, and we’ll probably give most of the adjustment, but not quite all of it, in the number we write down next for Q4.
We will actually want to reverse that thing called territorial adjustment in Q1.
<START>So January 30-31, 200791 of 255we’re actually going to make imports stronger and the net export contribution slightly more negative in Q1 as a result.<END>
MR.
STOCKTON.
That’s basically half of our GDP miss.
The other half is on the inventory investment side.
Just like with Karen, about half of our miss on inventory investment has to do with a difference of opinion about what the December book value figures will turn out to be.
So it’s just a difference between the BEA’s estimate for December and our estimate for December.
I don’t think we’d be inclined to alter our December estimate, so we’d write off roughly half of that miss on nonfarm inventory investment.
We don’t do that great a job of forecasting those book value inventory figures either.
<START>It is not as though we have lots of information or a good reason for staking ourselves to our forecast versus the BEA’s, but I don’t think they have any more information than we do.<END>
As for private domestic final purchases, which we have been emphasizing, even given some of the recent noise in net exports and government, there we were, in fact, almost exactly right;
we were off by 4 basis points in terms of its contribution to overall GDP.
<START>In terms of the composition, consumption was a bit weaker, and equipment spending a bit stronger, probably because of BEA’s estimate of the share of autos being sold to businesses versus households.<END>
So we don’t really see very much information there.
On net, government was a bit weaker:
<START>The federal side was weaker by more than the state and local side was stronger.<END>
MS.
MINEHAN.
What was the number for domestic final purchases, Dave?
MR.
STOCKTON.
I actually don’t know what the domestic final purchases were, but if you include the government, which they do, they were a little weaker than the number we had written down.
MS.
MINEHAN.
No, the overall number.
January 30-31, 200792 of 255 MR. STOCKTON.
Yes, I don’t know what the overall number is;
I know only what the contributions are.
We’ll be able to get the overall number by break time.
Taking on board our differences of opinion about the December figures, we’d probably be writing down, with the release in hand today, a GDP estimate for the fourth quarter of about 3 percent rather than the 3½ percent that is being currently published
—and in contrast to the 2½ percent we wrote down in the Greenbook.
So then the question is, What does this imply about the overall momentum of activity going into the first quarter?
My answer has to be “not much,” and I don’t think this is just blind stubbornness, although I’m glad my wife is not here to dispute that particular characterization.
[Laughter] But about the two surprises
—as Karen already indicated, they would be inclined to actually mark down their contribution of net exports to GDP growth in the first quarter on the basis of the net export side.
We would probably be inclined to do the same thing with respect to the higher inventory investment, and so we’re coming into the first quarter with somewhat higher inventory-sales ratios and maybe some indications that we’re not as far along in working down inventories as we had thought.
I’m glad that I don’t have to write actually down that first-quarter number today because we will have an employment report on Friday and some first real readings on the pace of activity in the first quarter by the end of the week and in the next week or two.
So basically I’d argue that there isn’t a lot of signal in that 3½ percent figure that we’re moving into the first quarter with much thrust.
Another reason for not necessarily marking up activity as we move into the first half of this year, even though GDP came in 1 percentage point above our estimates, is that real disposable income actually came in 1 percentage point weaker than our Greenbook estimate.
<START>So it isn’t as though, with the higher growth rate of activity, we have more underlying growth in labor income that is likely to be spent going forward.<END>
We have an even January 30-31, 200793 of 255lower saving rate now in the fourth quarter than we have written down.
Thus I think there are several reasons for not necessarily reading this as a sign of greater strength moving into the first part of the year.
On the inflation side, things were actually spot on.
Total PCE inflation was minus 0.8 percent.
That’s what we had written down in the Greenbook.
Core PCE was 2.1
—also exactly what we had written down in the Greenbook.
Market-based core was 1.7;
that was actually 0.1 percentage point better than what we had written down in the Greenbook.
The other major release this morning was the employment cost index, which showed a year-over-year increase of 3.2 percent.
That number also is exactly what we had written down in the Greenbook, so I don’t think we really see any difference.
Obviously, the number has continued to be very subdued.
<START>So in the totality, on the inflation side, things are looking very close to our expectations and I think still pretty good.<END>
Mr. Chairman, that’s all I have to say.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Are there any questions?
If not, Vincent.
MR.
REINHART.3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll be referring to the handout “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” As noted in the top left panel of your first exhibit, the path of policy expectations rotated up over the intermeeting period, and investors now apparently anticipate the federal funds rate to move down only about ½ percentage point over the next couple of years.
As related in the panel at the top right, primary dealers are unanimous in expecting no change in the policy rate at this meeting.
Indeed, nearly all the dealers believe that you will hold the funds rate steady through the May meeting.
As to the wording of the statement, some dealers are calling for a more upbeat assessment of the economic outlook, but almost all expect no change in the Committee’s assessment of risks.
In the Treasury market, as shown in the bottom left panel, this shift in policy expectations was associated with a rise of about ⅜ percentage point in nominal yields
—the movement from the dotted to the solid black lines
—and a smaller increase in their real counterparts
—the dotted to the solid red lines.
Thus, inflation compensation, the vertical difference between the lines, edged higher across maturities.
According to the Desk survey, as in the table at the bottom right, dealers marked up their outlook for real GDP growth and lowered their assessment of inflation for this year, although the changes were small.
If you examine the high-frequency movements of the ten-year nominal yield, about 20 basis points of the 3 Material used by Mr. Reinhart is appended to this transcript (appendix 3).
January 30-31, 200794 of 255increase was registered in windows around economic data releases
—that’s the red bar in the middle right panel
—suggesting that the revisions to the growth outlook apparently predominated in shaping investors’ thinking about your near-term behavior.
Federal Reserve communications
—the statement, the minutes, and speeches
—had no net effect on yields.
But as the gray bar shows, a sizable portion of the rise in yields cannot be linked to data or other identifiable news releases.
A similar measure of our ignorance in explaining yields comes from the arbitrage-free models of the term structure that we regularly follow.
Those models (not shown) suggest that about ¼ percentage point of the rise in the ten-year yield was due to an increase in the term premium.
The same combination of a modestly higher track for activity and a lower one for inflation was a highlight of the simulations of the FRB/US model reported in the Bluebook and repeated in exhibit 2.
The trajectory of the nominal federal funds rate that best achieves your aims
—subject to the many assumptions necessary to make this exercise work
<START>—has shifted up over much of the projection period, whether you have an inflation goal of 1½ percent or 2 percent.<END>
One consideration for the policy choice at this meeting is which charts in those two columns entice you.
<START>With a 2 percent inflation goal, you can keep the funds rate unchanged for some time because you can very nearly declare victory at the prevailing level of inflation.<END>
In contrast, to make progress toward a 1½ percent inflation goal, you’ve got a bit of work to do, as the sluggishness of inflation expectations and the flatness of the Phillips curve in the FRB/US model make it costly to disinflate.
Indeed, this simulation puts the nominal federal funds rate around 6 percent by year-end.
<START>This observation on the inflation goal is mapped into two monetary policy alternatives at the top of exhibit 3.<END>
<START>The quarter-point firming of alternative C would be particularly attractive if, besides having an inflation goal below the prevailing rate of inflation, you harbored significant concerns about the underlying strength of aggregate demand and potential cost pressures.<END>
For instance, you might view the recent string of favorable data on spending as suggesting upside prospects for aggregate demand, perhaps along the lines of the “buoyant consumer spending” alternative simulation shown in the Greenbook.
The results of that exercise are plotted as the green lines in the middle panels for the federal funds rate, the unemployment rate, and core PCE inflation, respectively, along with the baseline outcomes as black lines.
With more pressure on resources and inflation running higher, an estimated policy rule predicts a federal funds rate heading to 7 percent.
Another source of concern may be inflation expectations.
<START>Inflation compensation derived from the Treasury market, plotted as the solid line in the bottom left panel for the next five years and the red line for the five-year, five-year-forward rate, moved in a fairly wide range and rose a touch on net over the intermeeting period, perhaps undercutting some of the claim that inflation expectations are well anchored.<END>
<START>The case for holding the funds rate at 5¼ percent, as under alternative B, would be strengthened if you have an inflation goal of 2 percent.<END>
<START>In addition, the central tendencies of your forecasts for the unemployment rate and core PCE inflation January 30-31, 200795 of 255reported in yesterday’s chart show suggest that some of you believe that there is a more favorable tradeoff between the two than does the staff, perhaps along the lines of the “lower NAIRU” alternative simulation in the Greenbook (the red lines in the middle panels).<END>
<START>Even if you viewed inflation running at or above 2 percent as uncomfortable, downside risks to employment and growth, especially given the uncertainties surrounding the ongoing housing market correction and possible spillovers to other components of spending, may tip the balance toward keeping the funds rate unchanged for now.<END>
If those risks do not materialize, the same process in financial markets that operated over the recent intermeeting period will likely operate in the future, as President Poole and Chairman Bernanke noted yesterday.
That is, with market expectations of the funds rate still tilted down, as plotted by the dashed line in the bottom right panel, yields will back up further as investors come to realize that policy easing will not be forthcoming, adding to financial restraint.
<START>Also note that market-based confidence bands surrounding investors’ expectations, derived from interest-rate caps and shown by the blue fan chart, are narrow in the near term but then widen markedly.<END>
Thus, market participants see ample scope for policy action
—in either direction
—in coming quarters.
The last exhibit gives the latest version of table 1, which circulated Monday.
It trims the wording of alternative B to be a little more upbeat about firmer economic growth in section 2, which feels right this morning.
I also hope that you might reflect on the risk assessment offered in section 4 of alternative C. The language about policy firming that you’ve repeated for the past few meetings seems a little stale and potentially misleading if you are not confident that your next policy action will be to tighten.
Talking about the relative odds of action might be a more durable structure.
But this might be a discussion for a later day out of concern about an inappropriate reaction in financial markets today.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Are there questions for Vincent?
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
This is more an observation than it is a question.
<START>I guess I’m a little uncomfortable the way you framed, just in the paper, exhibit 3, in the sense that I don’t think it would be great if we came to view alternative B in the statement as, in a sense, validating a higher implicit inflation objective than members of the Committee heretofore talked about.<END>
<START>It is true that, with the stance of policy implied in markets today, under reasonable assumptions you may not get below 2 percent any time soon.<END>
<START>But if you have different assumptions about the structure of the economy, about the way inflation works in this economy, January 30-31, 200796 of 255or different views about the period that’s optimal for bringing inflation down, it’s plausible that you could have a forecast that gets inflation below 2 percent with the stance of policy not dramatically different from what’s in the Greenbook.<END>
I know that you didn’t mean to imply that, but I don’t think it would be good for us to create a sense of validating the monetary policy expectations that are in the markets or in the Greenbook.
We would be accepting that we have allowed our implicit objective to drift up.
MR.
REINHART.
You probably won’t have that trouble in public because among the things that will be released is your central tendency forecast and it does have a steeper decline in core PCE inflation than the staff’s forecast does.
<START>So keeping policy unchanged at this meeting does not validate a 2 percent inflation goal;<END>
it just means you might have a different view.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
We’re ready to begin our policy go-round.
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll start off by saying that today I favor maintaining the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
As we discussed yesterday and we learned this morning, the picture that seems to be emerging from the latest economic information is one of reasonably strong underlying growth, which has been temporarily weakened by housing and autos.
Given that temporary weakness, I think it would be premature to raise rates today;
<START>but I am not confident that core inflation will continue to decelerate in the coming quarters, and that could risk our credibility.<END>
<START>The level of inflation continues to be higher than I’d like to see, and in my forecast we may not see a return to price stability unless monetary conditions are tightened further.<END>
Although I don’t think today is the day to do it, I do want us to consider tightening if we see growth accelerating back to trend more quickly than in the Greenbook.
<START>I say this not because I think that growth will put upward pressure on inflation but because the associated equilibrium January 30-31, 200797 of 255real rates that are implied by that higher growth, which we are beginning to see in the marketplace, will eventually force our hand.<END>
As I mentioned in my remarks on the economy at the past two meetings, I have been of the mind that a somewhat slower economy, combined with a constant funds rate, might be sufficient to ensure a decline in core inflation.
As the economy strengthens, that scenario becomes a little less likely.
<START>If the economy continues to strengthen, a failure to act not only puts our price stability goal at risk but also risks our credibility with the public.<END>
Thus it would be ill-advised to suggest in our statement that we are finished acting for a while, and therefore I would not favor the language that Bill Poole circulated last week.
My preference is for the language describing the rationale given in alternative C in table 1 of the Bluebook.
The rationale in alternative C, including both sections 2 and 3, is really not more hawkish than the language of alternative B, yet it’s more concise and comes closer to my views on the current state of the economy.
<START>Indeed, since under alternative B, section 3, or alternative C, section 3, we would be making sizable changes in the language from our last statement, I also think that it’s appropriate at this time to purge the language about the high level of resource utilization having the potential to sustain inflation pressures or lower oil prices to mitigate core inflation.<END>
All the recent work on the forecasting of medium-term and longer-term inflation that I have seen says that these Phillips-type models don’t help us forecast core inflation very well.
The FRB/US model of the Greenbook looks as though it has very flat tradeoffs, certainly in the near term anyway;
so I think it would be useful to change our language at this point.
<START>I have not been a fan of that language, but in the past I was persuaded that we should leave it so as to avoid unnecessary changes that might confuse the public.<END>
But since we are considering changes at this time, I would favor going with alternative C, which gets rid of this language.
<START>I’m happy to January 30-31, 200798 of 255continue with the risk assessment that we had last time, eliminating the word “nonetheless,” although frankly I would not greatly resist actually going with the assessment of risk in alternative C. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Plosser, just so I’m clear, which sections from C?
MR.
PLOSSER.
I advocate leaving the federal funds rate section as is but using sections 2 and 3 from alternative C as our rationale.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, am in favor of maintaining policy at its current level.
I find myself somewhere between policy alternatives C and B as described in exhibit 3, leaving out, as Vice Chairman Geithner suggested, any commitment to either of those goals.
I am concerned about housing and the possible spillovers.
However, the underlying pace of growth and activity within the economy does risk taking inflation up from where we think it’s going to go, changing the path of it slightly.
The Chairman and a couple of other people mentioned yesterday the uptick in medium-term to long-term bonds.
A good point to be made here is that most of the action in the markets has resulted from the release of economic data.
Given at least the surface gloss of the GDP report, I imagine that the markets will be firmer rather than softer, will expect less movement on our part, and could move up at the long end and create some lessening of financial accommodation, in effect making financial terms a bit more restrictive.
So I think we will get some help from the market reaction to the current economic data.
Those things together
—my continuing concern about the housing situation, though I think it is stabilizing, and a bit tighter markets than perhaps we expected
—tend to weigh in my mind against my concern that the inflation path in our forecast will not be realized.
So I am content for the time being with alternative B. As I said in my comments January 30-31, 200799 of 255yesterday, if we continue to see the same pattern of things, sooner rather than later we may have to contemplate, to manage the risks in the economy, an upward movement in monetary policy;
but I would not suggest that for today.
Turning to the language, I suggested a couple of days ago that we use section 2 from alternative C. There have been some modifications to section 2 in alternative B. I am okay with those, but I continue to believe, as does President Plosser, that section 2 in alternative C is a bit cleaner, a bit shorter, and a bit more reflective overall as to the way I see things.
But I could go with either B or C at this point.
Vince mentioned that we might want to think about section 4, the assessment of risks.
I had made a recommendation there as well
—one somewhat similar to what he was implying we might want to think about in terms of the Committee’s judging that inflation remains a predominant concern.
<START>I think that’s a little stronger than “the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain.” I would take the remaining phrase of that sentence out<END>
—about near-term policy firming being more likely than policy easing
—as I think that might be a big shock.
But changing the language to “inflation remains the predominant concern” and then picking up with “future policy adjustments” would make a small change to the inflation risk section, would focus people a bit more firmly on that, and would be a step in the right direction of cautioning the markets about the possibility, though perhaps not very high yet, that our next move might be up rather than flat for a long period or down.
So just to sum up, I am okay with alternative B, section 2.
<START>I’d prefer section 2 from alternative C, but I’m okay with B. I would make a change in the assessment of risks.<END>
I can live with it the way it is, but I think the alternative C change that I have recommended is a little cleaner and moves in the direction that Vince was talking about.
January 30-31, 2007100 of 255 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan, for the risk assessment, in alternative C, are you proposing also the second sentence?
MS.
MINEHAN.
Yes, just taking out the phrase from “and” to “easing”:
“The Committee judges that inflation remains a predominant concern.
<START>Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.<END>
Thank you.
First Vice President Barron.
MR.
BARRON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me say at the outset that I was truly impressed with your summary of everyone’s comments yesterday.
If I had known that you were listening so intently, I might have scrutinized my own comments a little more.
<START>[Laughter] Many participants, as you summarized, reported an improved outlook in housing and, perhaps to a lesser extent, an improved outlook for inflation.<END>
<START>To play off our immediate past Chairman’s phrase, I think it might be appropriate to guard against what I might call “premature exuberance” on both fronts with regard to the bottoming out of housing and the improvement in inflation.<END>
I don’t think we gain much at this point in the business cycle by declaring victory on the housing front, and I didn’t hear anyone say that.
But I think we have to be cautious in our comments as it could well prove to be a drag going forward.
For the overall economy, my own take is that we have more upside potential than perhaps we have seen so far, putting aside this morning’s report.
Corporate balance sheets remain extremely strong.
Although I do not anticipate that profits in 2007 will match the levels that we saw in 2006, I see no reason that they would drop below trend, and perhaps they will even come in above trend.
With that as a backdrop, the job outlook might even be brighter than we’ve discussed.
<START>If the job market remains firm, I would have every reason to believe that the level of January 30-31, 2007101 of 255participation outlined in the Greenbook might be understated, and so we could well have more positive income effect from the consumer going forward than we’ve witnessed or that we are thinking of for the future.<END>
A final point relates to exports.
Yesterday evening I looked back over the information we had with regard to the consistency of a high level of performance of all the economies of the world.
I couldn’t find a time in which we had all the economies of the world performing at the level they are today.
If you take that into consideration and put aside, as Dave so eloquently noted, the special factors that we had in the fourth quarter in exports, we could well see a more positive effect going forward in net exports.
On balance, though, I still have a concern that the effect of housing going forward will be a drag.
However, I fully anticipate that, at the national level at least, we will be able to bounce back in the second half.
If we do bounce back in the second half in housing, then GDP growth could well exceed what we are forecasting now.
All of that said, I’m very comfortable with the current stance of policy.
I’m not going to try to wordsmith on the fly.
My own bias is to be somewhat supportive of alternative B as presented this morning.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I’m very comfortable with alternative B as far as the rate goes.
Given what we don’t know today, I think that’s exactly where we ought to be.
We will know more over the next six months about how that should be adjusted as we move forward.
On the language, I feel that we would be better served with sections 2 and 3 of alternative C. That language describes my own views and much of what I heard yesterday, especially as it says “seems to be rebounding” and “some tentative signs of stabilization.” “Going forward the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace” is good language.
Then, more important, I would like to see in section 3 that “readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent January 30-31, 2007102 of 255months but remain elevated.” Going forward, that is the essential issue I think we have to watch besides the economy.
That’s why I believe that language is preferable.
<START>The risk assessment as described in alternative B is fine.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
May I ask a clarifying question?
It’s not actually clear to me, really, that alternative C, section 3
—the inflation section
—is more hawkish than alternative B. MR.
HOENIG.
It’s not.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
So you were speaking in its favor not because it is more hawkish but for what reason?
MR.
HOENIG.
Because it describes what is, and that is that inflation is elevated.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
<START>My concern is that, as the Chairman has said, if you look at the three-month annualized rate for a whole bunch of measures of core, “elevated” be overstating it a bit.<END>
might The original intention was to capture the last relatively few monthly readings, so there is a bit of ambiguity there.
MR.
HOENIG.
It isn’t to me, because 2.6 year over year is elevated.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
MR.
HOENIG.
My point is that what you’re describing is the systematic move down, and the margin is bringing the average down, and that’s what you say:
“Readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months but remain elevated.” So long as we can convey that, I think the markets will read us more properly because, even though the three-month January 30-31, 2007103 of 255may be coming down, it’s still 2.6 percent year over year rather than where I thought last June it would be, which was 2.4.
So it has improved, but we’re not to where we need to be, and that’s my point.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Mr. Chairman, I was a bit loquacious yesterday and apparently, for some, too anecdotally explicit, if not excessive.
[Laughter] So I’ll be less frisky this morning, shorter, and more to the point.
I support alternative B. I don’t want to wordsmith it.
The only word I would want to add, which I won’t get, is “worldwide,” which I would insert after “resource utilization.” That’s a reality, and that’s my recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
I’m sorry if I took too much time.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
No problem, President Fisher.
Thank you.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support Bluebook alternative B. I think we should maintain the current stance of policy because it is likely to foster an economy that gradually moves toward a soft landing.
<START>At the same time, the upward bias in the risk assessment is consistent with my view that upside risks do predominate for both growth and inflation.<END>
My best guess still is that this year’s growth will be slightly below trend with the current stance of policy.
But as I indicated yesterday, for me the risks have shifted more to the upside given recent news.
Housing remains a concern, but I think the prospects for a really serious housing collapse that spreads to consumer spending have diminished substantially.
I am focused, as I said yesterday, on upside risks to activity, possibly coming from consumer spending.
<START>On the inflation front, the news has been good, and I continue to think for a variety of reasons, including my views on persistence, that core inflation will edge down over the year;<END>
but clearly it is too January 30-31, 2007104 of 255soon to conclude that a new trend has set in.
To me, the upside risk to inflation seems palpable, especially because labor markets have tightened.
<START>Although I agree with President Plosser that the Phillips curve has certainly appeared to flatten in recent years, most estimates that I have seen of Phillips curves suggest that the relationship between changes in unemployment and changes in inflation, even though it may have become smaller, is still significant.<END>
The lags may be long so that its effect might not show up very much over the next couple of years, but it is a significant source of long-term risk.
I’m pleased with the language suggested for alternative B. I think it effectively updates developments since our last meeting, and I favor keeping the same wording on the risk assessment that we used last time.
That wording still conveys a sense of upside bias.
I don’t see a compelling reason to change, and I think it still works.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support no change in the federal funds rate today.
<START>From our comments yesterday, it appears that not much has changed in terms of our outlook for growth and inflation.<END>
So I’d prefer to make only the changes to our statement that are necessary to keep us current with the intermeeting data reports.
I’m comfortable with the language in alternative B. It updates what we’ve heard in terms of the current reports.
However, I also agree with Vincent’s comment that our language in our assessment of risk has become stale.
I felt that way in December.
But we’re not operating with a clean slate, and any significant changes to the language today are probably going to be interpreted as an attempt to signal some significant change in our outlook or risks to that outlook.
So I agree that today is not the day to do that, but I hope that we’ll have some further discussion about how to use some language in our statements that is more durable.
For now, alternative B looks right to me.
I have January 30-31, 2007105 of 255one final comment.
<START>For the record, I agree with Vice Chairman Geithner’s comment about not interpreting our actions today or our thought about the path for the fed funds rate as a suggestion that we have a different objective on inflation.<END>
I think that Vice Chairman Geithner made a good point, and I want to support it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Just an interjection
—I would also like to be on record as not assuming that the Committee has an explicit objective.
Individuals around the table have indicated comfort zones of one range or another, but as far as I know the Committee has no explicit objective.
<START>We all want to have the best policy we can for inflation and growth in a given period.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
I tried to qualify my comment with as many qualifiers as I could:
I didn’t mean to imply that the Committee had an implicit objective.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
I agree.
I was commenting on my own outlook.
Because of some of the differing assumptions that we talked about yesterday, I just didn’t want to be in the camp of a 2 percent objective.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree with the sense of the Committee that we should not be raising rates today.
However, I do think that, as we’ve all said, the inflation risks still dominate and that we’re approaching some very important decision points in the next couple of meetings.
<START>If we look back, of course, the primary risk to our growth forecast has been housing.<END>
We have seen an incredibly sharp decline, and many of us have the sense that housing is stabilizing now.
There’s still some uncertainty about that, but it seems to be January 30-31, 2007106 of 255stabilizing.
Once it stabilizes, our attention will shift to the other part of our dual mandate
—to price stability.
As I think we have all said, we’re uncomfortable with the current rate of inflation.
There has been some improvement;
we’ll take that to the bank.
We’re happy with that.
But there is still a lot of uncertainty about the future course of inflation, and the projections in the Greenbook and the Bluebook are not encouraging to me.
My comfort zone is 1 to 2 percent, so I’m in the 1½ percent category.
In view of that range, as Vince said, we have work to do.
I agree with Tim and Sandy that we shouldn’t interpret alternative B as saying that each individual has a target of 2 percent.
Our projection for inflation is 2¼ percent in both years, and that is clearly above that target.
We have said we’re concerned about inflation
—we said that last time, and I think it was well put.
<START>But we should make even stronger statements in the minutes about the costs of inflation running above forecast and about the damage it can do to the economy on a long-term basis.<END>
<START>As I said, I don’t think we have the luxury of waiting until inflation rises before we act.<END>
We have to be forward-looking.
The next couple of meetings are going to be important because we’ll know a lot more about whether housing really has stabilized further and what the inflation numbers will look like.
In terms of the language, I’m comfortable with alternative B as it’s stated.
I like the reference to the high level of resource utilization in section 3, so I would not change the language at this time.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>As I commented yesterday, it seems to me that developments, in terms of both real growth and core inflation, have been positive recently, and I would say the same thing about the outlook.<END>
<START>Against that background, I think that maintaining the federal funds rate as in alternative B is the appropriate policy decision.<END>
I’m willing to be patient to see how much disinflation we get from here.
But I guess my patience isn’t infinite, January 30-31, 2007107 of 255and so at some point, if we don’t get any more than is anticipated in the Greenbook, we’re going to have to consider further action.
But at the moment, that’s not a principal concern of mine.
So that’s my judgment about the stance of policy for now.
As far as the language is concerned, I have a preference for sections 2 and 3 from alternative C. I find those more appropriate than the expressions under alternative B. As far as section 4 is concerned, there could be a case for some abbreviated version along the lines that President Minehan suggested.
Alternative B, section 4, has really served us well overall, and so my judgment is that at this point it’s not worth trying to change that language.
So I would recommend marrying sections 2 and 3 from alternative C with section 4 from B as being about as good as we can do at the moment.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
By way of preface
<START>—I didn’t mention this yesterday, but my semiannual forecast projects core PCE inflation falling to 1.6 for ’08, and growth rising from 2.6 to 2.9 in ’08.<END>
<START>This represents both a more-rapid return to price stability and a higher rate of trend growth than provided in the Greenbook.<END>
My forecast takes seriously the instruction to assume appropriate monetary policy, perhaps more seriously than I have taken it in the past.
I think it is likely to require that the policy be more aggressive than assumed in the Greenbook and that communications be forceful about our intentions to bring inflation down.
I think the forecast that I have submitted is both feasible and desirable because I think we don’t need to use the output gap as our sole means of hammering inflation expectations and we don’t need to wait nearly a decade, as in the Bluebook simulations.
Although I believe that the appropriate policy is likely to require a higher funds rate path at some point this year, I’m not too uncomfortable leaving it unchanged today.
<START>I welcome the January 30-31, 2007108 of 255recent good news on core inflation, and like President Stern, I’m willing to wait and see whether the good news continues.<END>
However, I have been disturbed over the past year and a half, as I have told you, about the extent to which short-run core inflation and longer-run inflation expectations appear to be sensitive to energy price movements.
We appear to have conditioned people to expect core inflation to rise whenever energy prices surge.
This will pose a problem for us if energy prices rise substantially or if the current lull in core inflation proves to be only the transitory effect from the recent fall in energy prices.
Both hypotheses seem reasonably plausible to me for the coming year or two.
So I believe, as President Moskow and others have said, that we’re likely to face another inflation challenge later this year.
I think it would help our cause if our policy moves were coupled with better communications, but that is a discussion for later today.
For now, I’m prepared to support standing pat.
I agree with President Plosser and others around the table who prefer the language in alternative C for sections 2 and 3.
I also agree with President Minehan about the language in alternative C for section 4.
<START>I think that I read “predominant concern” as a little stronger and better calibrated to our views<END>
—or at least my views
—than the language in B. I also agree strongly with Vice Chairman Geithner that standing pat today doesn’t imply a 2 percent target.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER I’m not sure I understand, Jeff.
With regard to section 4, what is your preference?
MR.
LACKER.
President Minehan’s suggestion.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
This is the problem with editing on the fly.
I had recommended that you go directly from “the Committee judges that inflation remains the predominant concern” to January 30-31, 2007109 of 255the next sentence
—“Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth”
—and so on.
However, leaving out the phrase that is in alternative B now in section 4
—“the extent and timing of additional firming that may be needed to address those risks”
<START>—actually does make that sentence of section 4 of alternative C somewhat weaker than alternative B. I’m getting ready to take my suggestion off the table [laughter] because I think that you may be on to something with alternative B, and it may be better to leave it that way because it does suggest additional firming as opposed to leaving it open.<END>
MR.
LACKER.
It’s a fair point.
I’d agree with that.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I take my suggestion off the table.
MR.
LACKER.
I withdraw my support for your previous suggestion.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
You can’t withdraw it;
she’s not making it.
[Laughter] President Lacker, please just say a word about how we are linking energy prices and core.
In our public remarks
—for example, my speeches on energy
—I have talked about the importance of unlinking those two.
MR.
LACKER.
Yes, indeed.
But if you just plot the two for the past year and a half, you see a kind of two-month or three-month echo into the core.
You calculate the cross correlations.
They were pretty high before 1984;
they were low from 1984 to 2001.
They’ve been high again since.
My reading of the financial press coverage of macroeconomic conditions following the hurricanes in late ’05 is that we saw a sudden burst of references to the macroeconomic conditions of the 1970s.
I suspect
—it is hard to disprove this one way or another
—that rhetoric harkening back to slowing growth and energy prices causing higher inflation induced, in the public’s mind, a sense that, when energy prices surge, growth is going to be lower.
You saw the policy path come down in September of ’05, and you’re going to see higher core inflation, and January 30-31, 2007110 of 255that’s what we saw that fall.
To some extent, we tried to speak strongly of our desire to hold inflation down, but in hindsight we left that association in the public’s mind.
So I just think this is a conditionality that appears now to have been built into expectations.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Kroszner has a two-hander.
MR.
KROSZNER.
A two-hander on the now-disgraced proposal on section 4.
[Laughter] I think the way to raise it back is just take the phrase “the Committee judges that inflation remains the predominant concern” and then move on to the sentence in alternative B that starts with “the extent and timing of any additional firming.” MS. MINEHAN.
We could definitely do that.
MR.
KROSZNER.
If you want to keep it, I think that’s the way to bring it back to grace.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Moskow has an intervention.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I was going to make exactly the same suggestion
—to put it on the table for consideration by President Minehan.
[Laughter] MR. KROSZNER.
It also has the virtue of minimizing the number of word changes and just substituting a phrase from the minutes from last time, for those of you who think that’s the best way to go.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
But I just raise a question, for those who are making the suggestion, because I’d like to hear your response.
In saying that inflation is the predominant concern, we are acknowledging more explicitly than we have before that we have other concerns.
That is, we’re in some sense bringing into the assessment the presumption that there are concerns other than inflation, but we are perhaps more concerned about housing than we were before.
This is simply a semantic issue.
In alternative B, we don’t acknowledge other concerns.
Neither January 30-31, 2007111 of 255of these things is quite accurate, I agree.
I just wanted to point that out and ask for your response.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
<START>I think several of us have used the “predominant concern” language, so I don’t see it as likely to induce a dramatic change in assessment about our views.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
<START>The language that we have had for some time has shown concern about cooling as a result of the housing market.<END>
Whether we have explicitly referred to it as a concern or not, clearly it has been a concern.
<START>I think that “predominant concern” is a bit stronger than “some inflationary risks remain” and that such language correctly reflects the sense of the people around the table.<END>
Now, it may be too much.
I don’t want to speak for Tim, but at one point he thought it was too much.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
<START>Well, no, I’d just make the observation that we debated this before and we debated several times the question about whether the best introductory phrase to that balance of risk assessment was exactly that language.<END>
The problem in doing it now
—this is just one man’s view
—is that I think it will be read as a significant alteration of our signal, and on the strength of what we’ve discussed about changes to the outlook in December, we can’t justify a significant change in the signal.
The second reason not to do it is the one that the Chairman raised.
It introduces a slightly infelicitous framing when there is some risk that people will read everything we say through the prism of whether we’re in the midst of altering implicitly the hierarchy of objectives that we have as a Committee in some broad sense.
That’s not the way you framed it, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I couldn’t have framed it that way.
[Laughter] January 30-31, 2007112 of 255 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
But I think we haven’t changed our view of the outlook enough to justify that significant a change in the signal.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Intervention, President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 145

INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 145
