Confidential

(Translation)

MINUTES *
OF THE 226th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON MONDAY, 13th JUNE 1988 AT 10 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Banque
Nationale de Belgique and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Godeaux, accompa-
nied by Mr. Janson and Mr. Bussers; the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank,
Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Rieke; the Governor
of the Bank of Greece, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by Mr. Papademos and
Mr. Marathakis; the Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio, accompanied
by Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France,
Mr. de Larosiére, accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the
Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady
Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi,
accompanied by Mr. Dini and Mr. Masera; the President of De Nederlandsche
Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr. de Swaan; the Governor of the
Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Costa Pinto; the
Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by
Mr. Loehnis; the Director-General for Economic and Financial Affairs of the
Commission of the European Communities, Mr. Costa; the Director General of
the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr. Jaans. Also present at the meeting
was Mr. Dalgaard, Chairman of the Group of Experts. The Secretary General
of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul, Mr. Scheller and

Mr. Cook, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan also attended.

| I. Approval of the minutes of the 225th meeting.

The Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 225th meeting,
on the understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be in-

corporated in the final text.

* Final text approved at the meeting on 12th July 1988, which incorporates
a drafting change.
II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:

- Preparation by the “Dalgaard Group";

- Statistical charts and tables.

4

A. Statement by Mr. Dalgaard

The "Monitoring Group" had not met in Basle because of timetable
problems, but, as usual, it had held a telephone conference on the after-
noon of Friday, 10th June, which formed the basis of this statement.

The main conclusion was that the authorities had now convinced
the markets that there would not be any major changes in exchange rates in
the near future. The result was that funds were tending to flow to countries
with high rates of interest. This was true both for the relations between
the dollar and the other currencies and within the EMS.

During May and the beginning of June the dollar had risen by
approximately 3% against the Deutsche Mark and had reached its highest
level since the end of October 1987. However, the fluctuations had been
moderate compared with those in the past, and over the last five months the

dollar had, in fact, been moving within a quite narrow band around DM 1.70.

This appreciation of the dollar was principally due to the rise in US interest

rates and to the market's perception, based on statements and interventions
made by the central banks, that the dollar would not be allowed to fall
much lower than DM 1.67 or rise much higher than DM 1.73. The firming of
the US currency had, nevertheless, been limited by quite substantial sales
of dollars by the Deutsche Bundesbank. The Bundesbank did not consider that
these constituted interventions, as the sales, effected outside the market,
corresponded to dollars acquired previously in the form of customer transac~-
tions, for example US and UK payments for the maintenance of troops in
Germany and interest income on reserves. The amounts sold did not appear in
the intervention tables, but they were included in Table 2, which showed an
outflow of US$ 3.4 billion in the form of customer transactions in May. The
"Monitoring Group” and the "Concertation Group" had briefly discussed the
best way of dealing with this type of dollar sale in the statistical systen,
but they had not reached a conclusion and would come back to this question.
The EEC experts were, however, of the opinion that it would be sensible to
curb the strengthening of the dollar, given that a further increase would

probably not be sustainable. In any case, the appreciation of the dollar
since the beginning of May should not be exaggerated; on the one hand, it
reflected the rise in US interest rates, which had brought the differential
vis-a-vis German rates to more than 3 points, and, on the other, the apprecia-
tion had only occurred against the European currencies, the dollar having
remained more or less stable vis-a-vis the yen. In short, the sales of
dollars by the Bundesbank had only neutralised or offset the purchases made
by other central banks.

Within the EMS a total absence of expectations of a realignment
in the near future had been observed for some time. This was a very satisfying
development, almost surprising if it was considered that elections had been
held in France and Denmark. In May and early June there had been no tension,
Save some changes in the relative positions of currencies reflecting interest
rate differentials. Three currencies, the Danish krone, the French franc
and the Irish pound, had performed particularly well. The Danish krone had
risen by 1% against the Deutsche Mark; the market interest rates had fallen
by between 0.5 and 1 point without any variation in the official rates, and
the central bank had purchased approximately US$ 750 million. The French
franc had also firmed, by between 0.5 and 0.75% against the Deutsche Mark,
while the interest rate differential between these two currencies had been
reduced. The Banque de France had accepted quite marked variations in the
exchange rate, which had proved very effective in stabilising the market,
so that there had been no need for intervention. The Irish pound had also
appreciated against the Deutsche Mark, while interest rates had declined
slightly in Ireland and intervention purchases had amounted to approxi-
mately US$ 500 million. It should be noted, however, that despite the decreases
in interest rates that had occurred, the interest rate differentials vis-a-vis
Germany remained relatively high: 5 points for Denmark and 3 to 4 points
for France and Ireland. The Italian lira had shown little movement against
the Deutsche Mark and had firmed slightly at the beginning of June. Interest
rates had remained more or less unaltered, but there had been substantial
changes in interventions: the Banca d'Italia had sold US$ 1.5 billion by
llth May and had repurchased almost the same amount over the weeks that
followed. This turn-round partly reflected the stabilisation of the political
situation in Italy and also the influence of the elections in France. The
Belgian franc and the Dutch guilder had moved only slightly against the
Deutsche Mark, the interest rates had also remained very stable, and some

moderate intervention purchases had been made. The Deutsche Mark had weakened
within the EMS in spite of the reduction in interest rate differentials,
purchases of German currency by the central banks in the region of
US$ 3 billion and sales of dollars by the Deutsche Bundesbank totalling
more than US$ 3 billion.

Outside the EMS exchange rate mechanism, the pound sterling had
continued to appreciate in May, only to fall quite sharply at the beginning
of June. The Bank of England had actively used interest rates, lowering
them in April and May when the pound had been very firm and then raising
them twice by half a point when the exchange rate had weakened. This use of
the interest rate instrument had made it possible virtually to dispense
with interventions in the market. The Spanish peseta had remained fairly
stable against the Deutsche Mark between the end of April and the end of
May, during which time there had been no change in the interest rates, and
no interventions had been made. At the end of May and the beginning of June
there had been new inflows of funds, which had led to interventions despite
a fall in Spanish interest rates. As forecast, the Portuguese escudo had
depreciated by 0.3% in effective terms. The Greek drachma had also depreciated
slightly, but its effective depreciation since the start of 1988 only amounted

to 2.3%, which was very little.

B. Discussion by the Committee

The Chairman recalled that on account of the special timetable of
meetings at the BIS in June, the Alternates had not convened, and conse-
quently Mr. Janson was not required to present the usual report on the
discussions held by the Alternates.

Mr. Pohl said that the description of recent developments given
by Mr. Dalgaard was correct. The absence of expectations of a realignment
had led to substantial outflows of funds from Germany, which have almost
reached DM 50 billion since the beginning of 1988. The result of this had
been strong pressure on long-term interest rates, and the slope of the
yield curve had steepened markedly. The discount rate stood at 2.5%, while
the capital market rates were between 6 and 7Z. Tensions were also
affecting short-term interest rates; it had to be realised that
differentials of 3 to 4 points vis-a-vis France and Ireland and of 5 points
vis-a-vis Denmark meant that, in fact, the interest rates in these
countries were twice as high, or even higher, than in Germany; this in turn

created a strong incentive for capital movements as long as there were no

expectations of exchange rate changes. In this context the lowering of
interest rates in France and Denmark was welcome, but some increase in
short-term rates in Germany was possible in the coming weeks.

Mr. de Larosiere emphasised that the present situation was frag-
ile; there were no expectations of exchange rate changes, but this stabil-
ity was based on enormous external disequilibria. It was therefore neces-
sary to do nothing to disturb this stability. No country would benefit from
provoking a fall in the dollar. Mr. Greenspan had recently said, with good
reason, that if the dollar should fall, the nominal US balance-of~-payments
figures would deteriorate. In fact, the capacity of export-oriented production
was already under severe strain, which meant that a depreciation of the
dollar would not result in an increase in the volume of exports but might
rekindle inflation and raise nominal US import figures. It was therefore
necessary to be wary of the current relative calm. Capital movements towards
the high-interest currencies also represented, to some extent, movements to
finance the external disequilibria. Interest rate differentials might
appear to be comfortable, but there was nothing to indicate that the
current equilibrium could be long-lasting, and its fragility called for the
avoidance of shocks to the system as a whole.

Mr. Pohl said that he agreed with Mr. de Larosiére's analysis and
conclusions. The current equilibrium was, indeed, fragile. However, it
would not be in anyone's interests to see the dollar firm appreciably, as
such a development would not be sustainable and would not fail to create
inflationary pressures in other countries, in particular in Europe and
Japan. The optimum solution would perhaps be to maintain the current level
of the dollar. The situation should not be dramatised, and there should be
satisfaction at the calm which had characterised the markets since the
beginning of the year. Countries should, however, defend their own interests.
Thus, for the Deutsche Mark, which had depreciated in real terms since the
beginning of the year, a continuation of this decline was not desired; in
other words, the Deutsche Bundesbank would not like to see the dollar
strengthen, and if that did happen, it might react by intervening in the
markets, by raising the interest rates or by a combination of the two.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton also referred to the statement made by
Mr. Greenspan at the Chicago Conference; he considered it to be important
since it gave reason to believe that the US authorities seemed willing to

avoid a fall in the dollar and to act accordingly. In the current rather
- 5 -

expectations of exchange rate changes. In this context the lowering of
interest rates in France and Denmark was welcome, but some increase in
short-term rates in Germany was possible in the coming weeks. |

Mr. de Larosiére emphasised that the present situation was frag-
ile; there were no expectations of exchange rate changes, but this stabil-
ity was based on enormous external disequilibria. It was therefore neces-
sary to do nothing to disturb this stability. No country would benefit from
provoking a fall in the dollar. Mr. Greenspan had recently said, with good

reason, that if the dollar should fall, the nominal US balance-of-payments

figures would deteriorate. In fact, the capacity of export-oriented production

was already under severe strain, which meant that a depreciation of the
dollar would not result in an increase in the volume of exports but might
rekindle inflation and raise nominal US import figures. It was therefore
necessary to be wary of the current relative calm. Capital movements towards
the high-interest currencies also represented, to some extent, movements to
finance the external disequilibria. Interest rate differentials were now
comfortable, but there was nothing to indicate that the current equilibrium
could be long-lasting, and its fragility called for the avoidance of shocks
to the system as a whole.

Mr. Pohl said that he agreed with Mr. de Larosiére's analysis and
conclusions. The current equilibrium was, indeed, fragile. However, it
would not be in anyone's interests to see the dollar firm appreciably, as
such a development would not be sustainable and would not fail to create
inflationary pressures in other countries, in particular in Europe and
Japan. The optimum solution would perhaps be to maintain the current level
of the dollar. The situation should not be dramatised, and there should be
satisfaction at the calm which had characterised the markets since the
beginning of the year. Countries should, however, defend their own interests.
Thus, for the Deutsche Mark, which had depreciated in real terms since the
beginning of the year, a continuation of this decline was not desired; in
other words, the Deutsche Bundesbank would not like to see the dollar
strengthen, and if that did happen, it might react by intervening in the
markets, by raising the interest rates or by a combination of the two.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton also referred to the statement made by
Mr. Greenspan at the Chicago Conference; he considered it to be important
since it gave reason to believe that the US authorities seemed willing to

avoid a fall in the dollar and to act accordingly. In the current rather

delicate situation, the pound sterling was moving strongly and rapidly,

both upwards and downwards; for example, the exchange rate had approached

DM 3.20 and ten days later it had fallen to DM 3.10, without the fundamentals
justifying such a variation. Faced with these movements, the authorities

were using mainly interest rates and also interventions. It would be desirable
to find a level of stability for the pound, but it was not easy to know

where that level was and how to maintain it. The UK authorities would probably
be forced to make greater use of interest rates, in both directions, to try

to obtain a band of stability that was eluding them for the moment. Moreover,
the domestic situation gave grounds for concern; lending was growing very

rapidly, and domestic demand was very strong.

III. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EEC Ministers of Finance
on developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen
countries participating in the concertation procedure during

May and the first few days of June 1988.
The Chairman took note that the Committee's approval of the

"concertation report", which would be submitted as usual to the EEC

Ministers of Finance.

IV. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee:

European monetary co-operation.
The Chairman recalled that the session of the ECOFIN Council had

been postponed for one week; it would thus take place that day in Luxembourg,
and the Chairman had been invited to join the Ministers' luncheon and the
session which would follow. Among the items on the agenda would be one
question in particular which was of especial interest to the Governors,

viz. the Directive on the full liberalisation of capital movements.

As far as European monetary co-operation was concerned, the Chairman
said he had already presented an oral report which reflected the Committee's
opinions in Travemiinde in May; he did not intend, therefore, to make any
further comments unless asked to do so. On the other hand, were any
information of interest to emerge from the Ministers’ exchange of views,
which could take place over lunch, the Governors would be informed.

The Chairman said that Mr. Giscard d'Estaing, in his capacity as
co-chairman (with Mr. Schmidt) of the Committee for European Monetary Union,

had written to him enclosing the Committee's report entitled "A programme

for action". The former French President had written that he had sent a

copy of this document to Chancellor Kohl, current President of the European
Council, and to Mr. Delors, President of the Commission; his letter went on

to say, firstly, that he considered it likely that issues relating to European
monetary co-operation would be on the agenda of the next European Council
meeting, to be held in Hanover; and, secondly, that he appreciated the

eminent role which the Committee of Governors was being called upon to play

in that process, and that he would be happy to discuss these matters with

the Chairman of the Committee. .

The Chairman said that the Secretariat would be distributing
copies of the letter and the report to the Governors and that he thought it
would be proper to accede to the wish expressed by Mr. Giscard d‘Estaing.

Mr. Ciampi offered two comments in response to the Chairman's
remarks. Firstly, he wondered whether a meeting with Mr. Giscard d'Estaing
would take place before or after the meeting of the European Council in
Hanover, since the chosen date was of significance for that Council meeting.
Secondly, while not denying the positive aspects of all dialogue and the
value of being open to all opinions, be they from official or unofficial
circles, he was, nonetheless, slightly surprised that a body such as the
Committee of Governors, with its institutional functions, should be invited,
in the person of its Chairman, to participate in a dialogue with a purely
private committee. Dialogue was an excellent thing, but it was important to
know its limits.

The Chairman thanked Mr. Ciampi for giving him the opportunity of
pointing out that a meeting between himself and Mr. Giscard d'Estaing would
take place only if the European Council were to agree in principle to study
the issues referred to in the report of the Committee for EFuropean Monetary
Union. If the European Council decided not to discuss these issues or accord
them political significance, the proposed meeting with Mr. Giscard d'Estaing

would have little point.

V. Date and place of the next meeting.
The next meeting would take place in Basle on Tuesday 12th July,

beginning at 10 a.m.
Committee of Governors of the Annex 13th June 1988
Central Banks of the Member States

’ , C * ‘
of the European Economic Community Confidential

BRIEF REPORT ON
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

MAY 1988

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of
the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce-
dure’ and briefly describes their interventions during May and the first
few days of June 1988.

I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main features of the foreign exchange market during May 1988

were:

- a strengthening of the US dollar vis-a-vis most currencies, in
particular against the Deutsche Mark, together with a roughly
unchanged position vis-a-vis the yen;

- an absence of tension in the EMS despite political elections in
some countries;

- a continuing strengthening of sterling until the end of the month
when it began to weaken;

- some uncertainties concerning the trend of interest rates related
mainly to the pace of economic activity in the United States and

other industrial countries.

1 The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.
The US dollar edged higher against most major currencies. It was
supported by rising US interest rates, expectations of a further tightening
of US monetary policy, and the perception that there was a developing con-
vergence of policy requirements for domestic stability and external adjust-
ment. In addition, the dollar benefited from the report of much better-
than-expected US trade figures for March. The dollar closed the month
3 1/4% higher against the Deutsche Mark, 2% higher against the pound
sterling and 1/4% higher against the yen.

The EMS was generally stable. The changed market mood after the
French and Danish elections, together with a firmer US currency, contributed
to an appreciation of the Danish krone and, to a lesser extent, of the
French franc.

The Deutsche Mark weakened vis-a-vis most of the major curren-
cies, with a decline of 3.1% and 2.92% against the US dollar and the
Japanese yen respectively and one of 0.6% within the EMS. The main reason
was the renewed attention given to interest rate differentials between the
Deutsche Mark and the other currencies. The Deutsche Mark's weighted index
vis-a-vis fourteen industrial countries stood at 170.6 at the end of May,
1.3% below its end-Apri® level of 172.8 (1972=100).

The French franc strengthened in the second half of the month,
approaching its central rate vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark. One of the main
reasons was the considerable foreign capital inflow on the French bond
market induced by attractive long-term interest rates. The particularly
stable position of the French franc allowed the reduction of the Banque de
France's intervention rate from 7.25% to 7% and a further liberalisation of
exchange controls. A 0.5% increase in prices in April did not prevent these
developments.

As in the previous month the Dutch guilder remained in top
position within the EMS band. The Nederlandsche Bank bought moderate
amounts of Deutsche Mark and lowered its rate for special advances by 0.12%
to 3.92%.

The Belgian franc weakened slightly in the EMS towards the end of
the month.

The Danish krone rose by approximately 1% within the narrow EMS
band after the general election on 10th May. Simultaneously market interest

rates declined and the Central Bank made some intervention purchases.
The Irish pound remained relatively stable in the upper half of
the EMS band during the month. In response to continuing net: inflows the
Central Bank of Ireland effected net purchases of foreign currency and
reduced its rate for overnight funds by 0.5 percentage point to 8%.

The Italian lira was subject to some pressure in the first part
of the month in connection with market uncertainty ahead of the French
Presidential elections. Since then, the change in market sentiment has
allowed the Banca d'Italia to rebuild some of its reserves and the lira to
stabilise in the EMS.

Although sterling softened a little at the beginning of the month
as oil prices fell, underlying sentiment remained good and periods of heavy
overseas demand were seen. Official sales of sterling and a further 1/22
reduction in UK base rates (to 7 1/2%) on 17th May stemmed the appreciation
of the currency. The publication of an increased UK trade deficit for April
and the recovery of the dollar caused the pound to end on a softer note.
Its trade-weighted index fell by 0.5 to 77.9 (1975=100).

The Greek drachma ended the period unchanged vis-a-vis the ECU,
while it depreciated by 2.6% against the US dollar. In effective terms the
drachma depreciated by 0.32.

The Spanish _peseta ended 0.4% lower with respect to the EEC
currencies in effective nominal terms. Most of this depreciation took place
during the first half of the month, while renewed capital inflows in the
last few days led to additional purchases of foreign currencies by the
Banco de Espafia. The Banco de Espafia reduced its rate for overnight funds
by 0.5 percentage point to 10.52.

In effective terms, the Portuguese escudo depreciated by 0.32.
Vis-a-vis the US dollar it decreased by 2.6%. As from 6th May the Banco de
Portugal's rediscount rate was lowered by 0.5 percentage point to 13.52.

The downward trend of the Swiss franc continued during the month.
Exchange rate losses vis-a-vis both the US dollar and the Japanese yen
amounted to roughly 3.5%. Against the EMS currencies the franc's weakening
proved to be less pronounced. The export-weighted value of the Swiss
currency dropped by 1.4%. Despite rising interest rates in the domestic
money market the interest rate level remained comparatively low.

The Austrian schilling weakened vis-a-vis the US dollar by 3.42,
the monthly spread amounting to 3.5%. Against the Deutsche Mark it fluctu-
ated by a mere 0.042%.

Higher interest rates led to heavy selling of foreign currencies
against the Swedish krona by non-residents as well as by domestic compa-
nies. The index for the krona remained at the intervention point of 130.0
for most of the period and the Sveriges Riksbank was forced to buy large
amounts of foreign currencies almost on a daily basis.

The recent strength of the Norwegian krone, together with signs
of less rapid credit expansion, allowed for a reduction in the interest
rate on banks’ daily borrowing facilities at the Central Bank by 0.5 per-
centage point to 13.3% from 9th May. The inflow of foreign exchange never-
theless resumed and Norges Bank had to intervene regularly during the
latter part of the month in order to prevent the currency index from
becoming stronger than 109.5, the lower limit of the band.

The Finnish markka strengthened slightly as a result of a con-
tinuing capital inflow. The base rate was raised from 7Z to 8% as from
16th May.

The Canadian dollar traded in a fairly narrow range influenced by
the narrowing and widening of short-term interest rate differentials vis-
a-vis the United States.

The Japanese yen was relatively stable, remaining within a narrow
range of Yen 124-125 against the US dollar in thin and quiet trading. Vis-
a-vis European currencies the yen appreciated by 2.5% against the ECU. This
was mainly in response to Japan's strong economic performance against the

background of the stability of the dollar/yen exchange rate.

II. INTERVENTIONS
A. Interventions in US dollars

Net purchases of US dollars by central banks amounted to US$ 3.3
billion compared with US$ 4.6 billion in April. Gross purchases amounted to
US$ 4.5 billion and gross sales to US$ 1.2 billion. The main buyers were
the Bank of England, the Bank of Canada and Scandinavian central banks. The

main sellers were the Banca d'Italia and the Bank of Canada.

B. Interventions in Community currencies and in private ECUs

Interventions in EMS currencies and ECUs by Community central

banks amounted to the equivalent of US$ 4.3 billion compared with US$ 2.8
billion in April. These interventions mainly consisted of purchases of
Deutsche Mark by the Banco de Espana, the Central Bank of Ireland and

Danmarks Nationalbank.

III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 10th JUNE

The US dollar remained relatively stable during the first days of
June as the exchange rate appeared to be influenced by interest rate
differentials. The EMS was also stable. Sterling weakened further allowing
the authorities to induce two half-point increases in the base lending rate

to 8.52%.

1A

EVOLUTION DE L'ECU, DU COURS MEDIAN DES MONNAITES PARTICIPANT AU
MECANISME DE CHANGE DU SME ET DES MONNAIES DES BANQUES CENTRALES DE
LA CEE NE PARTICIPANT PAS A CE MECANISME, SUR LA BASE DES COURS
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986 VIS-A-VIS DU SEU*

1988

* Voir page suivante.
10.6.1988

1B

EVOLUTION DES MONNAIES DES BANQUES CENTRALES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A
LA CONCERTATION, SUR LA BASE DES COURS RELEVES LES 31 DECEMBRE 1986
VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*

|

|
|
| |
. | | |
|
| | |
: | | eeee FS |
| | .  — $Can |
| { KAS |

24 ) l wenare scn 24
l 5 ewww eee KRN :

, | | eceane FIM |
|
| | |
| | |
| | |
| | .. | |
| on .* : oe - ° ;

20 lee : “es, ok - etee | 20
‘ ace , Me f *e ° ‘| pe * eeee . . |
ae Pi MAE i Be
! : % *. . “ Bay . * — * | v ° *s bry a od [

: / ‘ ° . , :.. f! . ‘ iW 9,%, | . l . ?
| ", . vos ‘ “ ¢ ‘ Y ' ‘es 2 ye
te ov ve . : fins . . / . anaes rd { he ’
™ 7 7 @ ' iv) cy ] iN 4 } e
16 t ‘ 2. SS aneee ae ! » Me on rare nae Rar
v 7 ’ 1s é ! ‘ i vel oly wi, to? oa” ‘ e | 16
‘
' |
' |
|
12 12
§ 8
26.2 11.3 25.3 8.4 22.4 6.5 20.5 3.6

1988

" ECU 0,93425; £ 0,6773; DR 138,7601; PTA 131,8700; ESC 146,0995;

FIM 4,7925; $Can 1,3805; FS 1,6215; Yen 159,7993; KRS 6,7750; KRN 7,3975;
Sch 13,6520; cours médian des monnaies participant au SME 0,92913. Le
cours médian des monnaies participant au SME représente la moyenne jour-
naliére des cours des deux monnaies 4 marge de fluctuation de 2,25% qui
se sont éloignés le plus de leurs cours-pivots bilatéraux actuels.

10.6.1988
2

MOUVEMENT A L'INTERIEUR DE LA GRILLE DE PARTIES DU SME CALCULES SUR
LA BASE DES COURS DE L'ECU DANS LES DOIFFERENTES MONNAIES
PARTICIPANTES

1988

10.6.1988
75

$0

EVOLUTION DE L'INDICATEUR DE DIVERGENCE*

i | , ) 100
| | | |
| | |
! | ! |
I | |
: pocrocsc tcc n scenes eens prcrcr terror eres ese eces poco 78
| OM ! !
| Lit |
| --- CRD |
wacene 50
oeeeeee fir | eon, onot heres -. |
° -* | Se TS ete eey l
an ed , \o
| | “ees
|
|
25
|
rot I
' ss suas af an :
hoe A? re |
. ‘ te Jeee
0
-25
-50
-75
-100

1988

* L'indicateur de divergence a pour but de mesurer, sur une base compa-
rable pour toutes les monnaites participant au mécanisme de change européen,
la position d'une monnaie vis-a-vis de son cours-pivot ECU. L’écart
maximal de divergence est le pourcentage maximal par lequel le cours de
marché de 1'ECU dans chaque monnaie peut s’apprécier ou se déprécier par
rapport 4 son cours-pivot ECU; il est exprimé par + 100, le seuil de
divergence étant + 75. Les données qui ont servi de base 4 1’établissement
de ce graphique sont les cours de 1’'ECU exprimés en termes de diverses
monnaies, cours gui sont toutefois corrigés des effets des fluctuations

de la lire italienne, de la livre sterling et de la drachme grecque au-
dela de la marge de 2,25% vis-a-vis des autres monnaies participant au

SME.
10.6.1968
4A

EVOLUTION DE LA LIVRE STERLING, DE LA DRACHME, DE LA PESETA ET DE
L'ESCUDO PAR PAPPORT A L ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*

1988

"© 0,724942; OR 148,526; PTA 141,151; ESC 156,382.

10.6.1988

48

‘

EVOLUTION DES MONNAIES DES BANQUES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A LA
CONCERTATION PAR RAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*

epPMPat sc sreerogecer ener te.s

-12

1988

* $EU 1,07038; $Can 1,47766; FS 1,73562; Yen 171,046; KRS 7,25181; KRN 7,91812;
Sch 14,6128; FIM 5,12978.

10.6.1988

