Confidential

(Translation)

MINUTES*
OF THE 229th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 8th NOVEMBER AT 10 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Banque
Nationale de Belgique and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Godeaux, accompanied
by Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen; the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank,
Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Rieke; the Governor
of the Bank of Greece, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by Mr. Papademos and Mr.
Karamouzis; the Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio, accompanied by
Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France, Mr. de Larosiére,
accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the Governor of the
Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady Walshe and
Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi, accompanied
by Mr. Dini and Mr. Santini; the President of De Nederlandsche Bank,
Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr. Szasz and Mr. Brockmeijer; the Governor
of the Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo
Marques and Mr. Amorim; the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton,
accompanied by Mr. Loehnis and Mr. Price; the President of the Commission
of the European Communities, Mr. Delors, accompanied by Mr. Costa, Mr. Mingasson
and Mr. Dixon; the Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute,
Mr. Jaans; the Secretary of the Monetary Committee, Mr. Kees. Also present
at the meeting were Mr. Raymond and Mr. Dalgaard, Chairmen of the Groups of
Experts. The Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy,
Mr. Bascoul, Mr. Scheller and Mr. Giles, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan

also attended.

* Final text approved at the meeting on 13th December 1988, which
incorporates some drafting changes.

I
IN
I

I. Approval of the minutes of the 228th meeting.

The Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 228th meeting,
on the understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be in-

corporated in the final text.

II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:

- Preparation by the '"Dalgaard Group" and discussion by the Committee
of Alternates;

- Statistical charts and tables.

A. Statement by Mr. Dalgaard

Mr. Dalgaard began by pointing out that the basic "monitoring"
documentation (tables and statistical charts) was now drawn up by the
Secretariat of the Committee.

During the two months which had passed since the September meeting
there had been no acute tensions on the exchange markets but there had been
a number of important developments.

The position of the dollar had changed markedly. Since the low
reached at the end of 1987 and until September 1988 the dollar had firmed
or remained stable. Intervention sales had totalled approximately $25 billion
in the three months July, August and September. In October/early November
the dollar had weakened by about 3% against the Deutsche Mark and intervention
purchases had been made for a total of some $3 billion. This reversal of
trend appeared to be connected with the fact that US growth seemed to be
less vigorous and that, as a result, interest rates were unlikely to rise
as had been expected. Moreover, the external imbalance was provoking renewed
concern. However, the weakening of the dollar against the European currencies
had not been very pronounced; its level vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark in
early November, for example, was the same as in January-October 198/ and
more than 10% higher than its end-198/7 level.

The weakening of the dollar had been more pronounced vis-a-vis
the yen, whose current level was about the same as that recorded at the end
of 1987. Concerted interventions had been undertaken by the Federal Reserve
and the Bank of Japan to check the fall of the dollar, the latter intervening
for the first time after a long period. The yen had thus strengthened against

the Deutsche Mark, its appreciation amounting to approximately 10% since
the beginning of the year.
The outlook for the dollar was even more uncertain than usual
owing to the US elections, but a further decline following the elections
was widely anticipated.
Within the EMS, the situation was currently remarkably calm.
There had been two periods of tensions: in early September, in connection
with rumours of a realignment, and in mid-October, when the French franc
had been subject to some pressure. The tensions had never been acute and
the narrow fluctuation band had not been utilised to the full at any time.
After a relatively weak performance until September, the Deutsche
Mark had firmed again markedly within the EMS in October, while German
interest rates, particularly long-term rates, had fallen and sales of Deutsche
Mark had been undertaken. This development was to be seen against the background
of the weakening of the dollar and the improvement in economic growth in
Germany. Mention should also be made of the change in the repo tender technique
in combination with an increase in rediscount quotas. These changes had
been aimed at making the existing instruments more flexible without modifying
the basic stance of monetary policy.
The French franc had experienced two bouts of weakness. Firstly
in early September with the rumours of a realignment. The Banque de France
had responded with intervention sales, by allowing the franc to weaken
somewhat within the band and by raising short-term interest rates slightly.
This had rapidly restored calm to the markets and the exchange rate and
interest rates had returned to normal. Subsequently, towards mid-October,
labour disputes and poor August foreign trade figures, combined with the
fall of the dollar, had caused the franc to weaken again. Once more the
Banque de France had responded with the three instruments. In addition, the
French and German authorities had issued very clear statements opposing any
realignment. The markets had again been calmed and the interventions had
ceased. The situation in early November was that the franc was the weakest
currency within the narrow band, quite close to its lower limit, that the
real interest rate differential vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark was wider than
in the summer but smaller than it had been in 1987, and that there had been
no return flows of capital following intervention sales totalling approximately

$4 billion.
The Italian lira had also been affected by the rumours of a realign-
ment in early September; the Banca d'Italia had then allowed the exchange
rate to ease slightly; it had raised interest rates and carried out inter-
ventions. The tensions had disappeared. Since then the lira had firmed and
purchases of foreign exchange had been made for approximately $2 billion.

The reasons for this turn-round were: the high level of interest rates

needed to finance the government budget, the good performance of fundamentals
such as economic growth and the trade balance, and the good reception accorded
the 1989 budget. The announcement of capital liberalisation measures had
possibly contributed to the weakness of the lira in September but there had
been no repercussions when the measures had entered into force on lst October
1988.

The Danish krone had weakened slightly and had slipped below the
middle of the band; since this level was considered perfectly acceptable,
no intervention had been undertaken. The full liberalisation of capital
movements as from lst October 1988 had had no effect on the market.

The Irish pound had been strong for most of the period; it had
weakened slightly, however, towards the end of October. Interest rates had
increased somewhat, possibly in connection with the announcement of the
full liberalisation of securities transactions at the end of the year.

The Belgian franc had been a little weak at the end of
August/beginning of September, apparently because interest rate differentials
had narrowed too far. Interest rates had been raised slightly and since
then the situation had been calm.

The Dutch guilder had also been rather weak in August and early
September; a number of intervention sales had been made. The interest rate
differential vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark had been increased to 3/4% and
this had been sufficient to reverse the flows of capital. As a result the
guilder had stabilised at a level close to bilateral parity with the Deutsche
Mark, interventions had ceased and the interest rate differential vis-a-vis
the Deutsche Mark had narrowed to less than 0.5%.

All in all, the general situation as far as the exchange rate
mechanism was concerned was satisfactory, insofar as the flexible use of
the three instruments had proved effective and the liberalisation of capital
movements in Italy and Denmark had not had any negative effects on the

exchange markets.
Sterling had remained stable vis-a-vis the other EEC currencies:
there had been no significant intervention or interest rate changes. This
reflected an equilibrium of a sort between the overheating of'the economy,
the large current-account deficit and the high level of UK interest rates.

The peseta had firmed following a substantial increase in interest
rates by the Banco de Espafia in response to the sharp rise in prices (+1Z
in September) caused by the overheating of the economy.

The Bank of Greece had pursued its policy of contributing to the
aim of general stability by allowing the effective exchange rate of the
Greek drachma to fall by less than inflation differentials. Since the beginning
of 1988 the effective exchange rate had depreciated by 5.3%, with a figure
of 7% expected for the year as a whole. Overall, the drachma should record
a real appreciation of 3 to 4% in 1988.

In Portugal, the policy of gradually bringing down the effective
exchange rate of the escudo had been continued, in progressively smaller
steps.

Finally, several points should be made.

The recent interventions by the Banca d'Italia had included purchases
of French francs totalling more than $400 million.

As could be seen from the tables submitted to the Governors, the
central banks’ holdings of private ECUs had grown substantially in 1988,
from 4 to 8 billion, and had recorded sizable movements. Danmarks Nationalbank,
for example, had reduced its holdings by 250 million in connection with
repurchases of official ECUs; the Banca d'Italia had done likewise for a
total of 670 million in October as part of a redistribution of exchange
reserves. By contrast, the Bank of England had increased its holdings by
more than 900 million following the issue of ECU Treasury bills.

At a meeting of central bank experts held on Sunday evening in
Basle it had been decided to make a study of the volume of transactions on
the exchange markets. For this purpose a survey would be made in April 1989
by among the majority of the EEC central banks along the lines of the
surveys already carried out in the past by the Bank of England and the Bank

of Japan.

B. Statement by Mr. Rey

The Alternates’ exchange of views could be summarised in two
keywords: satisfaction, but a need for vigilance. This dual impression
could be illustrated from four different angles.

1. There was every reason to show satisfaction with the measures
taken to liberalise capital movements in Denmark and Italy and with those
very recently announced in Ireland. These measures had, moreover, been on
balance favourably received in the markets.

Vigilance was recommended in this area by the Alternates of the
countries concerned; the Irish and Italian Alternates, in particular, had
cautioned against any euphoria. In Ireland there had been a certain firming
of long-term interest rates in connection with the announcement of the
liberalisation measures. In Italy there was no lack of factors apart from
the relaxation of exchange controls to explain the recent firmness of the
lira; the improvement in the trade balance in particular had played a
significant part in the strong performance of the currency.

2. The EMS also gave grounds for satisfaction. The stability of
exchange rates within the EMS could not be said to have been seriously
impaired during the period under review. Some tensions had emerged, and
rumours of a realignment had been heard, but they had been well controlled.

In particular, the downward pressure on the French franc had been successfully
countered in accordance with both the letter and the spirit of the Basle/Nyborg
Agreement: with interventions, a weakening within the exchange rate band

and action on interest rates.

The need for vigilance lay in the size of the current-account
imbalances between countries participating in the EMS exchange rate mechanism.
These disequilibria could not be expected to disappear in the near future
under the effect of differentiated demand policies. In the short term,
therefore, they would have to be financed in one way or another. It was
very widely felt that the necessary capital flows should continue to be a
spontaneous response to market stimuli, which meant maintaining appropriate
interest rate differentials. From this point of view, it would be as well
to be cautious before contemplating unilateral action that would lead to a
Narrowing of the French franc/Deutsche Mark interest rate differential.

3. The Alternates’ attention had been drawn to the situation in
Spain, where the continued very fast growth of economic activity was accompanied

by an acceleration of inflation and widening trade and budget deficits. The
authorities had found it necessary to tighten monetary policy in order to
counteract this development.

4. Finally, it was satisfying that the fall of the dollar had
taken place in an orderly manner, bringing the US currency back to a level
judged to be more in keeping with the requirements of the international
adjustment process. There were, however, obvious uncertainties surrounding
the development of the dollar in the near term. Some Alternates thought
that the dollar had stored up potential for a fall that might be released
following the elections, but it could also be that the market had already
anticipated the fall and was adopting a wait-and-see attitude until such
time as the intentions of the new Administration became clear. It might
even be desirable, at the dollar's present level, if some stabilisation

were encouraged.

C. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. de Larosiére thanked Mr. Rey for his statement, which had
been extremely clear and concise.

Mr. Ciampi noted that the Banca d'Italia was delighted that the
liberalisation of cross-border capital movements was now a reality after
more than fifteen years of controls. The experience of just over a month
had been without hitches, and it was not to be forgotten that the last
realignment had taken place almost two years ago. A tribute should be paid
to those in Italy who for so many years had tenaciously worked for progress
along the path of liberalisation without its giving rise to imbalances.
However, problems persisted for Italy and the EMS. The inflows of funds in
October had followed upon September's outflows in connection with the rumours
of a realignment. Interest rates were on average higher in Italy than in
the other member countries, in both nominal and real terms. This situation
had at the same time a cyclical component (the very strong growth of bank
lending necessitating a policy of high interest rates) and a structural
component (the government having to offer attractive rates of interest in
order to raise the resources needed to finance a very large budget deficit).
Two other factors had favoured the implementation of the latest stage in
the liberalisation of capital movements: firstly, the good performance of
the Italian balance of payments in response to buoyant world demand and the
fall in oil prices; and, secondly, the greater confidence of Italian operators

in the authorities' statements and commitments regarding the reform of the

public finances. This store of confidence now had to be reinforced through
concrete action.

Mr. Rubio confirmed that inflation was accelerating in Spain and
that this had been the reason for the one-point increase in interest rates.
The objective for 1989 was to bring inflation down to 3%, which would require
a ~ possibly substantial - tightening of monetary policy. The budget deficit
was in the process of being cut, and a further reduction ought to be achieved
in 1989. This was due to the very sharp increase in revenue; overall, however,

fiscal policy was not restrictive and could even be expansionary.

Til. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EEC Ministers of Finance on
developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen countries
participating in the concertation procedure during September, October
and the first few days of November 1988.

The Chairman noted that the Committee approved the "concertation
report", which would be sent to the EEC Ministers of Finance in the usual

way.

IV. Examination of current monetary policies in EEC countries based on
Report No. 33 of the group of experts chaired by Mr. Raymond.

The Chairman drew attention to the fact that Report No. 33 was
the first reflecting the supplementary mandate which the Governors had
given to the "Raymond Group" in May 1988 with a view to improving the co-
ordination of monetary policies between the EEC member countries and supplement-
ing the monthly monitoring procedure established as a result of the Basle/Nyborg
Agreement of September 1987. In addition, the drafting of this autumn report
had been brought forward one month to enable the Governors to discuss it in
November, as December had appeared a little late given the various monetary

decisions that had to be taken in the EEC countries.

A. Statement by Mr. Raymond

Report No. 33 differed from preceding semi-annual reports by the
Group of Experts at least in terms of its aims. These aims had been set by

the new mandate given by the Governors in May 1988. The Group had been

asked to provide the Community central banks with the information necessary
for developing a co-ordinated monetary policy approach in 1989. For this
purpose it had been called upon to focus on an analysis of divergences and
of the steps to be taken to reduce them.

The experts had taken note of the unforeseen acceleration in
growth in 1988, with a slowdown to be expected in 1989. They had noted that
although price movements had become less favourable than in the preceding
two years, they had remained moderate and the situation should stabilise.
This was true in general as well as in Europe.

It was primarily the balance-of-payments adjustment process that
claimed attention. It had seemed to be marking time for some months between
the United States, Japan and the Federal Republic of Germany. While the EEC
surplus had narrowed in 1988 to no more than 0.5% of aggregate GNP, divergences
had widened between member countries. Germany's surplus was still equivalent
to 4% of its GNP and 1% of that of the Community. Surpluses persisted in
the Benelux countries and Ireland.

On the other hand, current balances were worsening or in deficit
in those countries where they were already weaker, except in Denmark. These
results, which were disappointing in convergence terms, could be attributed
to several] factors:

- domestic demand was stronger in the less developed member countries
and in those which were experiencing some overheating than in the
surplus countries;

- exchange rates had worked against adjustment for much of the
year; and,

- finally, the rapid pace of growth had intensified the effects of
industrial specialisation, with Germany in particular demonstrating
its capacity to meet the strong demand for capital goods on the
part of its partners.

The divergences with regard to prices and budgetary positions had
narrowed slightly, but not enough to bring real convergence.

In sum, in 1989 the Community countries would still for the most
part be split into two groups: those with moderate inflation and an appreciable
current-account surplus (Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg and
Ireland) and those with an inflation level higher than the Community aver-

age and current-account deficits or deteriorating external positions (the
- 10 -

United Kingdom, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece). France and Denmark lay
somewhere in between.

The above analysis appeared to point to two conclusions for the
co-ordination of member countries' monetary policies in 1989.

Firstly, the general stance of these policies: two contradictory
observations led the experts not to recommend that it should be modified in
one direction or the other. Monetary policies, which had been eased immediately
following the stock market crash in October 1987, had been tightened again
at different times in the various countries as from the second quarter of
1988. This re-appraisal, well received by the markets, appeared to have
calmed inflationary expectations and therefore seemed to suffice for the
moment. On the other hand, the buoyancy of lending and the high liquidity
of the economy in many countries suggested that the reins should not be
loosened, a move which could only be contemplated in 1989, in the view of
most experts, if a significant slowdown in growth occurred.

Secondly, the differentiation between monetary policies: this was
in theory necessary in order to bring closer together the two groups of
countries set in rather dramatic contrast. In the long term the persistence
of different inflation rates and contrasting balance-of-payments positions
could only put exchange rate stability at risk, especially within the exchange
rate mechanism (but the Group's mandate was not confined to that mechanism).

It had first been stressed that the balance of payments on current
account might give an excessively pessimistic impression of the risks being
run. It was true that in 1988 large outflows of capital from Germany had
helped to limit tensions. Nevertheless, one could not rely entirely on such
phenomena: capital flows other than direct investment could move against
exchange market equilibrium, in flight from the deficit countries to a safe
haven in the surplus countries under the influence of exchange rate expecta-
tions. This risk was greater today, in a deregulated Europe. It called for
stronger and swifter responses from the central banks on interest rates.

Structural policies were certainly indispensable, but their impact
on supply would be too slow to resolve the difficulties of 1989.

There remained cyclical demand management. None of the countries
with a current-account surplus saw any scope for stimulating domestic demand
further. Domestic demand was considered satisfactory in Germany to the
extent that it was broadly in line with the growth of productive capacity
and thus did not threaten medium-term price stability. The other surplus

countries attached priority to the stability of their exchange rates vis-a-vis

- 11 -

Germany, from which they therefore did not wish to diverge; these countries
could not stimulate their economies through fiscal measures as their public
finances on the contrary needed adjustment. Under these conditions closer
convergence could only come from demand restraint in the second group of
countries with higher inflation and a weak balance of payments.

Most experts had regretted the timing of the fiscal measures
adopted in 1988 in the United Kingdom, or planned for 1989 in Germany,
which, albeit warranted on a long-term view, could work against short-term
adjustment.

From all this it could be concluded that closer convergence would
depend largely on the development of interest rates and their differentia-
tion, which was mainly the task of the second group of countries; the result
would undoubtedly be an overall tightening in the Community. At the same
time, interest rate differentials alone could not be expected to reduce the
external imbalances rapidly, given their size.

Different views had also emerged regarding responses to possible
fluctuations in the dollar. The representatives of the second group of
countries (higher inflation, weaker balance of payments) feared that a fall
in the dollar would not bring a fall in interest rates in the first group,
or that a dollar appreciation would lead to further increases in interest
rates in those countries.

Many experts thought that it would be useful if any announcement
of targets for 1989 contained a reference to joint preparatory work - even
though the experts were well aware that they had not yet reached complete

agreement.

B. Statement by Mr. Rey

The Alternates had attempted to answer the following four ques-
tions:

- did the redrafted version of the report constitute an appropriate
response to the mandate given by the Committee of Governors last
May?

- could the analysis of macro-economic and monetary developments be
shared?

- was it possible to reduce the differences of opinion that had
emerged between experts on the subject of the desirable monetary

policy approach in the Community?
-~ 1? -

- should one follow the recommendation made by the majority of
experts to announce publicly that the monetary targets set for

1989 in the various countries had been the subject of a joint

preliminary discussion within the Committee of Governors?

With regard to the first question, which concerned the execution
of the mandate, the Alternates had been unanimous in their appreciation of
the quality of the report, which lucidly set out the problems involved in
the co-ordinated conduct of monetary policies. If there were disagreements
as to some of the options to be taken, it was the experts' role to highlight
them, and that had been done. It was for the Alternates and the Governors
to assess to what extent these points of view could be reconciled.

As regards the analysis of recent developments, the Alternates
were very largely in agreement with the experts. There were three comments
to be made in connection with growth, inflation and the current-account
imbalances.

Growth, which had been sustained in the Community in 1988, had
exceeded the most optimistic forecasts. This was particularly true in Germany,
where aggregate demand was growing significantly more quickly than estimated
productive capacity. In this respect a slowdown in the rate of demand growth
in 1989 would not be undesirable and would not be enough to warrant a relaxa-
tion of monetary discipline. The observation had been made that the rapid
growth of investment should contribute to enlarging productive capacity;
without denying the validity of this argument, the German Alternate had
pointed out that this process required time and meanwhile was being thwarted
by the reduction of the working week.

With respect to inflation it was remarkable that economic growth
had accelerated in the countries participating in the EMS exchange rate
mechanism, without any appreciable sacrifice of internal stability. Outside
the mechanism, however, some countries were facing relatively strong inflation-
ary pressures.

The Alternates were of the opinion that the current~account imbalances
within the EEC were at present the main cause for concern. The forecasts
hardly held out hope of any appreciable reduction of these imbalances in
1989. This fact was particularly important for the choice of monetary policy
stances.

As regards the third question examined by the Alternates, they
had first of all noted that the possible contribution of fiscal policies to
- 13 -

greater convergence, in particular at the balance-of-payments level, would
be very limited. The criticisms voiced in the report by the majority of
experts regarding the fiscal measures taken in two member countries had
been countered by the Alternates concerned. For the German Alternate, the
raising of indirect taxes in 1989 could not be divorced from the cut in
direct taxes planned for the following year. The British Alternate had
emphasised that the strong growth of domestic demand in the United Kingdom
was wrongly being attributed to fiscal policy (it should be remembered that
the budget showed a comfortable surplus); rather, it reflected the easing
of monetary policy in the last few months of 1987 and early 1988, for well-
known reasons. The tightening of monetary policy, as subsequently observed,
had therefore been an appropriate response.

The report thus proposed a differentiation of monetary policies
between countries participating in the EMS exchange rate mechanism according
to their balance-of-payments positions and suggested a differentiated response
depending on whether the dollar moved up or down. The discussion held by
the Alternates had not enabled them to reconcile the diverging views expressed
on this subject by the experts. In particular, the German Alternate had
suggested that in the event of a rise in the dollar an increase in German
interest rates might be the appropriate response, whereas if the dollar
fell one should hardly expect a lowering of rates but rather interventions,
to the extent that their impact on domestic liquidity could be neutralised
by other means. Other Alternates had remarked that the situation in their
countries, and in the EEC as a whole, would not justify a tightening of
monetary policy.

Being unable to agree in advance on a co-ordinated monetary policy
strategy, the Alternates recognised the need to respond flexibly to develop-
ments and consequently to ensure a certain continuity in the joint monitoring
of monetary policies. It had also been pointed out that the Bundesbank
should be more attentive not only to the risks of liquidity expansion but
also to the counterparts of any such expansion. If it were to occur, for
example, as a result of capital inflows, it would be inappropriate to respond
with a policy of raising interest rates.

As for the proposal that an announcement affect should be aimed
for when the monetary targets for 1989 were published by referring to the
work carried out by the Committee of Governors, the Alternates were not

greatly in favour of it under the present circumstances. Apart from the

~ j4 -

institutional difficulties which this proposal could create in certain
countries, the Alternates thought that it would lack credibility in a situation
in which it had not been possible to eliminate significant differences of
opinion as to the appropriate approaches. The Alternates did not, however,

rule out for the future the idea of a joint public announcement of approaches

on which the monetary authorities had reached a genuine consensus.

C. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. Duisenberg agreed with the Alternates in their assessment of
Report No. 33, which provided a very balanced analysis of economic and
monetary developments within the Community and the problems arising. The
report usefully focused on the co-ordination of monetary policies and the
lack of convergence, but perhaps devoted too much attention to the past and
not enough to the future. The Group should be more forward-looking and
suggest some options for suitable corrective measures; it might indicate
how monetary policies could contribute within the member countries to the
process of disinflation and the restoration of external equilibrium. The
experts could, for example, discuss desirable monetary targets for 1989,
including that for the growth of domestic lending which formed part of the
mandate.

The report stressed that monetary growth had been vigorous in the
majority of the EEC countries, above all in the last few months, and that
this was chiefly due to the strong growth in bank lending to the private
sector in the context of very buoyant domestic demand. Moreover, the average
rate of inflation within the Community had increased, reaching 5% in August.
Determination was therefore required with regard to monetary targets, but
greater attention needed to be given to the internal and external counterparts
of money creation.

At a more general level, a few points were worth making. In 1989
economic growth would remain strong in some countries, while in others
there would be an appreciable rise in wages. There would thus be an obvious
risk of new inflationary pressure which policies should combat as quickly
as possible so that productive capacities were not exhausted and so as to
reduce excess liquidity. Finally, a sharp depreciation of the dollar leading
to tensions within the EMS could not be ruled out; rapid action would then

have to be taken on interest rates and differentials suitably widened.
- 15 -

Mr. Ciampi endorsed the opinions expressed about the quality of
the study submitted by the "Raymond Group". The process of liberalisation
of capital movements in which the Community was engaged involved risks
unless simultaneous progress was made in the conduct of monetary policy,
which, moreover, could no longer be seen in a narrow national context but
had to take account of the situation of the other member countries. It was
clear that the studies should not be confined to retrospective observations,
commenting on the past, but should look to the future. Such an approach,
which had already been advocated by Italy, should be followed by everybody,
independently from the stage reached in the liberalisation of capital
movements. The ‘Raymond Group" should go further in the direction desired
by Mr. Duisenberg, i.e. it should provide pointers and options for
co-ordination for the future.

At the procedural level, Mr. Ciampi proposed that the new mandate
given to the "Raymond Group" should be confirmed and if possible that part
of it which was forward-looking and prepared the ground for the future
should be reinforced.

Mr. Pohl thought that Report No. 33 represented an excellent
analysis of the situation and the problems arising. The experts appeared to
be a little pessimistic in saying that the adjustment process had been
marking time, especially as far as the United States was concerned. Actually,
the US representatives thought that the reduction of their country's deficit
would continue, albeit perhaps at a slower pace. In fact, the bilateral
relations between the United States and Germany had seen a decrease in
German exports of around 13% and an increase in German imports of roughly
the same order of magnitude since the beginning of 1988. The problem obviously
arose within the EEC: since the beginning of 1988 exports from Germany to
its partners, notably Italy and France, had risen much more rapidly than
German imports from the other member countries. The problem was thus tending
to worsen, and gave all the more cause for concern in that the scope for
expanding domestic demand in Germany was limited.

The question was, therefore, how these imbalances might be corrected,
bearing in mind that exchange rate adjustments should only be a last resort
and could in any case only be modest. Hitherto the growth in the German
trade surplus had not caused any problems, since it had been offset by
capital movements. It was possible that, with different exchange rate expecta-

tions, capital flows would be reversed, as had been the case for some time.
- 16 -

Were such a trend to persist or to intensify, tensions would be bound to
emerge within the EMS. A widening of interest rate differentials risked
being insufficient, and so it would be better to bring about capital exports
from Germany to those countries with relatively weak currencies. These
countries had, in fact, to adopt policies conducive to attracting capital.
Italy provided a convincing example in this regard: the liberalisation of
capital movements there had given rise not to outflows but, on the contrary,
to inflows of capital, which were a sign of confidence. This kind of policy
designed to make the country more attractive to foreign capital was the
only way of achieving progress, given that the cohesion attained now ruled
out any major parity changes.

Mr. Pohl noted that the EEC countries with the highest inflation
rates and the largest current-account deficits did not participate in the
EMS exchange rate mechanism. Membership of the exchange rate mechanism had
a disciplinary effect that appeared to be conducive to closer convergence.
This was a situation which might merit examination in greater depth.

Mr. de Larosiere offered a few remarks and a suggestion as regards
method. The size of the current-account imbalances was currently a major
factor. The existence of surpluses or deficits within a regional grouping
such as the Community was not abnormal, but the size of these imbalances,
for example a surplus equal to 4Z of GNP, and their persistence year after
year posed a problem. The monetary policies of the EEC countries could not
fail to be influenced by this basic fact. The countries with large surpluses
and low inflation should not therefore envisage any tightening of their
monetary policy but should rather consider a slight relaxation, especially
if the dollar weakened. Moreover, the restrictive stance of fiscal policy
in Germany in 1989 was to be regretted. The structural reasons for raising
indirect taxes were understandable, but the decision was wholly out of line
with the cyclical situation.

The risks of inflation in the second group of countries, as described
by Mr. Raymond, should lead them to exercise very strict vigilance in their
demand management policies. This applied both to fiscal policy and to monetary
policy and meant, for example, that interest rates had to be maintained at
relatively high levels. In France the narrow monetary aggregates were developing
along fairly satisfactory lines, but the growth in lending, of the order of
11%, was too strong and demanded the continuation of a vigilant and rigorous

monetary policy.
With regard to the dollar, close attention had to be paid to the
international aspects of its development. As long as US fiscal policy failed
to bring about a significant easing of domestic demand pressures, a sharp
decline in the dollar, in the current context of very high capacity utilisation
in the United States, would only serve to heighten inflationary pressures
in that country and would not improve the balance of payments. Moreover,
interest rates would have to be raised in the United States, and this,
which would doubtless take place in a context of stagflation, would have
adverse consequences for the Third World and the international monetary
system as a whole. A rapid fall in the dollar might also cause disturbances
within the EMS. All these reasons gave grounds for thinking that it was the
central bank Governors’ responsibility rather to seek dollar stability.

With regard to a suggested method, Mr. de Larosiére noted first
of all that the "Raymond Group" had produced a very remarkable study. As
Mr. Duisenberg and Mr. Ciampi had mentioned, the experts should be encouraged
to be even more precise in their recommendations and their analysis concerning
monetary policies and their co-ordination. The more forward-looking and
precise the picture presented (perhaps by setting out different monetary
policy scenarios in the various countries), the better the Governors would
be assisted in making their own authorities or boards aware of aspects of
interaction at the European level.

The schedule of work for the Group could be modified with this in
mind. The November report introduced this year was perfectly appropriate,
since it enabled the Governors to draw on the experts' analysis in preparing
their monetary policy decisions. On the other hand, the May report was a
little late for an examination of the preceding year, which was known by
March, and a little early to offer a sound view of the first half-year. A
possibility would therefore be to have, firstly, a fairly brief report in
March, or possibly in April, concerned essentially with taking stock of the
previous year's results and, secondly, a report in July for purposes of
examining the situation half-way through the year. If Mr. Raymond agreed,
one meeting of the experts might be sufficient for the March report, instead
of two as at present for the May report, so that the total number of meetings
could perhaps remain the same.

Mr. Rubio referred to Mr. Péhl's remark on the current improve-
ment in adjustment between the United States and Germany. If this develop-

ment continued, the current-account deficits would increase in several EEC

- 18 -

countries. However, offsetting such a deterioration by increasing capital
inflows was certainly not a good solution and could lead to more serious
problems in the future. It was possible to conduct a monetary policy capable
of attracting sufficient capital, but this could not be made a permanent
process. As soon as the current-account surpluses of certain countries
became structural, its deficit partners would have to maintain a

restrictive policy and therefore high interest rates for such a long time
that at some point the markets would come to feel that the only solution

was a substantial change in parities and would exert pressure accordingly.

Mr. Raymond thanked the Governors for their compliments, which he
would pass on to his colleagues and which he directed more especially to
the Secretariat of the Committee, which carried out a considerable amount
of work in drafting the reports.

The Governors’ request that the experts be more precise in their
proposals for the future was an entirely desirable development in the Group's
work; it obviously presupposed that the experts would comment very clearly
on the situation in their own countries and on that in the other member
countries; one could soon hope to have more concrete mutual criticisms. As
far as the schedule was concerned, bearing in mind both the emphasis on the
future and the Governors' desire to take more frequent stock of monetary
strategy outside the monthly monitoring procedure, Mr. de Larosiére's proposal
might be followed up. In March, when figures for the past year were known,

a report would to some extent update the November report, which only gave
reliable forecasts concerning the current year. The March report could, in
addition, include the data on which the central banks had based their
objectives for 1989, their assumptions regarding lending, the various
monetary aggregates and interest rates. This would lay the foundation for
taking up the examination again on a forward-looking basis in November
1989, since it was true that in November 1988 the experts said nothing
about the development of the monetary and credit aggregates in 1989 in the
member countries. Such an approach presupposed that the Governors would
instruct their experts to be as frank and precise as possible.

In July a report could indeed take stock of the situation half-way
through the current year, whereas in May there would only be the first
quarter to cover; experience had shown, particularly in July 1988, that the
situation and assessments at that point had been very different from those

in November 1987.
- }jQ -

Mr. Raymond added that the Governors' various projects did not
present any problems for the work of the Group of Experts; he would, however,
like to be given the leeway of five working meetings, as it would perhaps
be difficult to make do with only four.

Mr. Duisenberg reverted to the problem of the current-account
imbalances. Monetary policy could help correct these imbalances but it
could not do everything, and capital movements could not offset them indefini-
tely. Fiscal policy also had to play an important role. In addition, another
factor contributed to maintaining these imbalances, namely the various
subsidies or assistance schemes which existed in the EEC countries to promote
national exports. There was no uniformity in this area, and the Commission
should look into this.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton remarked that in most of the EEC countries
growth was strong, particularly with regard to investment, which had contri-
buted a good deal to the German current-account surplus. The slowdown pre-
dicted for 1989 in Europe and worldwide should bring some correction of the
current-account imbalances, and one should therefore perhaps avoid being
overly pessimistic.

With regard to the programme of work for the ‘Raymond Group",

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton agreed with the drafting of three reports a year; he
noted that even though April was the better month for the United Kingdom -

as the budget was then established ~- March seemed preferable to him, given
that in April the Governors were often under pressure owing to ECOFIN Council
and IMF meetings.

The Chairman brought the discussion to a close by noting the
Committee's agreement with the proposals put forward concerning the focus
of future “Raymond Group" reports and the programme of three reports a

year.

V. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee.

There was no other business.

VI. Date and place of the next meeting.

The next meeting would take place in Basle on Tuesday, 13th December

1988, beginning at 10 a.m.

Committee of Governors of the Annex 8th November 1988
Central Banks of the Member States

of the European Economic Community Confidential

BRIEF REPORT ON
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER 1988

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of
the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce-
dure! and briefly describes their interventions during September, October

and the first few days of November 1988.

I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main features of the foreign exchange markets in September
and October 1988 were:
~ a sharp decline of the US dollar during October, the depreciation
being more pronounced with respect to the Japanese yen;
- a short period of nervousness in the EMS at the beginning of

September, which did not give rise to major tensions.

After an initial weakening in early September, the US dollar
moved higher against most major currencies during the rest of the month.
The dollar benefited from the release of US trade statistics for July, as
well as from expectations that any emerging signs of economic overheating
would lead to higher US interest rates. Also, the Berlin summit communiqué
and subsequent official commentary were interpreted by some as suggesting

that the G-7 monetary authorities would tolerate a further rise in the

1 The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.

dollar. Towards the end of the month, the US authorities sold dollars
against Deutsche Mark in concerted intervention that restored the view that
monetary authorities would resist a further dollar rise. From late September,
the dollar has declined in a move prompted by various indications that
US economic activity was not expanding as vigorously as had been thought,
suggesting that upward pressure on dollar interest rates might subside.
Market sentiment towards the dollar became increasingly negative as con-
cerns about the pace of external adjustment resurfaced. As the dollar came
under strong selling pressure at the end of October, the US authorities
bought dollars against yen to limit the dollar's decline. The dollar closed
the two-month period under review down 5Z on average against European cur-
rencies and 8.6% lower against the Japanese yen.

At the beginning of September and for the second time this year,
some nervousness appeared in the EMS, although the pressures abated easily.
Subsequently, there was some movement in currencies' relative positions,
mainly the strengthening of the Deutsche Mark to the top of the band and
the weakening of the French franc to the bottom of the narrow band.

The Deutsche Mark continued to firm against almost all currencies,
appreciating most strongly - by 5.7Z - against the US dollar. During the
second half of September this development was temporarily interrupted when
the decline of the dollar gave way to an upswing. Late in September this
rise was, however, halted by concerted intervention, and in October the
Deutsche Mark firmed strongly. In the second half of October the weighted
index of the Deutsche Mark vis-a-vis the EMS currencies reached the highest
levels yet recorded; overall (vis-a-vis fourteen major industrial countries),
however, the Deutsche Mark's index was still approximately 3Z% below the
peak values recorded at the beginning of the year.

In the period under review the French franc was subject to certain
pressures. At the beginning of September, as a result of rumours of a realign-
ment associated with the dismantling of Italian exchange controls, the
franc weakened against the Deutsche Mark, but the decline was checked by
the statements made by the French and German monetary authorities ruling
out the necessity of a parity readjustment. The announcement at the end of
September of a substantial August trade deficit (of Fr.fr. 9 billion),
followed at the beginning of October by social disputes, gave rise to new
pressures on the franc, in particular by inducing French residents to cover

forward their commercial operations. The firming of the Deutsche Mark
exchange rate, accompanied by an increase in French short-term interest
rates, subsequently made the taking of positions more costly and dissipated
these pressures. Thereafter the resolution of the social disputes and the
announcement of a Fr.fr. 0.4 billion trade surplus in September gave an
incentive to purchases of francs by non-residents.

The Belgian franc remained relatively stable. The Banque Nationale
intervened occasionally in the market, above all in the form of sales in
the first fortnight of September. On four occasions it was able to reduce
the rate for three-month Treasury bills, which currently stands at 7.25%,
corresponding to a reduction of 0.35% over the last two months.

The Dutch guilder firmed slightly against the Deutsche Mark in
September, due to a somewhat larger short-term interest rate differential.
It subsequently rose further within the EMS as it followed the strengthening
Deutsche Mark.

The Danish krone weakened slightly to a level just below the
middle of the EMS band. The abolition of the remaining capital controls in
Denmark as from Ist October had no effect on the foreign exchange market.

The Irish pound was relatively stable at the top of the EMS band
during September, with continuous small net inflows of currency. However,
during October, the Irish pound weakened slightly within the band, in
response to currency outflows, resulting in intervention sales. Towards the
end of the month, it was announced that investment in medium and long-term
securities would be fully liberalised with effect from 1989.

During the first half of September the Italian lira was weakened
by substantial short-term capital outflows, fuelled by expectations of an
EMS realignment, necessitating the Banca d'Italia to intervene with sizable
sales of foreign currencies. Since mid-September and throughout October the
stabilisation of exchange rate expectations induced substantial capital
inflows and made possible a replenishment of official reserves while the
lira appreciated slightly in the EMS.

Helped by modest intervention, sterling recovered from an uneasy
start to September and enjoyed a period of stability until suffering from
nervousness about the UK trade figures for August. In the event, the figures
(published on 27th September) were not as bad as feared and sterling advanced
strongly in their wake. With the Chancellor ruling out an early fall in
UK interest rates, the pound displayed a firm tone during October until
balance of payments concerns again resurfaced ahead of the UK trade figures

for September. Once again, the figures (a current account deficit of
£560 million) were better than anticipated and sterling recovered well to
end the period on a steady note. Over the two months, sterling appreciated
vis-a-vis the US dollar but remained stable vis-a-vis the other European
currencies. Sterling's trade-weighted index rose by 0.8% to 76.4 (1975=100).

The Greek drachma appreciated by 4.0% against the US dollar and
depreciated by 1.8% against the ECU. In effective terms the drachma depre-
ciated by 0.4% in September and by 1.0% in October.

During the first few days of September the Spanish peseta depre-
ciated sharply, which led to intervention sales by the Banco de Espafia.
However, for the rest of the period it appreciated smoothly, driven by the
increased positive interest rate differential. In all, the peseta ended
0.12 higher with respect to the ECU and 6.0% higher with respect to the
dollar. On 23rd September the Banco de Espafia raised by 1 percentage point
its intervention rate for overnight funds, and on 26th September the three-
month repurchase agreement rate.

The Portuguese escudo depreciated by 0.45% in effective terms
during the two months - 0.25% in September and 0.2% in October - in line
with the objectives defined by the authorities. Against the US dollar the
escudo rose by 5.52.

Vis-a-vis the US dollar the Swiss franc strengthened by 5.75%. On
an export-weighted basis its value rose by just under 1%. Against all other
currencies the franc's weakness, which had persisted for months, continued
up to the end of October. On some days the Deutsche Mark/Swiss franc rate
temporarily increased to the level of 85.- francs. In the last week of
October a break in the trend appeared and the franc became stronger in
relation to most currencies.

The Austrian schilling firmed against the US dollar by just under
6% in October. Vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark it fluctuated by a mere 0.012%.
Speculative short-term capital inflows were countered by interventions.

The Norwegian krone continued to weaken during the first days of
September, but this trend was reversed later in the month. In October the
krone was fairly stable despite fluctuating oil prices. The relative
stability of the krone, together with a moderate expansion of domestic
credit and reduced inflation, gave room for a further 0.4 percentage point
reduction, to 12.4%, in Norges Bank's overnight lending rate with effect
from 24th October. The interest rate differential versus the basket cur-

rencies has, during the period, been reduced by more than 100 basis points
to less than 4 percentage points. In effective terms the krone weakened by
0.32.

The Swedish krona strengthened in mid-September by about l per-
centage point as a result of the election. At the same time, short-term
interest rates tended to decline and the Riksbank was forced to intervene
in both foreign exchange and money markets. In October, the krona remained
fairly stable, unaffected by a sharp fall in long-term money market rates
as it was speculated that Sweden might be close to a further liberalisation
of the foreign exchange regulations.

The Finnish markka continued to fluctuate, in effective terms,
within a narrow range around the currency index level of 102. Domestic
short-term interest rates rose by about 1%.

After recording the year-low of 136.80 yen per dollar (on a
Tokyo-market basis) on lst September, the Japanese yen appreciated by 8.02%,
reaching Yen 125.00 on 31st October. The yen's sharp appreciation, which
started in early September and continued throughout October, was attributable
largely to a surge in the bullish sentiment towards the currency, reflecting
lower oil prices and the various economic indicators, including unemployment
statistics, suggesting a possible slowdown in the US economy. The yen
appreciated by 3.3% against the ECU.

The Canadian dollar rose through September and most of October to
above the US$ 0.8325 level, but has since fallen markedly to about US$ 0.8150.
Underpinning the currency throughout its rise were investment-related inflows
from abroad, related in part to new euro-Canadian issues, a firming of
Canadian interest rates in response to domestic inflationary pressures and
a widening of short-term interest rate spreads vis-a-vis the United States.
Over the last week, public opinion polls have indicated that the official
opposition was gaining strongly in popularity ahead of the 21st November
election. This has cast some doubt over the final passage of the US/Canada
free trade agreement which has, in turn, exerted considerable downward

pressure on the Canadian dollar.

II. INTERVENTIONS
A. Interventions in US dollars

Net sales of US dollars by central banks in September amounted to

US$ 3.9 billion, whereas in October there were net purchases of
US$ 2.6 billion. This compares with with net sales of US$ 21.5 billion in
July and August. Gross purchases for September and October taken together
amounted to US$ 5.7 billion, the main buyers being the Bank of Canada, the
Banca d'Italia and, to a lesser extent, the Banco de Portugal. Gross sales
amounted to US$ 6.9 billion, the main sellers being the Banque de France
and, in September, the Banca d'Italia and, to a lesser extent, the Banco de
Espana. In late September, a number of central banks participated also in

concerted intervention sales of US dollars.

B. Interventions in Community currencies and in private ECUs

Interventions in EMS currencies and ECUs by Community central
banks amounted in September and October to the equivalent of US$ 5.0 billion,
compared with US$ 5.7 billion in July and August. The interventions consisted
of sales of Deutsche Mark by the Banca d'Italia in the early part of
September which were reversed later in the month, and of sales of Deutsche

Mark by the Banque de France in October.

III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 4TH NOVEMBER

The downward pressure on the US dollar chiefly against the Japanese
yen continued, which prompted intervention purchases of dollars both by the
Federal Reserve and by the Bank of Japan. The release in the United States

of the employment data for October has eased these pressures.
1A

EVOLUTION DE L'ECU, DU COURS MEDIAN DES MONNATES PARTICIPANT AU
MECANISNE DE CHANGE DU SME ET DES MONNATES DES BANQUES CENTRALES DE
LA CEE NE PARTICIPANT PAS A CE MECANISME, SUR LA BASE DES COURS
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986 VIS-A-VIS DU S$EU*

wv
a

20

1988

= Voir page suivante.

44.11.1988

wv

28 |

24 |

EVOLUTION DES MONNAIES DES BANQUES CENTRALES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A
LA CONCERTATION, SUR LA BASE DES COURS RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986
VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*

es

ye Os ee an Ad

Lo.

| |
7 |
! | “\/\ 5 !
el
! ~~ rE en
\—--™ “  \ aru e \
\ ~~ | f ” ” sd — |
~ 7™N“ _! .’ a“ aa —
a“ ~ e . , oh )

1988

* ECU 0,93425; # 00,6773; DR 138,7601; PTA 131,8700; ESC 146,0995; FIM 4,7925; $Can
1,3805; FS 1,6215; Yen 159,7993; KRS 6,7750; KRN 7,3975; Sch 13,6520; cours médian
des monnaies participant au SME 0,92913. Le cours médian des monnaies participant
au SME représente la moyenne journali®@re des cours des deux monnaies a marge de
fluctuation de 2,25% qui se sont é6loignés le plus de leurs cours-pivots bilatéraux
actuels.

4.11.1988

18

we

28

24

20

16
MOUVEMENTS A L'INTERIEUR DE LA GRILLE DE PARITES DU SME CALCULES

SUR LA BASE DES COURS DE L'ECU DANS LES DIFFERENTES MONNAIES

PARTICIPANTES

wy

oO
N

wy

—N

oO

o)

.10

21

10

1988

. 1988

V1

4.
EVOLUTION DE L'INDICATEUR DE DIVERGENCE*

-100 | £100
29.7 12.8 26.8 9.9 23.9 7.10 21.10

1988

* L'indicateur de divergence a pour but de mesurer, sur une base comparable pour
toutes les monnaies participant au mécanisme de change européen, la position d'une
monnaie vis-a-vis de son cours-pivot ECU. L’écart maximal de divergence est le
pourcentage maximal par lequel le cours de marché de 1'ECU dans chaque monnaie
peut s‘apprécier ou se déprécier par rapport a son cours-pivot ECU; il est exprime
par +/-100, le seuil de divergence &tant +/-75. Les données qui ont servi de base
a8 l'établissement de ce graphique sont les cours de 'ECU exprimés en termes de
diverses monnaies, cours qui sont toutefois corrigés des effets des fluctuations
de la lire italienne, de la livre sterling et de la drachme grecque au-dela de la
marge de 2,25% vis-a-vis des autres monnaies participant au SME.

4.11.1988

4A

EVOLUTION DE LA LIVRE STERLING, DE LA DRACHME, DE LA PESETA ET DE
L'ESCUDO PAR PAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*

|
|
|
Lo
| | | |
|
| |
j { 3
8 | | :
| ——— } |
——— OR |
Fn Pta
~ eee Esc | |
|
| | |
4 | | 4
| | |
k t
|
|
|

-12

1988
“ ¢ 0,724942; OR 148,526; PTA 141,151; ESC 156,382.

44.11.1988

4B

EVOLUTION DES MONNATES DES BANQUES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A LA
CONCERTATION PAR RAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU ‘MARCHE
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*

' o ’
*. ad . ees
- baad *
| di =~" 0 @=~aswoaae”™ |

ad hei

29.7 12.8 26.8 9.9 23.9 7.10 21.10
1988

~ $EU 1,07038; $Can 1,47766; FS 1,73562; Yen 171,046; KAS 7,25181; KAN 7,91812;
sch 14,6128; FIM 5,12978.

4.11.1988

