Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 21-22, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., starting on Monday, December 21, 1981, at 3:30 p.m. andcontinuing on Tuesday, December 22, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. Corrigan 1/Mr. GramleyMr. KeehnMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford, and Winn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 2/Mr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis, Duprey, Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, Truman,and Zeisel, Associate Economists1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market trans-actions in Government securities, agency obligations and bankers acceptances.2/ Attended Tuesday session only.12/21-22/81Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account Mr. Wallace, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors Messrs. Gemmill and Siegman, Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Kohn, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, Koch, and Parthemos, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond, respectively Messrs. Burger and Syron 1/, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston Ms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 2.
 Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York -2 -  Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of December 21-22, 1981  December 21--Afternoon Session   CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We can come to order and approve the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a neutral statement about starting a meeting and approving minutes.


Passage number 3.
MR. SCHULTZ.  So moved.SPEAKER(.).  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz moved and the speaker seconded, indicating agreement and cooperation.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  With a motion and a second we will approve the minutes, if there are no objections.  Then we will have a report on foreign currency operations or the lack thereof.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first sentence is a procedural statement indicating that the minutes will be approved if there are no objections. The second sentence simply states that there will be a report on foreign currency operations or the lack thereof, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 5.
MR. CROSS.  [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear passage provided in the question. Please provide the passage or statement mentioned in the question for analysis.


Passage number 6.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Any comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot answer this question as no passage has been provided.


Passage number 7.
MR. GUFFEY.  I'd just like to ask this:  You mentioned that we had authority to intervene.  Authority from whom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  What was the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage does not contain any specific statements or arguments that can be debated or disagreed upon. Additionally, the passage simply asks a question without providing any information or opinions that could potentially lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 9.
MR. CROSS.  The question was:  From where did the authority come to intervene.  The New York Federal Reserve Bank was instructed by the Chairman on the basis of discussions between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents the question and provides information about the source of authority for intervention.


Passage number 10.
MS. TEETERS.  What were the terms that the Treasury agreed to for us to begin [intervening].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply states a question being asked and does not indicate any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 11.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, we would have intervened if the [mark] had continued to weaken.  I am sorry I missed whatever you said Sam, but we would [unintelligible].  After the Polish declaration of martial law, the mark was very weak and then it strengthened relative to [its level] in the Far East.  We would have intervened if it had retreated rapidly again after having strengthened at around the 2.30 level or a little lower, [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical situation and expressing a conditional statement about intervention based on the weakening or strengthening of the mark.


Passage number 12.
MR. CROSS.  The mark hit a peak in the Far Eastern trading of about 2.36-1/2 and the rates in terms of the other [currencies] were similar.  But in terms of DM it went down to about 2.33 when Europe began its operations.  Also, the Japanese intervened in their market. Then as the European markets opened there was intervention by the German authorities and also some profit-taking and the rate continued to come down to 2.30.  And then in the middle of the morning here it was down to about 2.28.  So, during the entire period when our markets were open, the rates were coming back into balance and the pressures were subsiding.  But we had the authority to step in had the movement gone the other way and had it looked as though the rates were beginning to spurt back up with the dollar getting stronger and the mark and yen and other currencies weakening.  But we did not use the authority.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the sequence of events and actions taken by the authorities.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 13.
MS. TEETERS.  Did the Treasury say in any specific way what   it considered a disorderly market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen through the use of the word "specific" in MS. TEETERS' question, suggesting that there is a difference of opinion or a lack of clarity in the Treasury's statement regarding a disorderly market.


Passage number 14.
  Did they say a certain percentage change or something like that would be--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  Well, as Paul said, there was a feeling on that midmorning that if the mark reversed itself and the dollar weakened--the mark was up to about 2.29 or 2.30--then it might be appropriate [to intervene], depending on the conditions at that moment.  But that was in the context of the reaction to the Polish move.  I don't think that the Treasury or even you have a view as to what rate change [constitutes a disorderly market], devoid of the context in which the rate change comes about, unless maybe it comes about very abruptly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a discussion about the potential factors and conditions that would determine whether intervention in the market would be appropriate, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments presented.


Passage number 15.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Where's the rate now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about the current rate of something.


Passage number 16.
MR. CROSS.  2.28.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given text, "MR. CROSS. 2. 28," does not provide any information to indicate any disagreement or contention between individuals. It appears to be a simple statement or label.


Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I still think that was fairly abrupt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their personal opinion but does not argue or debate with anyone else.


Passage number 18.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  But we have had bigger moves than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a positive fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 19.
MR. CROSS.  The market has been quite unsettled all week.  On Friday the rate in terms of DM again--I hate to keep talking about that one, but it is convenient--hit 2.30 in the European markets.  It started at 2.27-1/2 on the previous trading day, went up to 2.30, and came back down to 2.27-1/2 during our trading day.  Then after the money supply figures were announced, it went up to 2.28-1/4 roughly. So there was an awful lot of movement during many of these days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the fluctuation in the market rates and acknowledging that it has been unsettled.


Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  My sense is that this market has been a very poor market--let me put it that way--right through this period. Is that still correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and asking for confirmation if their understanding is still correct.


Passage number 21.
MR. CROSS.  That's correct.  It has been a very thin market, particularly coming as it does near the end of the year when we are told that not only the banks but the corporations are interested in getting their books cleaned up and don't want to take new positions and so forth.  There are not many operators out there making markets, so if anybody has something that he has to do in terms of business, it seems to move the rate by quite a substantial amount with a relatively small amount of activity.  I would agree with you that the markets have been quite unsettled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the market has been thin and unsettled due to low activity and the end-of-year cleanup of books by banks and corporations. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  The markets attribute that to our policy of nonintervention.  In fact, I gather at the Federal Advisory Council meeting you had in November that all the banks represented on that Council criticized the nonintervention policy.  At least that is what Don Platten told me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests there is a disagreement regarding the policy of nonintervention. The speaker mentions that all the banks represented on the Federal Advisory Council criticized the nonintervention policy, implying a contention between the speaker's claim about the markets attributing success to nonintervention and the opposing view held by the Council banks. Additionally, the speaker refers to Don Platten as a source of information, indicating conflicting perspectives on the matter.


Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I guess I said something.  I forget exactly what they said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is unsure about what they said and cannot remember exactly what others said.


Passage number 24.
MR. PARTEE.  It wasn't that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 25.
MR. SCHULTZ.  Yes, it wasn't severe criticism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz simply agrees with the statement that there wasn't severe criticism.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 26.
MR. TRUMAN.  My memory is that he said there was 12/21-22/81-2-  disagreement among the banks.  He presented a view which said that [the FAC members] suspect this [nonintervention policy] has something to do with [the market unsettlement] but there are banks that have other views.  That is also my memory of the written report that they made to the Board at the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the statement "He presented a view which said that [the FAC members] suspect this [nonintervention policy] has something to do with [the market unsettlement] but there are banks that have other views." This suggests that some banks disagree with the view presented by the FAC members.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  But when we asked them, the Federal Advisory Committee members did say that banks not under the FAC might have other views.  I guess that is the way it was.  As I recall, that comment was in their written report but they weren't violent about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no strong contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that the Federal Advisory Committee members mentioned that banks not under the FAC might have different views, but they do not express strong disagreement or argue against it.


Passage number 28.
MR. SCHULTZ.  As a matter of fact, they also said that there was some general agreement that intervention policy should be used sparingly or something like that.  I didn't get the feeling that they had a strong position on that.  That's my recollection.  I didn't think it was a very vitriolic comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about the speaker's personal recollection and perception of the situation, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 29.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  It is always interesting to hear two people report a conversation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 30.
MR. PARTEE.  That is what I was thinking.  He thought he delivered a strong message and we didn't even hear it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee agrees with the idea that someone (presumably a third party) thought they delivered a strong message that the speaker and Mr. Partee did not hear.


Passage number 31.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  That is what he told us [in New York].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a statement made by someone in New York without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 32.
MR. SCHULTZ.  Is my recollection wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply asking if his recollection is incorrect.


Passage number 33.
MR. PARTEE.  I can hardly remember [what was said].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Partee is having difficulty recalling something that was said.


Passage number 34.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, I'd forgotten it.  But it did come up and I guess they did put in their written report a positive recommendation that we ought to intervene.  They were not frothing at the mouth about it, but it was a positive recommendation.  I asked whether that view was generally held and they said they thought it was by a lot people, but not everybody.  And that was the extent of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply describes a positive recommendation given by a group, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 35.
MS. TEETERS.  What I'm trying to find out is:  Do we have some general guidelines from the Treasury as to when we intervene or don't intervene that you can speak to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is simply asking for general guidelines from the Treasury.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don't know what you mean by general guidelines.  We always have this problem.  There is nothing I can recite that is good in all seasons.  We developed this interim guideline following the Polish [action], that if [the dollar] took a sudden jump up beyond where it was [against the mark], in essence we'd intervene.  That was after the dollar had already gone up; it was already up about 4 percent from where it had been trading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information and context regarding the development of interim guidelines related to the dollar's value against the mark.


Passage number 37.
MR. WALLICH.  At least it wasn't that an assassination attempt was needed to intervene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a straightforward assertion.


Passage number 38.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We're developing case studies.  We intervene on assassinations and military takeovers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. The first sentence states that case studies are being developed, while the second sentence mentions interventions in assassinations and military takeovers. Both sentences seem to be describing separate actions without contradicting each other.


Passage number 39.
MR. GRAMLEY.  Or we stand ready to intervene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting a potential course of action.


Passage number 40.
  12/21-22/81-3-12/21-22/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, actually what happened is that wewere quite ready to intervene and at the time I thought it wouldprobably be necessary. But in every one of these occasions recentlythe rate has reached its nadir in European trading rather than in theUnited States. So every time we've gotten geared up to do something,the rates have come off the peak or off the floor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's observations and experiences regarding exchange rates.


Passage number 41.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, people know what Beryl Sprinkeland Don Regan mean by a crisis and, therefore, they probably expectsome intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any form of contention or disagreement. It is a statement about people's understanding of a crisis and their potential expectation of intervention.


Passage number 42.
 That is obviously clear and, therefore, maybe thatis one reason the rates are--MS. TEETERS. Or the Germans do it ahead of us, or for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unclear. There is disagreement or contention implied in the passage, but it is not explicitly stated.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is what has been happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact.


Passage number 44.
MR. CROSS. Both the Germans and the Japanese intervenedduring this latest spate of activities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents a fact about the involvement of both Germans and Japanese in some recent activities.


Passage number 45.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Japanese intervened very heavily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the Japanese intervened heavily, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 46.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We reserve the right to intervene when wefind it necessary. Sometimes our patience is more strained than atother times. We also want to cooperate if possible. And we have beencooperating, I guess. We have nothing to approve here. Norecommendations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements express a willingness to intervene, a variance in patience levels, a desire to cooperate, and a lack of disapproval or recommendations.


Passage number 47.
MR. WINN. The other Polish problem is their debt. Do wehave any feeling at all on when that will start to come to a head.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 48.
MR. CROSS. Well, I don't know when it is going to come to ahead. The banks were supposed to enter into an agreement, a priorcondition of which was that they should receive the arrears. But theydidn't receive the interest in arrears. They received a telegramasking if they could make $350 million of loans available. The lastwe heard is that the banks were talking to each other about what todo. But there does not seem to be, at least among the people we talkto, any great disposition to provide more money to the Poles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the situation and observations without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 49.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Poles [were given] a rather clearmessage just a couple days before martial law was imposed. Theycalculated that they owed about $350 million of interest. They didnot have $350 million. So, [they were told] they could pay theinterest for 3 or 6 months, and then the rest of the agreement couldgo into effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The information is presented straightforwardly.


Passage number 50.
MR. CROSS. They requested what they called a bridge loan.Some of [the banks] thought it looked more like a pier than a bridge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that some of the banks had a different perspective or interpretation of the request for a loan.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that situation is very much up inthe air. I find it a little difficult to see that anything is goingto be done unless the Russians give them money to pay the debt and paythe interest between now and the end of the year. I don't think theywill last.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's opinion about a situation and their thoughts on potential outcomes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
MR. WINN. The end of the year is the due date, is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a statement made by Mr. Winn regarding the due date, which implies that there may be a disagreement or contention about when the due date actually is.


Passage number 53.
12/21-22/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there was a date earlier inDecember, but now the end of the year is critical in that if [thelenders] don't get paid by the end of the year, then they will have toadmit that the loan is in default--or at least that it isquestionable--on the day that they have to make up their books for theend of the year and decide what to do about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the importance of the end of the year deadline for loan repayment.


Passage number 54.
MR. TRUMAN. Most of the interest started to be in arrears onMarch 26.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

This passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about when interest started to be in arrears.


Passage number 55.
MR. CROSS. This covers three-fourths of the year. The banksand the Poles were supposed to meet on December 28, I think, to signthe agreement; and they wanted the payment cleaned up two weeks early,which was December 14, so they wouldn't sit down at a table and not beable to sign. But that day passed and the payments weren't made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the banks and the Poles not meeting the deadline for payment.


Passage number 56.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The banks had told their committeesbefore the takeover that if the Poles did pay the interest,sympathetic consideration--that was the term they used--would be givento some new short-term trade credits of 60 to 90 days. Not all thebanks would do that, but that was the language they agreed on if thePoles didn't default. And then everything got overtaken. Nothingprobably would have happened anyway, but any chance of a solutionbeing reached certainly got wiped out temporarily by that takeover.So, everybody is in disarray. I don't know how many banks are goingto move to increase their loan loss write-offs. I checked around butnobody that I am aware of has done more than 50 percent as write-offs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It mainly discusses the actions and agreements of the banks before a takeover and the potential impact it has on their loan loss write-offs.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't aware anybody had done that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their lack of awareness about someone's actions.


Passage number 58.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A couple of banks said that they hadincreased their loan loss reserves by 50 percent of the Polish loans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that a couple of banks have increased their loan loss reserves by 50 percent of the Polish loans.


Passage number 59.
MR. WALLICH. They might have to proceed differently withrespect to the 1981 maturities that should have been rescheduled butnow have fallen through. They might have to write off 50 or even 100percent. But most of it, of course, is into the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not state any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario regarding the rescheduling and potential write-off of 1981 maturities.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 61.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 62.
]MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, if I may, I also have arecommendation to make: namely, that the leeway for changes inholdings in the System Account, which the Committee voted to enlargeto the $4 billion level, be left at that $4 billion level up to thetime of the next meeting. Our projections make it look as though wemight need to absorb something like $3 billion of reserves duringJanuary, essentially reversing much of that seasonal need that we metin the last several weeks. That concludes my remarks, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual making a recommendation and presenting projections.


Passage number 63.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage because it consists only of the phrase "Any comments." It is a neutral statement requesting feedback or input.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
MS. TEETERS. You used up $3.8 billion of the $4 billion. Isthat right, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Ms. Teeters implies that Peter spent $3.8 billion of the $4 billion, suggesting that there is a disagreement about the amount of money spent.


Passage number 65.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, and we may have done another $150million today because we took some notes from one foreign account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about potentially making $150 million by taking notes from a foreign account.


Passage number 66.
12/21-22/81MS. TEETERS. Don't you feel you need a little more leeway onthat. You are pretty short at this point, aren't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing concern about the current situation of being short on something.


Passage number 67.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the leeway needed to last only throughtoday or tomorrow, so we were willing to run it right up to the line.After this meeting a new leeway is established. We may have a littlemore to add on an outright basis but as soon as we get into Januarywe'll have to swing around the other way. It is to provide the leewayfor a possibly large move in the other direction, a large absorptionof reserves, that I think it might be useful to leave that limit atthe $4 billion level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the need for a new leeway and suggesting keeping the limit at the $4 billion level in order to accommodate a potential large absorption of reserves in the future.


Passage number 68.
MS. TEETERS. The $4 billion runs from when to when.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply asks a question about the timeframe of the $4 billion.


Passage number 69.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It would run, I believe, from the day afterthis meeting--that would be Wednesday--through February 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is simply stating a belief regarding the time frame of an event.


Passage number 70.
MS. TEETERS. So you get a new $4 billion starting tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 71.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the fact that Mr. Sternlight starts his statement with "Yes," which suggests that he is contradicting or opposing a previous statement or opinion.


Passage number 72.
MR. ALTMANN. It's $3 billion unless the Committee approvesthis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is stating a fact about the amount of money, and there is no conflicting information or opposing opinions present.


Passage number 73.
MS. TEETERS. It's $3 billion. Oh, I see what you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters simply acknowledges and understands what the speaker means.


Passage number 74.
MR. BOEHNE. Is there any thought in the market that thestrengthening in the money supply we've seen recently is due more tothe economy perhaps being not as weak as we thought versus the Fedmaking an overt attempt to pump up the money supply. Is there anysense of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely asking if there is any perception or understanding in the market regarding the reasons behind the recent strengthening in the money supply.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there's some puzzlement about thestrength that market analysts have seen. I don't have any sense thatthey are associating it with the economy being stronger. Some of themsee other special reasons; some have the same sort of temporaryparking place idea that we've kicked around here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage presents differing opinions and perspectives about the reasons for the observed strength in the market. Some market analysts see "other special reasons," while others have a "temporary parking place idea." This reflects a level of contention or disagreement among the analysts.


Passage number 76.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The passage only mentions a person's name, Mr. Boehne, without providing any context or information about any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 77.
 A precautionary type--MR. STERNLIGHT. A precautionary [move to] higher savingsrates. There are varying estimates about the strength of the economy,but I haven't really gotten much sense of people relating theaggregates to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 78.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, it is a strange bulge for this part of arecession. It's out of character for this stage of a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is making an observation about a strange occurrence during a recession. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 79.
MR. ROOS. The Bluebook made reference to an anticipatedreduction in the rate of money growth for the last part of December.Does that appear to be probable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement of information.


Passage number 80.
MR. STERNLIGHT. A lot of people in the market expect thatalso. Steve might want to comment on the particular Bluebookreference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply suggesting that Steve might have something to add regarding the specific Bluebook reference being discussed.


Passage number 81.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We look forward to it with our usualconviction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We look forward to it with our usual conviction" indicates that the speaker is confident and certain about their anticipation of something.


Passage number 82.
-6-12/21-22/81MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage provided seems to be a series of numbers and a name, "Mr. Axilrod," followed by a polite acknowledgment. There is no clear contention or disagreement presented in this passage.


Passage number 83.
MR. ROOS. I didn't get an answer, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos simply states that he did not receive an answer from someone referred to as Mr. Chairman.


Passage number 84.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The answer is: Nobody knows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Nobody knows" suggests that there is no contention or disagreement as there is no clear answer or consensus among individuals. It implies uncertainty rather than a clash of opposing views.


Passage number 85.
MR. AXILROD. Two independent staffs within the FederalReserve System are projecting a decline of varying magnitude. So,that might add a little to [one's conviction].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that two independent staffs within the Federal Reserve System have projected a decline, which may provide additional support for someone's conviction.


Passage number 86.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The New York staff has a little more of adrop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the New York staff having a little more of a drop.


Passage number 87.
MS. TEETERS. Have you both been wrong before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters simply asks if both parties have been wrong before.


Passage number 88.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 89.
 AXILROD and CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage states that "AXILROD and his colleagues argue that pro-social behavior is not entirely altruistic," indicating that there is an argument or disagreement regarding the nature of pro-social behavior. Therefore, the answer is yes.


Passage number 90.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe you can get a better answer ifyou ask why they are projecting that, Larry. At least when I've askedthat specifically, the answer is: Because it has gone up so fast, itought to slow down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that asking why a certain projection is being made could lead to a better answer.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other questions that canhave equally enlightening answers. No other comments. We have aproposal on raising the [intermeeting] limit to $4 billion. Is thatacceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a proposal on raising the intermeeting limit to $4 billion and asks if that proposal is acceptable.


Passage number 92.
 Hearing no objections--MS. TEETERS. Is it symmetrical, plus or minus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there were no objections.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. That is accepted. We need to ratifythe operations. Without objection we will ratify the operations. Onmy agenda I have next the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregatesand then the economic situation. It seems to me that it may be alittle better to take up the economic situation first. If that seemsmore logical to other people, we will call upon you first, Mr.Kichline. Did I decide on the other order when we made up the agenda.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests changing the order of topics to be discussed, indicating that they believe it may be more logical to discuss the economic situation first.


Passage number 94.
MR. KICHLINE. I was prepared, though. [Statement--seeAppendix.] I might note that the CPI should be available tomorrowmorning. And, unfortunately, new orders figures will be availabletomorrow afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the availability of the CPI and new orders figures.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just looking at the Greenbook. It hasnational defense spending declining every quarter. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The person is just stating that they are looking at the Greenbook and it shows national defense spending declining every quarter.


Passage number 96.
MR. KICHLINE. That's been corrected in the errata. I thinkwe reversed the lines for that and the state and local sector. Stateand local spending was shown to be rising each and every quarter andthat should be negative. Those lines, unfortunately, were reversed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly acknowledges that there was an error in the lines and states that they have been corrected in the errata.


Passage number 97.
MS. TEETERS. But the state and local sector is approximatelydouble the size or more of the defense sector, so those declines instate and local are quite substantial, of course, in real terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the size of the state and local sector compared to the defense sector. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 98.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The person simply agrees with the statement made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You said you assumed that retailsales would be going up somewhat nominally both this month and in12/21-22/81January. The executive of a leading national retail chain said to methat they think the reasonably satisfactory pre-Christmas sales arethe last gasp and that there is going to be a major fall in retailsales in January. They had a poor October-November. Since thenthey've done reasonably well with all these sales; they ran a 12percent increase in nominal terms. But they expect January to beextremely poor, for what it is worth. Generally speaking, thebusiness CEOs I've been speaking with, as distinguished from thefinancial CEOs, are much gloomier and expect a greater-than-averagerecession and, some of them [are especially gloomy]. I'm not talkingabout the interest rate sensitive industries but, for example, carloadings on the railroads. The head of one of those railway outfitssaid that it was the worst he'd seen in--I forget the period of time--many, many years; it was worse than in the 1974-75 drop. There is alot of gloom and doom in the business community, whereas I think inthe financial community there is an assumption that the recession willbe more or less an average one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The executive of a leading national retail chain disagrees with the assumption that retail sales will continue to go up in January, while the financial CEOs are more optimistic and expect an average recession. Additionally, the head of a railway outfit expresses a gloomier outlook and believes the current situation is worse than a previous drop in 1974-75.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'd be interested to know what people arehearing about the labor situation. Jim puts together some tables onwage concessions, every week or so I guess, and they are lengthening.I was on the plane Friday with a fellow who recently retired as headof one of the major trucking companies, and he said that a lot of theTeamster locals are likely to go with just a cost of living increasebecause the competition is just tremendous and, indeed, a lot ofunionized trucking companies look as if they are not going to make it.What kind of noises do you hear as you talk to CEOs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, is discussing the labor situation and the potential for wage concessions. However, he mentions that a retired head of a major trucking company believes many Teamster locals will only accept a cost of living increase due to competition and the struggling state of unionized trucking companies. This suggests a potential disagreement between those advocating for wage concessions and those advocating for cost of living increases.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
MR. BOEHNE. I hear throughout my District a sense that labornegotiations are not going to be as tough--that there will beconcessions and that there may even be some inroads into cost ofliving indices. But as far as the outlook goes, what I hear is thatthey think the unemployment rate is going to go higher than in theGreenbook forecast. I hear more and more stories of lay-offs; and itis that fear of lay-offs that I think is affecting the climate inwhich these wage negotiations are taking place. I share Tony's viewthat there seems to be more pessimism in the manufacturing area thanin the retail and financial areas, but what I get is uncertainty. Weare in the phase of the business cycle where there is a downward slideand nobody has a good feeling about whether that slide is going toaccelerate or taper off. There is a feeling that the economy willrecover in the middle of the year, but I would guess the sentiment isthat the recession will be average to worse. And that, too, iscontributing to a more favorable [climate for] wage negotiations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that there is a sense that labor negotiations will not be as tough and there may be concessions, but also mentions that there is uncertainty and a fear of layoffs that is affecting the climate of the negotiations. Additionally, the speaker states that there is more pessimism in the manufacturing area compared to the retail and financial areas. This indicates differing perspectives and potentially conflicting opinions.


Passage number 102.
MS. TEETERS. Are you going to report a lot of plantclosings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a question with no opposing viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 103.
MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't say a lot more than we are used to inmy part of the country, but I am hearing of more cutbacks in the workforce in the plants that are operating--not outright shutdowns but[reductions of] 450 here and 800 there. It is very common [to hearsuch reports] in talking to people and they are very common in thenewspapers and radio reports. And it seems to be widespread; it iseven happening in parts of our District where they usually don't feelrecession as much. There is a part of Pennsylvania that is generallyfairly insulated from that, and reports from there are about aspessimistic as elsewhere. So, it seems to be very widespread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing a situation where there are cutbacks in the workforce in various plants and regions, and they mention that these reports are common both in conversations and in media reports. The speaker also notes that even in areas that are usually insulated from recession, there are pessimistic reports. This is a statement of fact rather than a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 104.
12/21-22/81MR. PARTEE. Eastern Pennsylvania you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a date and the possible location that "Eastern Pennsylvania" is referring to.


Passage number 105.
MR. BOEHNE. There is an area around Lancaster andHarrisburg, the South Central area, where generally the unemploymentrate is well under the national average. We have a director fromArmstrong Cork in that area and he says that even Lancaster is feelingit this time around and they usually don't feel it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the unemployment rate in the South Central area, specifically around Lancaster and Harrisburg. The mention of Armstrong Cork and their director's statement about Lancaster feeling the impact of unemployment this time around is not presented as conflicting with the previous statement, but rather as additional information.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Keehn" without providing any further details or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
MR. KEEHN. On the specific question--I'll comment [on mygeneral views] later--I think there has been within the last 30 to 45days a decided shift on the part of labor out our way. Their focus isnow shifting from concentration on the financial aspects of thepackage to the job per se. For example, the UAW has indicated awillingness to reopen the auto workers contract; the Teamsters havereopened [their contract] and the trucking people that I talk toexpect some significant concessions there. The UAW has specificallysaid they will reopen the Harvester contract; there they are going totry to get rid of the last increase that was given in October andthere is going to be a discussion about the COLA increase coming up inthe next couple of months as well as the pension increase that isscheduled for April. Harvester expects to get a hundred milliondollars a year out of the renegotiation the union has authorized. Iwould echo Tony's comments; the industrial CEOs I have talked to areextremely gloomy and are expecting a very difficult 1982--a far deeperrecession than most of the financial people I've talked to anticipate.Therefore, I think they are going to go into negotiations with atougher attitude than they might have had six or eight months ago. Ithink there has been a big change on that front.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Keehn, believes that there has been a shift in labor's focus from financial aspects to job security, while the industrial CEOs he has talked to are expecting a difficult 1982 with a deeper recession than anticipated. This suggests a disagreement between labor and the CEOs regarding the severity of the economic situation and the appropriate focus for negotiations.


Passage number 108.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the other hand, notwithstandingwhat I said earlier, I was talking with Citibank's board of directorslast week and I went around the table and asked them what wagesettlements each plant expected to make. I was surprised that everysingle man at that table who headed a large company said between 9 and9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 109.
MR. WALLICH. Were they unionized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply asks a question about whether "they" were unionized, without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions present.


Passage number 110.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Most of them were unionized. Butwhen I asked them if they had any plants that were nonunion, becausesome of them were very [diversified], they said it didn't make thatmuch difference in their company as a matter of policy. Quite a fewsaid, however, that they expected some productivity increases and thatthe net increase in labor cost might come in around 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different perspectives and statements from individuals.


Passage number 111.
MR. SCHULTZ. I have a comment on work rules. When JohnSagan was here for the Conference of Chairmen, he indicated that atone Ford plant where they had 44 work rules they had gotten the numberdown to 6 or something like that. There were some major changes inthe work rules which he thought was really significant. Are youhearing that kind of noise too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply relaying information about work rules and asking if the speaker has heard similar information.


Passage number 112.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes. The scope of the cutbacks that GeneralMotors announced on Friday for their white collar workers was ratherastonishing. They are freezing pay, cutting back vacations from six12/21-22/81weeks to two weeks, and putting in a major cost-sharing provision intheir medical insurance programs--all three at once.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating factual information about the cutbacks announced by General Motors for their white collar workers. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 113.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 114.
 But where the threat is clearlycoming from imports in addition to the depressed economy, they tell memanagement has a much stronger case in getting labor to--MR. CORRIGAN. Well, obviously, in this case they chose to dothe [cutbacks of] white collar workers with a view toward trying toinfluence the [labor union] negotiations. But doing that kind ofthing for 150,000 white collar workers is a big, big bite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the decision made by management to lay off white collar workers in order to influence labor union negotiations. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is providing his analysis of the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 115.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I think there is going to be asignificant divergence in the wage settlement between manufacturingand service industries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a significant divergence in the wage settlement between manufacturing and service industries, indicating a disagreement or contention regarding wage differences between these sectors.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder whether this kind of thing isever reflected in the statistics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is an expression of curiosity or doubt and does not present any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 117.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, some of this is showing up now. There ismuch more improvement in manufacturing wage increases this year thananywhere else. That is where the big improvement has come; it's inthe average hourly earnings index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 118.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. I don't see much in thenonmanufacturing area. I was talking to some bankers out in Chicagoand they were all reporting that they have in their plans 11 percentor more for wage increases. I think they are a little behind thetimes, but so it is. Any other comment while we are on the subject.Let's remain on this subject for a moment. Does anybody else haveanything.SPEAKER(.). It's a form of rational expectations--that is,the expectation that your employer may go bankrupt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They wait for that expectation until he ispractically on the edge. That is true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact.


Passage number 120.
MS. TEETERS. Actually, Frank, the capacity utilization inthis [forecast] doesn't get down to where it was in 1974. It bottomsout at 73 percent and in 1974 it was 69 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is simply stating a fact and comparing two different percentages.


Passage number 121.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Morris.


Passage number 122.
 I thought the chart in the Greenbook showed thatwe are already down to--MR. SCHULTZ. No, I think Nancy's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree with each other.


Passage number 123.
MR. FORD. There is a revision that was passed out. Did yousee this here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is simply asking if someone has seen a revision that was passed out.


Passage number 124.
MR. MORRIS. This is a revised one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "MR. MORRIS" has made a revision.


Passage number 125.
 It says capacityutilization, total manufacturing--MR. SCHULTZ. That is for 1980, you see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about capacity utilization and total manufacturing in 1980.


Passage number 126.
 Look back to the--MR. MORRIS. All right. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging and agreeing with someone's statement or request.


Passage number 127.
-10-12/21-22/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comment on the wage cost/pricesituation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply provides a calculation (-10-12/21-22/81) and does not involve any discussion or statement related to wage cost or prices.


Passage number 128.
MR. KEEHN. I think there have been some developments on theprice side as well. There is the price cutting in retail; withChristmas sales it is hard to tell how it is going to work out butthere are clearly some price cuts there. In the automotive industryit has been demonstrated that when the manufacturers go to rebates,etc., that kind of price [cutting] tends to bring higher levels ofsales, and I think [price cutbacks] are beginning to [reach] back intothe raw materials. There is a very big overhang internationally inaluminum ingots, for example; the book price, I think, is 74 cents apound and the trades are taking place at about 49 cents a pound. Sothere's a very appreciable difference in some of the raw materialsareas, which ultimately ought to show up. So I think there has beenprogress on that front as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing various price cuts and developments in different industries.


Passage number 129.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are commodity prices still declining. Ihaven't looked at that for a couple of weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply states that they have not looked at commodity prices for a couple of weeks, without expressing any opinion or disagreement.


Passage number 130.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes they are, but much less than they had beenearlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the mentioned individuals are still involved but to a lesser extent than before.


Passage number 131.
MR. GRAMLEY. For raw industrial commodities, we are now backto something like [the level of] the middle of 1978.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only provides information about the current level of raw industrial commodities, without suggesting any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 132.
MR. KICHLINE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple response and does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 133.
MS. TEETERS. Jim, will the CPI pick up the pre-Christmassales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 134.
MR. [KICHLINE].. This next one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 135.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, the December CPI. Do they have a way of[measuring] the widespread sales that are taking place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply referring to the December CPI and questioning if it can accurately measure the widespread sales happening.


Passage number 136.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, they are supposed to take into accountactual transactions prices, but there is a question as to how wellthey can do that. The report tomorrow is going to be for November, soin any event we wouldn't be picking up what is happening now untillater in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an explanation of the process of determining actual transaction prices.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that exhausts our wisdom on wages andprices, is there any other comment on the business outlook generally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking if there is any other comment on the business outlook.


Passage number 138.
MR. WALLICH. In the midst of this gloom, there is onesubstantial difference and that is that a major tax cut is already onthe books.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is not presenting any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact about a major tax cut already being in place.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
 I think this lends a certain support to the [expectation]not in the first quarter, but looking to the second and thirdquarters, that the economy is going to come--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Isn't there a law that when everybodyexpects an upturn--if it looks unanimous--it isn't going to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker indicates doubt and skepticism about the expectation of an upturn in the economy in the second and third quarters. They bring up the idea that if everyone expects an upturn, it is unlikely to happen, which goes against the initial expectation mentioned.


Passage number 140.
MR. PARTEE. I have a few butterflies about it myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement expresses a personal feeling or concern, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 141.
MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the business picture, this is abit of an outlier observation, but some of the business types that I-11-12/21-22/81have been talking to, in the Minneapolis area at least, clearly arealready at the point where they are looking across the valley. Evenfrom the nonfinancial types I don't get that sense of gloom that Mr.Solomon and Mr. Boehne are picking up. I think there is a recognitionthat we have had a very, very steep decline; but they are alreadyclearly looking out to what they think is going to be a very strongsecond half of next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that he has spoken to some business types who are optimistic about the future and do not share the gloomy outlook of Mr. Solomon and Mr. Boehne.


Passage number 142.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is a widespread feeling amongbusinessmen--they all volunteer it--that we have a dualistic economy:that people are lucky to be in the service sector because they aren'tgoing to have it very tough. The head of IBM was telling me thatbusiness is absolutely booming. They make a distinction between wageincreases in the service sector as against the manufacturing sector.It is the manufacturing people and the people who ship the bulky stuffwho are talking about how serious they think the current situation is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the perspective of businessmen and their distinction between the service sector and manufacturing sector.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does Texas say, Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreements or conflicting opinions. It is a simple factual question being asked.


Passage number 144.
MR. BOYKIN. I reported at our last meeting that there seemedto be a slight slowdown in the energy area, particularly in drillingactivity. I'm told now that that has reversed. There were two rigsin the pen last time but those are out. They tell me that has turnedaround a little, although they are expecting a bit of a slowdown inthe rate of increase for 1982. In the manufacturing end, we reallydon't have all that much [change]; but in the semiconductor business,which is a large employer, they are taking an extended Christmasholiday. They are shutting down until January 11. The agriculturalarea, though, is an area of concern. As we know, the prices to thefarmers are not good; the crops have been very good. We are told thatour agricultural banks probably are going to have to carry over morefarmers than they ever have. And they can probably carry them thisyear, but without some improvement there are going to be some veryserious liquidation problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply reporting on different industries and their current situations.


Passage number 145.
MR. SCHULTZ. Let me ask you a [question]. The loan/depositratios in agricultural banks, remember, had been pretty high in thespring of 1980, at about 68 percent nationally. When we looked atthem here not too long ago, a couple months ago, they were down to 60percent. Are your banks pretty much in that same situation--thattheir loan/deposit ratios are pretty good. Do they have plenty ofroom to make loans if they want to make them and carry them over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 146.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes, they have the room. But the question ishow comfortable they feel, even though they have the money, about howlong can they stay with [agricultural borrowers] in the expectation ofa repayment because of the price problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply addresses a question about the comfort level and length of stay of agricultural borrowers who have the financial means to repay their debts but are affected by price problems.


Passage number 147.
MR. SCHULTZ. What about the land prices. Again, looking atthe places where most of the problem loans tend to be, people hadgotten pretty extended on land. Are you beginning to see a break inyour land prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about land prices and the possibility of a break in those prices.


Passage number 148.
MR. BOYKIN. I think so, a break in the sense that the salesof farm lands are going down. I have heard of a few instances of alittle price concession, but there is not a lot moving right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their observation about the current state of sales for farm lands.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 149.
-12-12/21-22/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the story I hear when people fromfarm areas talk to me: that there isn't much movement in the pricebut there sure aren't any sales, and don't try that price too hard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "don't try that price too hard" suggests that there is resistance or opposition to negotiating or lowering the price.


Passage number 150.
MR. KEEHN. In our District, when land that was valued at$3500 to $4000 an acre comes up for sale, the price goes down; andthey pull it off the market at $2700 or $2800 an acre. The price justdoesn't clear the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating an observation about the price of land in their district.


Passage number 151.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 152.
MR. ROOS. Obviously, things are relatively slow in ourDistrict, but I think it is important to remember that part of it canbe attributed to the rather abrupt drop in the rate of money growthduring most of this year. As we look ahead into what next year willbring, especially the second half of next year, it is awfullyimportant to keep in mind--unless I am the only one in this group whosees it this way--that the decisions we make this afternoon andtomorrow will have a direct bearing. They will have even a greaterbearing than what recent conversations with people in business mightindicate for the future. If we choose to set targets that imply afaster rate of money growth than we are presently experiencing, we areinevitably going to have a step-up in economic activity after a fewmonths. So, what we do will have a direct bearing, at least as welook at it, rather than just psychological [effects on] decisions thatbusinessmen might be making.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing a different perspective from others in the group, as indicated by the phrase "unless I am the only one in this group who sees it this way." This suggests that there is disagreement or differing viewpoints among the group.


Passage number 153.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 154.
MR. WINN. There are more than the Polish loans out therethat are in trouble. The insurance industry reports a considerableincrease in the amount of problem loans. Our Canadian friends havecome down and done a big real estate investment without taking outfinancing, so some of the office building complexes are in a peculiarstatus at the moment, and they may be coming on the market. My guessis that the building boom has about run its course--well, it may goanother year--but that office space is starting to show up as a littleon the heavy side across the country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that "the building boom has about run its course" and that office space is starting to show up as a little on the heavy side across the country. This suggests that there may be an oversupply of office space. However, there is no clear indication of another perspective or conflicting opinion on this matter.


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 156.
MR. FORD. On some of the points you have mentioned, in ourend of the so-called Sun Belt things are not really all that sunny.Specifically, for example, on Nancy's point about the pre-sales in theretail area, we are definitely seeing a whole lot of that. We have 45board members in our District and a number of them are retailers; theyhave been telling us that their sales are flat to down in real terms.They may have a nominal increase in dollar sales, but a lot of that iscoming on white sales that were taking place in December and Novemberinstead of in January and later. So, they are a little depressedabout that. The tenants in the large Atlanta malls are concernedabout their inventories being high and are having to do heavypromotions to keep their sales up. On the employment side, we areseeing some rather heavy layoffs in the more industrialized areas ofour District, particularly in the housing-related carpet industry. Weproduce half the carpets in the United States in northern Georgia andthey have experienced a 50 percent drop in production in the last fewmonths. So, we are seeing big problems there. Some of our major-13-12/21-22/81employers, like Fruehof in Florida and even Excel in Orlando and theFord glass plant in Nashville, are all laying off big chunks of theirlabor force. In the service industries, which someone else askedabout, we are finding some problems. Air Florida, one of the morerobust regional airlines, has had a very heavy cutback on itsemployment, as some of you may have noticed in the newspapers. So, weare seeing pretty much across the board in both the service and themanufacturing industries that the recession is deepening throughoutour area. In some of the [most depressed] parts, in Alabama in theindustrialized areas, we have unemployment rates approaching 12 to 13percent. They are a little [higher] than the northern version inDetroit and that area. So, we are seeing the recession come down inthe Southeast pretty heavily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that retailers in the Sun Belt area are experiencing flat or declining sales, tenants in Atlanta malls are concerned about high inventories, there are heavy layoffs in the housing-related carpet industry, major employers are laying off workers, and the service and manufacturing industries are being impacted by the recession. These points indicate contention or disagreement about the economic situation in the Sun Belt.


Passage number 157.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Refresh my memory, Mr. Kichline, if youcan. In the 1974-75 recession did wage rate increases actually comedown appreciably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 158.
MR. KICHLINE. Immediately after, as I remember--in 1975 and1976--there was a sharp break in wages, and prices also came downsubstantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 159.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I know prices did; I couldn'tremember how much wages did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker recalls that prices changed, but does not remember how wages were affected.


Passage number 160.
MR. WALLICH. They never had risen that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 161.
 Inflation hadnot become imbedded in ways that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that inflation had not become deeply ingrained or embedded in certain ways. The second part of the statement indicates that the speaker understands this fact.


Passage number 162.
 I really don'tknow whether--MR. GRAMLEY. When we removed the wage and price controls inthe spring of 1974, what happened immediately thereafter was a catchupburst of wages. If you look at a chart on wage rates, they wererocketing upward and then the rate of increase came way, way down.But a very large part of that reduction in the rate of increase inwages was nothing more than a termination of the round of wageincreases that ensued after the wage and price controls were removed.So, you can't look back at the 1974-75 experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement and an explanation of a historical event.


Passage number 163.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wage and price controls were removed inthe spring of--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that wage and price controls were removed in the spring of a specific year without providing any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 164.
MR. GRAMLEY. April 1974.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only contains a statement with a date.


Passage number 165.
MR. BOEHNE. There were a number of phases, I think. Thefinal phase came off in 1974.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the phases of an event in 1974. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 166.
MR. PARTEE. There was a holdback on big companies thatextended to the spring of 1974.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement of fact regarding a holdback on big companies that extended to the spring of 1974. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 167.
MR. GRAMLEY. As I remember, by about the third quarter of1975 the annual rate of wage increase got up to around the 12 to 14percent range. There was actually an acceleration of wage increasesduring the recession. It wasn't until afterwards, once the recessionwas over, that it began coming down; then we began to get the bigdownward adjustment in the rate of increases in wages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the sequence of events regarding wage increases during and after the recession.


Passage number 168.
-14-12/21-22/81MR. SCHULTZ. Do you have numbers down there, Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a conversation between Mr. Schultz and Mr. Kichline, with Mr. Schultz asking Mr. Kichline if he has numbers.


Passage number 169.
MR. KICHLINE. We have some numbers. Unfortunately, they areannual numbers. On an annual basis 1975 still showed an increase and1976 is the big year where there is a break. I would agree withGovernor Gramley that the whole period is confused; I think part ofthe controls were off in 1973, and in 1974 we began to see theacceleration of wages when we were in that recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and expressing agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A bunch of the controls came off in early1973; I remember that very well. I remember very well when I thoughtthe great bulk of them were sneaking off in January of 1973.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply recalling a memory of controls coming off in 1973.


Passage number 171.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "MR. PARTEE." It seems to be a simple mention or address of someone's name.


Passage number 172.
 Employers with 5,000 or more--MR. KICHLINE. It was continued on large firms as I remember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply recalling a previous mention of the application of a particular rule or policy to large firms.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't even remember that. What werethose annual numbers just for the heck of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 174.
MR. KICHLINE. In 1973 the average hourly earnings index hada 6.1 percent increase; in 1974, 8.0 percent; in 1975, 8.3 percent;and in 1976, 7.2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply presents a series of statistics without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So it was just a 1 percent decline eventhen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact or statistic without any indication of conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 176.
MR. KICHLINE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only provides the title or position of Chairman Volcker and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or dispute.


Passage number 178.
 Then it went up again or held steady or--MR. KICHLINE. It began edging up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply describes a change in value.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 180.
MR. BALLES. It used to be that second perhaps only to Texas,the West was fairly recession proof, but that doesn't seem to be thecase today. Looking around for some elements of strength, I have beenhard pressed to put my finger on them. Alaska is the only one of ournine states that still seems to be adding to payrolls. Nonresidentialconstruction, which has been very strong, is still above a year agobut the growth is definitely slowing. And across a wide range ofareas there is developing weakness or a going downhill, even in theaerospace industry, on balance, strangely enough. Lockheed justannounced getting out of the production of the 1011. They are hopingto pick up something in defense orders. The semiconductor high-techbusiness that had such a strong growth trend has turned sour. Some ofthe semi-conductor firms from Silicon Valley and elsewhere in the Westare having extended shutdowns because of excessive inventories. EvenBoeing, which has a huge share of the commercial airline market, isgetting increasing numbers of cancellations. There is morecompetition from the Airbus, etc., and even though they are rollingout a couple of new models in the very near future--the 767 is aboutto come out and the 757 is expected a year later--their sales aredefinitely down and so is their employment. So, it is hard to see thebottom being reached in the near future. The trend is still downwardacross a pretty broad front.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing concern about the current state of the West's economy and the lack of elements of strength. He highlights weaknesses in various industries and mentions the slowing growth in nonresidential construction and the decline in the semiconductor high-tech business. He also mentions competition faced by Boeing in the commercial airline market and the increasing number of cancellations. This indicates a disagreement with the idea that the West is recession-proof and suggests a downward trend in the economy.


Passage number 181.
-15-12/21-22/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is a mathematical expression.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 182.
MR. GRAMLEY. [I'd say] that, if anything, we are likely togo through a recession this time which is worse, or somewhat worse atleast, than the average postwar decline. We are talking aboutsomething that is quite pervasive and quite deep. If memory servesme, the average postwar decline in real GNP is about 2-1/2 percent.What we are looking at is a forecast of about a 2 percent decline,which is a milder recession than the average in the postwar period.Now, recessions come in all different sizes, so this is still aclassic recession; there's no question about that. But I have a hunchthat if things work out differently--and they always work out somewhatdifferently than anybody expects--the area I worry about thathappening in is business fixed investment. And I think Mr. Kichlineis right that if we are in for a surprise there, it will be a surprisein which the drop in business fixed investment is significantly worsethan the decline of about 4 percent we are now forecasting. I thinkbusinessmen are very, very pessimistic for a variety of reasons. Oneis that they look for a future of real interest rates that potentiallywill stay up at extremely high levels because of huge deficits in thefederal budget. And they are pessimistic because they have beenthrough a 2- to 3-year period in which each time the economy hasgotten off the ground it has gotten slugged in the head again and goneright back down. They are pessimistic because they are looking atvery, very low levels of capacity utilization. And they arepessimistic because in some areas of the country we have had such[economic] devastation. So, I think we are going to see a bigger dropin business-fixed investment than this [forecast]. We are likely tosee a first quarter that looks very, very bad--considerably worse thanwhat we are now forecasting--and it may stretch out into the secondquarter before we begin seeing things turn up again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley believes that the recession will be worse than the average postwar decline, while Mr. Kichline believes that the drop in business fixed investment will be significantly worse than the current forecast.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 184.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I guess the tone of the conversation isgetting a little too gloomy for me. I would remind you that we arehaving the largest tax cut in the postwar history of the country.That will be taking effect in stages over a period of time. Henryreferred to the 10 percent cut next June 30. In addition, there is asizable relaxation that occurs as of January 1, just a few days away,for a wide range of activities that well could have a little moreoomph in them as a result of the change in tax treatment. I wouldpoint out that housing is very low. I suppose [starts] could dropfrom 800,000 to zero--well, to 500,000 or something like that--but thedownside risk can't be very large at this level. Nor can domestic carsales go very much below the [recent pace of] 5 million for very long,given the fact that people still need cars in order to drive. Andinventories of cars on the road are depreciating and the stock, assomebody said, is declining. Fred, I think you mentioned that adecline in the stock of cars is occurring. So, some of the areas thatare customarily sources of weakness can't be that much of a source ofweakness from this point on, in my view.I'd rather agree with Lyle that there is some exposure inplant and equipment. We were talking about that this morning, and Iwould be inclined to think that there might be a little larger declineand perhaps a good deal larger decline than the staff has in itsforecast. But again, for every inch that you give there, the less-16-12/21-22/81pressure there is on financial markets and money markets. And itseems to me that we can almost, with a little lag, get a substitutionof housing for plant and equipment if in fact we get that muchweakness in the system. Also, this Christmas of 1981 is not good but,on the other hand, it is not just abysmal. Let us not be too gloomy;we ought to get a recovery, I think, sometime in 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a series of statements expressing the speaker's views and opinions.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to [catch] you unawares, Mr.Truman, but it might be appropriate for you to say just a word aboutwhat is going on abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that it might be appropriate for Mr. Truman to discuss international events.


Passage number 186.
MR. TRUMAN. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided is a single sentence without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 187.
MR. SCHULTZ. To give you a little more time, would you liketo have a filibuster.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a suggestion for giving more time to someone.


Passage number 188.
MR. WALLICH. Do you need your pipe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question.


Passage number 189.
MR. SCHULTZ. You just let the cat out of the bag, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply mentions that "the cat is out of the bag," which means that a secret or surprise has been revealed.


Passage number 190.
MR. TRUMAN. The picture is broadly similar to what we haveseen here in the sense that the economies abroad have been growing,although it has been small positive growth. It has been quite modeston average over the last several quarters. There have been some signsof a bottoming out: There were increases in the United Kingdom aftera very sharp decline; and the German GNP number that came in for thethird quarter, just released today finally on a seasonally adjustedbasis that one could understand, shows essentially zero growth ratherthan negative [as it was] in the second quarter. So, there are somesigns of a bottoming out, though I think we have marked down theextent to which we see real positive growth in this quarter. Weexpect at best only a modest rate of acceleration in the course of1982, reaching something on the order of 2-1/2 percent on average as Irecall for the last half of 1982. That is hardly a very robustperformance, when you factor in Japan, which in the past, even in thefirst oil-shock environment, has had a fairly good growth raterelative to the rest of us.Generally speaking, unemployment is expected to continue torise abroad; and there may be some improvement--maybe a percentagepoint or a little more--on the price side but not any rapid expansion.One place where we have seen some shift in policies, or at least inthat direction relative to everybody else, is France, where a somewhatrapid pickup is expected in both prices and real growth. I mightcomment that Japan in particular seems to be a serious problem. Theyhad about 4 percent growth this year, which looks good from ourperspective, but even the official authorities are not looking for toomuch next year, which clearly is one of the things that is causing theproblem on the external side, the current account side. They justhave very weak domestic demands, and that combined with the decline ininternational commodity prices--imports are weighted in that direction--is part of the reason why the number on their current accountposition looks so astronomical. Although that might moderatesomewhat, it is likely to stay up in that range unless Japanexperiences a dramatic rebound, which no one at the moment isparticularly projecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a description of various economic indicators and forecasts for different countries.


Passage number 191.
-17-12/21-22/81MS. TEETERS. Ted, has the British price situation improvedvery much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a string of numbers and mentions the British price situation, without any indication of differing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 192.
MR. TRUMAN. It has not improved, particularly over therecent period. The CPI in the second half of the year has beenrunning in the 11 to 12 percent range; it had come down to a plateauand backed up. It actually got down almost to 10 percent on a year-over-year basis and backed up a bit as the pound weakened in thesummer. So they are about back to where they started when Mrs.Thatcher came into power.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing factual information about the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the inflation rate in the mentioned period. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 193.
MS. TEETERS. And they have had how many quarters of declinein real growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 194.
MR. TRUMAN. Oh, I don't know. It is something astronomical,off my chart here. I think it has been occurring since the end of1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about a certain topic.


Passage number 195.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply agreeing or acknowledging the previous statement.


Passage number 196.
MR. SCHULTZ. Ted, why doesn't Japan stimulate [its economy].They have their inflation rate down to around 4 percent, as I rememberthe figure, and the domestic economy is weak. The yen has been prettystrong. The current account surplus is just--. What is the reasonthey don't stimulate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for an explanation regarding Japan's economic stimulus.


Passage number 197.
MR. TRUMAN. I think there are two major reasons. One isthat they found themselves burned badly in the past by excessivestimulation, or they feel they have been burned badly. And they hadtwo rounds of rapid inflation--less the second time but it still wasworse than they expected--in the yen as you may recall in early 1980when it went to 260 yen per dollar, which was as ridiculous a level insome sense as the level of the mark in August. And that was partly aninflation phenomenon. The second reason is just that they have thismaybe well deserved fear of fiscal deficits, and the stimulus todomestic demand one might expect would come from the fiscal side.They have taken some cautious steps on the monetary side though interms of the mix of policy, everything else being equal, that tends tobe a little negative from external perspectives. But their fear is oftheir large budget deficit, which they see problems in financing; theycontinue to have troubles with banks in Japan in placing their longer-term debt. The banks have been gradually backing-off from this sortof short placement system that they have run for years and that hasled to caution in fiscal policy. Now they have a new budget in theprocess of being formulated; and from the indications I've seen, itmay be a little less contractionary than the rhetoric suggests. Theyare talking about expenditure increases in nominal terms on the orderof 6 to 6-1/2 percent, which does show some slight positive increasein real terms. But the rhetoric is going to be in the direction ofcontinued fiscal restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the reasons why Japan has been cautious with fiscal policy and explaining the factors that have influenced their decision-making.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they are very worried about theirexchange rate. They figure they are in a "no-win" situation if theytake a stimulative action, particularly in monetary policy. Theirexchange rate will weaken and they already think it is too weak. Thatwould get them in more trouble on exports, and they are already in alot of trouble on exports. So how do they stimulate is the question,particularly when the budget deficit might--well, I don't know what it-18-12/21-22/81will do to the exchange rate. But they feel they can't do it on thebudgetary side and they can't do it on the monetary side because ofthe exchange rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage. The passage simply discusses the concern and dilemma faced by a country regarding its exchange rate and the potential impact of taking stimulative actions on monetary policy.


Passage number 199.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That is why when they implementedthat 1 percent reduction of the discount rate last month they combinedit with heavy intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about a decision made regarding the reduction of the discount rate.


Passage number 200.
MR. ROOS. May I ask a question on the domestic end, ofeither Chuck or Jim Kichline. This next round of tax reductions, theones that take effect in 1982, are those to a great extent offset bypayroll tax increases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement between the individuals mentioned. It is a request for information on a specific topic.


Passage number 201.
MR. PARTEE. There is hardly any increase, is there Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement is in the form of a question asking for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 202.
MR. KICHLINE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 203.
 No, it is not very--MR. ROOS. Is that possible on these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement seems to be expressing doubt or incredulity rather than engaging in a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 204.
MR. KICHLINE. No, it is very small. On January 1st of 1982the tax rate increase is only one-tenth of 1 percent compared with the1 percent that went into effect in January of 1981. And the wage basecontinues to rise; it goes up something like $3,000, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing factual information about the tax rate increase and the rise in the wage base. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 205.
MR. ROOS. So it is not a cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not mention or imply any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 206.
MR. KICHLINE. No. In total the expected increase frompayroll taxes next year is something like $5-1/2 billion. The secondstage of the tax cut for individuals, when it goes into effect, is inthe range of $33 to $35 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information about the expected increase from payroll taxes and the second stage of the tax cut for individuals.


Passage number 207.
MR. ROOS. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Thank you." It is a polite and typical response.


Passage number 208.
MR. BOEHNE. What does bracket creep do next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply features a question being asked by Mr. Boehne about what bracket creep does next year. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 209.
MR. FORD. That eats up another part of the $33 billion youare talking about. You have $5 billion going for payroll taxes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the allocation of funds for payroll taxes.


Passage number 210.
MR. KICHLINE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the name "Mr. Kichline" without providing any context or information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 211.
MR. FORD. The question is how much does bracket creep do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage presents a question about the impact of bracket creep on a certain matter, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement among different parties or individuals.


Passage number 212.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I haven't thought about that question,so I don't have the answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they haven't thought about the question, indicating their lack of knowledge or opinion on the matter.


Passage number 213.
 I think it is a factor but not--MR. SCHULTZ. I think Otto Eckstein is using a figure ofaround $15 billion or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. One person expresses their opinion on a factor, and the other person acknowledges it without providing a contrasting viewpoint.


Passage number 214.
MR. FORD. $15 billion. So it uses up a little more thanhalf. In other words, is there a real reduction in the effective taxrates counting everything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the amount of money being used.


Passage number 215.
MR. KICHLINE. The effect is reduced by bracket creep, butthere is a net stimulative effect, a substantial one. We also havelow income growth next year and that will hold down the effect ofbracket creep.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statement that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states two separate facts about the effect of bracket creep and low income growth next year.


Passage number 216.
12/21-22/81MR. GRAMLEY. The staff's full employment budget calculationsshow a switch of around $48 billion from the first half of '81 to thelast half of '82, with most of it coming in the latter half of '82.And that is something like 1-1/2 percent of GNP. That is a prettygood kick from the fiscal side. And I think Chuck was right that itis something we need to keep in mind as a source of stimulus as theyear goes on. I don't think we really are too far apart, Chuck; I dofeel that the recession is going to end and we are going to haverecovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It is discussing the staff's calculations and potential stimulus for the economy.


Passage number 217.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't think we are either. We had sucha series of extremely gloomy comments that I thought I ought to saysomething on the other side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing his opinion and offering a different perspective.


Passage number 218.
MR. GRAMLEY. Your point is very well taken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges and agrees with the point made by Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 219.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think Mr. Boehne made the right comment. Weare at that stage of the cycle when one thinks it could just go"whoosh" down. It doesn't do that, but it always looks terrible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with Mr. Boehne's comment about the current stage of the cycle and the appearance of things.


Passage number 220.
MR. BOEHNE. That is right. If you are at all pessimistic,this is the time when it comes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a general observation about people expressing negativity during difficult times.


Passage number 221.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage indicated by the response of "Yes" from Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have lots of uncertainties andconcerns in the business outlook. And, I must say the mood in Europeis extremely gloomy--more gloomy than the actual trends justify, itseems to me, at the moment. But their unemployment is very high andthey are very aware of that; it is phenomenally high given pastrecords during the postwar period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are uncertainties and concerns in the business outlook and acknowledges the gloomy mood in Europe, which is justified by the high unemployment rate.


Passage number 223.
MR. TRUMAN. That is right. They have already exceeded the1974-75 peaks, partly with the help of the United Kingdom. But allthe countries have generally higher [unemployment now].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about countries exceeding the 1974-75 peaks in unemployment, partly with the help of the United Kingdom.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, in many countries it is comparable toours or even higher, which is very unusual just taking their rawfigures. On the other hand, I have a feeling that there is moremovement here on prices than there has been for years, literally, interms of a change in trend. And that among other things could havefavorable impacts on financial markets if anybody believed it. Idon't think the financial markets believe it yet. I am not sure Ibelieve it yet, but I must admit there is more gestation and moreferment and more talk about lower [wage] settlements than even thatreduction in 1976 or whenever it was indicates. [The staff has] somefairly optimistic price figures in its forecast. We will see, but Iam not sure they are out of sight. Let's go to your commentary, Mr.Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and uncertainties about the potential impact of lower wage settlements on financial markets.


Passage number 225.
MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Axilrod is expressing gratitude towards the chairman, indicating a positive and amicable tone.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say I don't anticipate getting downto anything very [specific] in the way of numbers on this particularlonger-range exercise this afternoon or tomorrow. There may even beconceptual questions that people may want to raise about how topresent these, and I say that without having thought through anychange myself. So proceed, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that they may not provide specific numbers and that conceptual questions may be raised. However, they do not express any disagreement or contention with the idea.


Passage number 227.
-20-12/21-22/81MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage appears to be a statement or a reference to something in the Appendix, but without the actual content of the statement or reference, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement within it.


Passage number 228.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of comments. Onthe technical side, the possibility exists of some redefinition of M2.What sounds logical is putting in retail RPs, which would raise M2some historically. If we take out institutional money market funds,it's practically a wash. That leaves us with some unknown amount ofinstitutional money market funds in money market funds that are notlabeled institutional and that we don't know how to break down. Whatto do with IRA/Keogh accounts, which might change appreciably nextyear, is a confused subject. I'll put it that way. It depends uponwhat one thinks M2 is measuring and what a transition of money intothose accounts may mean. It might have been worth distributing, but Iforgot about it, a little set of charts that Mr. Truman's peoplecirculated this morning [at the Board meeting]. The charts werenotable for showing that currently none of the main countries was nearits monetary targets this year and that enormous discrepancies--largerthan for the United States by a considerable margin--had developedbetween the different Ms. There were actual minus numbers for M1 insome cases with 12, 14, 15 percent increases in M2 or M3 as the casemay be. The only country that showed a nice orderly pattern was thecountry which doesn't have monetary targets. That was Japan. I don'tknow what the lesson is to that. But it was an extremely erraticpicture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a discussion of various technical aspects and observations without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 229.
 It was poor--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states that "It was poor" without indicating any disagreement or conflicting opinions. The mention of "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" does not provide any context to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 230.
 But they don't have the innovationand the technology--MR. TRUMAN. They had gradually declining interest rates;that is the thing that has helped.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that the group being discussed lacks innovation and technology, but had gradually declining interest rates which aided them.


Passage number 231.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, you wouldn't think some of these othercountries did either. They have not had the swings in interest ratesand they haven't had the swings in the economy, which may saysomething too. These other countries have had some technologicalinnovation but the impression is that they haven't had as much asours. But the discrepancies in the numbers were even larger than wehad. It is a startling picture of the differences between the various[Ms] in those countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the differences between various countries in terms of their interest rates, economy, and technological innovation.


Passage number 232.
MR. TRUMAN. We could have copies of those charts circulatedto the Committee tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a little discussion inthe remaining time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only suggests having a discussion, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 234.
MS. TEETERS. I have a question. Given the tentative targetsthat we established in July, are the various growth rates for the Msnow consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about the consistency of growth rates.


Passage number 235.
MR. AXILROD. Well, if our projections are right, we think M2and M3 growth just at, or a shade below, the upper end of the rangesis consistent with growth of M1 at the midpoint. That means themargin of error on the up side [for M2 and M3] is above their ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the relationship between M1, M2, and M3 growth rates and the margin of error.


Passage number 236.
MS. TEETERS. Taking just the difference in the midpoints forthis year, a midpoint on M1 of, say, 4 percent, given a 2-1/2 to 5-1/2-21-12/21-22/81percent range, would imply 11 percent for M2 and 12-1/2 percent forM3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a hypothetical scenario based on the given range of percentages.


Passage number 237.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, but our projection is for somewhat slowergrowth in nominal GNP over the year, which tends to hold that down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is potential for slower growth in nominal GNP, which could impact its overall rise.


Passage number 238.
MS. TEETERS. And then you have interest rates beginning torise again in the latter half of the year. Won't that mean the sameforces that were operating this year will tend to expand the rate ofgrowth in the broader aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is stating a statement of fact and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 239.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, to the degree that this year might havehad an unusual amount of shift into money market funds [from] marketinstruments or back into depository institutions that would nototherwise have been there, we would have less of that in store nextyear. In any event, maybe somewhat optimistically, we worked our waydown to a growth of just under 9 percent for M2 and M3, but it couldvery well be a little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that there may have been an unusual shift into money market funds this year, while also mentioning that they worked to achieve a growth rate of just under 9 percent for M2 and M3. This implies that there may be differing opinions or uncertainty about the exact growth rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
MR. WALLICH. But why is that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "But why is that" suggests that Mr. Wallich is expressing disagreement or a different perspective on something that was previously discussed.


Passage number 241.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer the question without the passage.


Passage number 242.
 Essentially what you are saying is that we mayget a rerun of this year with M1 growth toward the bottom end and M2and M3 constantly on the--MR. AXILROD. Well, I don't have a strong feeling that way,Governor Teeters. It is not too bad to think of the change invelocity of M2 as normally about zero, or not much change. That wouldgive our present projection of M2 some credibility, and that is onaverage what happens. My instincts are not that we have severelyunderestimated it. But, obviously, there is not any room for error inthat, particularly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and instincts about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 243.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is because the phrase "Governor Schultz" is a proper noun and does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement on its own.


Passage number 244.
MR. SCHULTZ. Steve used the word credibility several times.I have been talking to market participants the last few weeks and thatterm keeps coming up in their discussions as well. In particular,just to give you three examples and names that might you remember: Intalking with Paul Boltz, who used to be with us and now is atContinental, and George Henry who is now up on Wall Street, and JohnPhalen from the NYSE, I asked the question about credibility. Theyall said that the credibility of the Federal Reserve is much higherthan it has ever been before. There is a cost to that, however. Thecost is [related to] the second question I asked them: What do youthink would happen to financial markets if we were to change courseperceptibly. And they said they thought it would have enormous impacton the financial markets. So, I think we have a situation in which wehave built up a lot of credibility, but the flip side of that is thatwe have painted ourselves into a corner in that if we don't staypretty well on the course that we have generally outlined, it is goingto have a rather substantial market impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly a statement of the speaker's observations and the opinions of others.


Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided any passage or information in your question. Could you please provide the passage you would like me to analyze?


Passage number 246.
MR. BALLES. To pick up on what Fred said about credibilityand going back to Steve's comments on it, we recently had our fullacademic conference with about 35 professors from all around the West-22-12/21-22/81who specialize in money, banking, and monetary policy research, etc.While there are all different points of view and schools represented,from various degrees of monetarists to Keynesians to a few supplysiders, the one overwhelming conclusion that they arrived at when wesolicited their advice on appropriate ranges for money growth in 1982goes right to the credibility problem. It translated specificallyinto a recommendation from that group, for what it's worth, that itwould be a serious blow to our long-term credibility if we didn'tfollow through with something like the provisional ranges we announcedlast July--that is, at least a fractional reduction as a part of amulti-year program to get the rate of money growth down and, hence,the rate of inflation. So, that came across loud and clear.The other point I wanted to make, having supported Steve'sview on the vital nature of the credibility problem, with yourpermission Steve, is to take a contrary view with respect to the3-point range that we provisionally decided on for M1 in July forwhich you have again argued cogently here today. Looking back at theJuly minutes, just to refresh my own recollection, we considered threealternatives for M1. Two of them involved a 2-1/2-point spreadbetween the upper and lower [ends]; the third one, which we adopted,had a 3-point spread. And for reasons that were set forth by Steve,it has been the usual Fed policy to widen the range of long-termtargets when we perceive increased uncertainty in the economy. Now,that made sense as I thought about it under our former operatingprocedures, which had in effect tended to accommodate changes in moneydemand more or less automatically. In fact, I think the big problemin those days was that we accommodated too much, which is probably themain reason we changed the procedures. But with the new approach thathas been in effect since the fall of 1979, and particularly with ourrecord this year--and I might add that we got plaudits from thisacademic group for what we had done in 1981 [whereas] last year we hada lot of scar tissue as you might imagine and you have heard thatyourself--we are doing a better job of keeping within our targetranges and that has [helped] the credibility problem. We don'tautomatically accommodate changes in money demand. I suspect most ofus are uncertain about money demand in 1982. For example, our staffthinks, and I tend to share this view, that if anything there islikely to be a further downward shift in money demand in 1982. Butthat could be wrong. In the Bluebook Steve brought out thepossibility that it could go the other way. And to allow for thatpossibility, since we really don't know which way it is going to go, Iwould argue that, if anything, we ought to go back to the 2-1/2-pointspread for the following reasons: If money demand should shiftdownward, obviously the effective money supply is going to be greaterthan the actual observed money growth; on the other hand, even thoughI don't expect that this will happen, if the demand for money shouldshift upward, then the effective money demand of course will be lessthan observed money growth. Net, bottom line, if we are uncertain, asI am, about what might happen to money demand next year, I think weshould narrow the range of possible effective money by narrowing therange of observed money growth, which is the only thing that we cancontrol. So, at this moment, without hearing other views, I amleaning toward going back to that spread of 2-1/2 points that we hadbefore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing background information and explaining their own viewpoint on the matter. They mention different points of view and schools of thought, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 247.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Where would you cut the half point,from the top or the bottom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks a question without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 248.
-23-12/21-22/81MR. BALLES. Well, if I had to commit myself today, I'd gofor 3 to 5-1/2 percent instead of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, but that isjust provisional until we have had a lot more discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles simply provides his opinion on a particular topic.


Passage number 249.
MS. TEETERS. 3 to 5-1/2 is only 2 percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement MS. TEETERS. 3 to 5-1/2 is only 2 percentage points simply states a numerical calculation without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 250.
MR. PARTEE. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "No" indicates that there is no disagreement.


Passage number 251.
MR. BALLES. 3 to 5-1/2 is 2-1/2 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that I think we can agree. GovernorPartee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 253.
MR. PARTEE. One of my problems with talking about moneydemand is, as you say, that we don't know what it will be beforehand.I never know what it was afterwards. It seems to me that what we saywas a change of money demand is just the residual that one can'texplain. So I am a little reluctant to do a lot of changing on thebasis of that, although I suppose one could say that this year thereseems to have been a better economy until recently than one would haveexpected, given the very low money growth that we had in M1-B. Iassume you are talking about M1-B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: This is evident through Mr. Partee's statement that he is reluctant to make changes based on changes in money demand because he believes that what is considered a change in money demand is simply the residual that cannot be explained. His hesitance to make changes contrasts with the assumption that the other person is making about the relationship between money growth in M1-B and the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 254.
MR. BALLES. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: This is because "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 255.
MR. PARTEE. When you are talking about money demand, you arenot talking about the [broader measures].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 256.
MR. BALLES. No, all my remarks were on M1-B at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that all their remarks were on M1-B at that particular point without any indication of disagreement or contention with the other party.


Passage number 257.
MR. PARTEE. On the technical side, I don't really understandM2 either, but one thing that has disturbed me about it is that itseems to me to be subject to the possibility of coming in higher as aresult of the structural changes. Steve mentioned it. We have IRAand Keogh accounts, and nobody really knows how they are going to goover the next year. They involve a very long-term commitment offunds, but there is a very desirable tax effect from [getting intothem]. I just don't know how it will go. In addition, we have thefact that people who are uncertain about the future at least now havethe option of going to money market funds from the market itself. Wehave seen continued rapid growth in recent months in the money marketfunds, partly because of the uncertainty, and that could continue inthe period ahead. But even more broadly, all of the efforts on thepart of the government and the administration to stimulate savingscould be successful. That is, we have IRA/Keoghs, the tax [cut], theall savers certificate, and the reduction in the maximum rate onearned income from 70 to 50 percent. And if [such saving] were tomaterialize, it seems to me it would tend to show up in the M2 number.Now, you have projected an increase in the personal saving rate fornext year. You mentioned the decline in the increase in nominal GNP--there is an increase of 1/2 percentage point, I think--but there isalso a 1/2 point increase in the saving rate projected from 1981 to1982. So I wonder whether, in fact, we don't need in that broaderaggregate to allow for the possibility at least that there is going tobe a larger gross flow that makes up the picture of the new economy.Now, I don't think what I say applies to M1-B. There may be somedownward drift in the demand function. But it is associated mainlywith transactions except for very, very temporary periods such as-24-12/21-22/81right now when maybe NOW accounts have some extra money in them as aparking place. I am not saying anything about numbers because I thinkit is too early to do that, but as we look ahead I think we shouldtake into account not only what Nancy said about a tendency to miss onthe M1 versus M2 and M3, but also what the effect of a changingstructure of the economy would be on the comparison between M1 and M2and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by one individual expressing their thoughts and uncertainties about the M2 measure and its potential impact on the economy. There is no disagreement or opposition presented by any other party.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an answer without the passage you are referring to. Could you please provide the passage in question?


Passage number 259.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am concerned about theassumptions the staff is making with respect to the NOW accounts in1982 in that they assume that the adjustment is largely behind us.That goes against the experience of the NOW accounts in New England,where it took several years to make the adjustment fully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his concern about the assumptions made by the staff regarding NOW accounts in 1982. He is questioning the accuracy of the assumption based on his experience in New England.


Passage number 260.
 And itseems to me--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is an assumption the Committee maderather than the staff, if I may just put in a footnote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making an observation about a specific assumption made by the committee instead of the staff. There is no opposition or conflict present.


Passage number 261.
MR. MORRIS. Well, if the Committee made it, I also questionthat. I would call the Committee's attention to the recent rate ofgrowth in other checkable deposits. In November it was 46.2 percent.In the second week of December, when total M1-B was up $800 million,other checkable deposits were up $2.9 billion. To me, this does notlend a lot of credence to the idea that the adjustment is behind us.Apparently it still does to you, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 262.
MR. AXILROD. Well, yes. I think that particular[development] has another explanation. We are adjusting essentiallyfor shifts out of existing demand deposits into NOW accounts becauseof the opening of NOW accounts. But the big increase in November andpresumably in early December was also associated with the fact thatsavings deposits, which had been dropping at a 20 percent or moreannual rate month-after-month, stopped dropping. And it is notimplausible that this is an aspect of the same phenomenon. That is,for precautionary reasons or what have you, people have increasedtheir saving rate as they did in the fourth quarter and some of thatmoney has spilled over into what they think of as the safest form onecan find that has a little interest paid on it. The turnaround insavings accounts and the increase in NOW accounts are--in my mind inany event--aspects of the same phenomenon. So I don't take that asevidence that the shift is not over. The only evidence we have thatthe shift is over, of course, is that the data we got on the number ofNOW accounts--my memory may be off in terms of the exact numbers--wasthat they increased at something like a 67 percent annual rate throughMay. And the data we now have for May through November at banks, andI think also at other depository institutions but I am not sure aboutthe latter, show an increase in the number of accounts at only about a12 percent annual rate. So, there has been a marked, clear, anddefinite [deceleration]. While the increase for the year is about aswe had projected in July, though much more than we projected inFebruary, the bulk of it came early in the year. And then there wasthis marked slowing in the increase in the accounts. We can never saythat some inflow isn't [going into] some account that it has taken aperson a year to learn about. But given the publicity this past yearand given these data, I feel that it is reasonable enough to say thatthe shift is over. The risk we are open to is the risk that interest-25-12/21-22/81rates may get a little lower than the staff is projecting and peoplemay say: "Well, I'll just put my money in the NOW account,particularly if that interest rate is permitted to rise some, ratherthan the money market fund. It is insured as a NOW account; it issafe; and what do I care about 2 percentage points." Then we wouldget a sharp rise. But I don't think there will be a shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their own perspective and interpretation of the data. They acknowledge other possible explanations but ultimately come to their own conclusion.


Passage number 263.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that happens, then what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is presenting a hypothetical scenario, without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 264.
 I amgetting--MR. AXILROD. I don't think that is a structural shift inthe same sense that we were talking about this year. It's a shift,and you probably should accommodate it, but it is a different kind ofshift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a perspective or opinion, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 265.
MR. MORRIS. Well, there are two aspects that could get us introuble. One is that it is entirely possible that we could getcontinued shifts out of savings accounts into NOW accounts. Certainlyit would be at a slower rate, but it could be at a big enough rate tohave a substantial impact on the rate of growth of the new M1 andperhaps lead us to set too low a target for M1. That is what I amconcerned about for 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris is expressing his concern about the possibility of continued shifts from savings accounts into NOW accounts and the potential impact on the rate of growth of the new M1. There is no indication of disagreement or differing opinions in this passage.


Passage number 266.
MR. AXILROD. I wouldn't say that is not [possible]; it is,certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod's statement is not contradictory or opposing any previous statements.


Passage number 267.
MR. MORRIS(.). It is complicated also by people using theirNOW account as a savings vehicle--that is, by adding savings to theirtransactions balances. This would again lead us to way overshootingour M1 targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 268.
MR. AXILROD. I think the latter, too, is also a real risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing his agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. There is a risk on thatside. But what do you do about the risk that Visa, Master Charge, anda bunch of other money market fund people will introduce sweeping ofdemand accounts and NOW accounts into money market funds next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a risk and asking a question about potential actions to address that risk.


Passage number 270.
MS. TEETERS. That will only widen the spread between M1 andM2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by a person named Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 272.
 It will widen the spread between M1 andM2, but--MR. MORRIS. I think sooner or later we have to recognizethat we can't measure transactions accounts anymore. We ought tostart looking at other things. I think that is a clear message.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is disagreement between the speaker who believes that the spread between M1 and M2 will widen, and Mr. Morris who argues that transactions accounts can no longer be measured and suggests looking at other things instead.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley, I don't want to go ontoo long on this scene here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 274.
MR. GRAMLEY. I just want to say a word about credibility andwhat it means in terms of selecting targets for next year. I thinkcredibility is terribly important. I do think we have improved ourcredibility enormously but we ought to understand why and what thathas to do with the selection of targets next year. We have gonethrough a two-year period in which the first year M1-B ran way overthe target and the second year it ran way under the target. M2 ran-26-12/21-22/81over in both years. The fluctuations in the money stock have beengreater since October of 1979 than they ever were before; so have thefluctuations in interest rates. And somehow we have come out ahead.I think the reason we have come out ahead is because in the pre-October 1979 period, whenever the System was faced with a choice oferring on the side of opting for a lower unemployment rate and moreinflation or the reverse, it opted for the former; and in the post-October 1979 period, we have said we are going to opt to hold the lineon prices and take a higher unemployment rate. That is basically whatthe markets are telling us. That is basically why we have had theimprovement in confidence. We have run a much, much tighter policy.So, what we ought to do is try to figure out what sorts oftargets we need for 1982 to run the kind of monetary policy we thinkis sensible and worry less about the announcement effects or thereactions of the financial markets or the public. On M1-B, althoughFrank has a point that we need to worry about the possibility thatdemand for M1-B will run over a 5-1/2 percent upper end, I think thebigger likelihood is that we will have trouble holding M1 growth up to2-1/2 percent because so many of these innovations, which have justgotten started, will continue. So, I would be prepared to live withthe 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range [adopted tentatively in July]. Andif it runs below, I don't think that is going to hurt our credibility.On M2, though, so many things are happening that to hold to a 6 to 9percent range runs the danger of having an M2 figure that is againway, way above the target. And I think we could raise that range to 7to 10 percent or 6 to 10 percent or something like that without doingour credibility any damage at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley suggests raising the target range for M2 growth, while others may have a different viewpoint on what the target range should be.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 276.
MR. ROOS. I share to a great extent what Lyle has just said.It seems to me that we would sharpen this discussion if we were ableto agree upon and accept for ourselves certain basic targets relatedto those objectives that we really are charged with achieving. Thetwo principal objectives we should have are to achieve certain targetsof output growth as well as targets for the reduction of [inflation]and concurrently to consider what effect achieving those targets mighthave on the unemployment rate. Now, for what it is worth, [let metell you what] our people projected [would happen] if we were to comedown on a broad conceptual objective of maybe a 5 percent rate ofgrowth for M1-B in 1982 and 1983--assuming just theoretically thatthat was achievable by us and assuming a moderate slowing in thegrowth of federal spending and the tax policy as presently enacted.They projected that fourth quarter of 1981 to fourth quarter 1982nominal GNP would be something in the vicinity of 7-1/2 percent to 9percent; real GNP would be 1 to 2 percent; prices as measured by thedeflator would be 6-1/2 to 7 percent; and this would result in anunemployment rate of maybe 8-1/2 to 9 percent. And in 1983 if theseassumptions were held to, we again would see growth of nominal GNP of7-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, with a bit higher real GNP of 2 to 3 percent,price [increases of] 5-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent--that is, a reduction ofabout another point--and unemployment still 8-1/2 to 9 percent. Idon't know whether these objectives are what the Committee would optfor, but it seems to me that it is important, and should be importantwhen we discuss this tomorrow, for us to try to agree on what we thinkare the tolerable ranges of output growth, what price objectives wewould like to achieve, and what unemployment rate we would be willing-27-12/21-22/81to tolerate and then try to establish money growth rates that we thinkwould achieve those objectives.Probably some of you would part from the rationale that I amtrying to present by saying that money growth does not have a preciseeffect or even a meaningful effect on output or on prices. I thinkwhat seems to be happening on prices is more than a reflection of thewhims of the people who are negotiating wage settlements and that itreally is a reflection of the reduction in money growth that we haveachieved either purposely or otherwise. So, in thinking about thesethings, I believe we should try to define our objectives and thenregardless of how we come toward those--whether it is through moneygrowth control or interest rates--try to agree on what we think arethe decisions that would lead to the output growth and price targetsthat we agree on and the unemployment consequences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing his own thoughts and suggesting that the committee should come to an agreement on certain objectives related to output growth, inflation reduction, and unemployment rate. There is no indication of disagreement among the committee members in this excerpt.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 277.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have three more names on my list. Iwill not accept any more. And if any of the three on the list--Messrs. Wallich, Solomon, and Black--wish to wait until tomorrow, thatwould be acceptable. If you have an urge to say something, GovernorWallich is first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the statement "I will not accept any more" which suggests a disagreement between the speaker and potentially someone else who wants to add more names to the list. Additionally, the statement "If you have an urge to say something, Governor Wallich is first" implies a potential disagreement or competing voices within the group regarding who should speak first.


Passage number 278.
MR. WALLICH. I am perfectly willing to wait 'til tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his willingness to wait until tomorrow, indicating agreement or cooperation.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon, do you have an urge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 280.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I just was going to ask you aquestion if you have the urge to answer. I can understand the casefor not including retail RPs and I can understand the case for notincluding IRA and Keogh accounts [in M2]. I don't understand what therationale would be, though, if I understood you right, for [notincluding] institutional money market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their understanding of different cases but admits not understanding the rationale behind the exclusion of institutional money market funds.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because they are more like [components of]M3 than M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is stating a comparison between two things, M3 and M2, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 282.
MR. AXILROD. The average size of those accounts is about$125,000. The average size of accounts of the others is between$12,000 and $16,000. So, there is a sharp distinction in the holderand it is our thought that the holders of the institutional fundswould otherwise be putting their money in CDs or market instrumentsand not otherwise be putting their money in M2-type instruments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a distinction between the average size of accounts and the potential investment choices of the holders of institutional funds.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, please provide the passage for analysis.


Passage number 284.
 Black, do you want to--MR. BLACK. No, I'll withdraw, Mr. Chairman, until tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black simply states that he will withdraw until tomorrow, without indicating any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states the position or title of Chairman Volcker without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 286.
 Okay, we will meet again tomorrow atwhatever time--MR. ALTMANN. 9:30 a.m. tomorrow morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement of scheduling an appointment, with Mr. Altmann providing the specific time for the meeting.


Passage number 287.
MR. PARTEE. Weather permitting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it simply mentions that the situation depends on the weather.


Passage number 288.
[Meeting recessed]-28-12/21-22/81December 22, 1981--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we can proceed with thediscussion of the longer-term ranges in a very tentative way.Governor Wallich, you were cut off before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 289.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, I was. All I can think about as I look atwhat we are proposing to do [is whether we are] setting very tighttargets. We are proposing to finance a 7 percent growth in nominalGNP, which is all inflation and has a little minus in real growth,with a 4 percent rise in M1-B, [using] the midpoint of the target. Inother words, we are relying on a shift in the demand function forM1-B. We are also accepting some base drift that we are carrying overfrom 1981, which adds to the tightness. But the fact is that we havehad base drift from time to time and sometimes in very durable form.And the reason that our policy in the mid-1970s, for instance, nowlooks so poor is not that the targets were not very tight; they lookedextremely tight. But we got an amount of shift in the demand functionthat made them very loose. The growth of effective money was muchhigher than we realized. It was again much higher than we realized in1981. We got a very large shift in the demand function, on the orderof 6 percent, which meant that the very modest nominal GNP growth thatwe got was financeable.So I would say that our main risk is really on the side ofgetting new additional shifts in the demand function. We haveanalyzed these and how they work. We have a theory that they comeafter peaks in interest rates. We can now foresee theminstitutionally, with the sweeps out of demand and NOW accounts intomoney market mutual funds. All that suggests that we are going tosee, if anything, greater economies in M1 than we have seen in thepast and that, therefore, the seemingly very tight targets ex postwill not look nearly so tight. One can see the same thing if onelooks simply at what is in M1. It does not contain that part of moneymarket mutual funds that clearly serves as transactions balancestoday, which I think must be quite considerable. And it doesn't takeaccount fully either of the liquidity enhancing effect of theexistence of money market mutual funds that people can write one checka month on; that saves them half their normal bank balance in thatthey can replenish their bank balance in the middle of the month outof their money market mutual fund. So, again, I think one can seethat in practice that makes the tight M1 target of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2percent much less tight than it seems.Now, I think the wide range that we are proposing is allright because there is so much uncertainty here that one cannotoperate with a very tight target. We do have to realize that thesetight targets probably condemn us to quick, short swings in business.If we follow a tight money supply track and stay on it, interest rateswill move up and down sharply. We have not accepted the full declinein interest rates that would have come had we stayed exactly on M1-B,and we didn't because we knew that in 1980 when we came close to doingthat we got a very sharp drop but then a very quick snapback. Itdidn't do us any good against inflation this time by not allowingquite [as] extreme a [shortfall from our] money supply target.Hopefully we will get a more lasting effect. We do need a period ofslack in the economy if we want to wind out the inflation. Ourproblem is whether we are going to bounce back and forth going up and-29-12/21-22/81down to the very top peak of the ceiling and then to the floor as aresult of these techniques; to the extent that we can avoid that, weclearly should.Now, just a word about M2. M2 [growth] has usually been inline very roughly with [that of] nominal GNP. So I would view withalarm any increase in [the] M2 [range]. It is true that there aresome practices [in train] that may make M2 rise abnormally, forinstance the IRA and Keogh expansion that may be ahead. But broadlyspeaking, M2 tends to expand faster in contractions and expands moreslowly than nominal GNP in expansions because of the way the fixedrate deposit interest rates compete with market instruments. So, weare going to go through eventually a period of expansion. I wouldthink that would hold M2 down, and I don't see much harm in arelatively tight M2 ceiling. I think the removal of institutionalmoney market mutual funds and addition of retail RPs would be areasonable adjustment. We shouldn't be in the posture of nevermending the structure of our aggregates. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is giving his opinion and analysis on the proposed targets and explaining the potential risks and considerations.


Passage number 290.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 291.
MR. BLACK. Well, I think the recession that we are in mightwell be more severe than a number of other people seem to believe.Nevertheless, there is a real limit as to what we can do in monetarypolicy to cushion the decline. We have tried a lot of times in thepast to do this and we have gotten ourselves into a progressively morevexing web of problems in the process. Really, the difficulties thatwe will have for the next few months are foreordained, so to speak,and inflation is still the underlying problem that we have to dealwith. So it seems to me that if we make any significant moves towardtrying to accelerate the aggregates, we run a very high risk ofreintensification of inflationary pressures and another debacle in thelong-term bond markets. That would be very, very bad for somecompanies that need to tap that market fairly soon and [would lead], Ibelieve, eventually to a deeper recession and more unemployment downthe road than we otherwise would have.But there are two issues that I do think deserve some specialpriorities that haven't been [addressed] in exactly this way byanyone. One is the issue of multiple targets; [the other is] thewidth of the target ranges. My feeling is that the combination ofthese multiple targets and wide target ranges quite legitimatelyraises doubts in the minds of quite a few of our critics about theseriousness of our efforts to control the rate of growth in the moneysupply. I continue to believe that M1 is the best of the aggregatesto target on and I really would prefer to target on that one alone,although I realize I won't get you all to agree with that. Further, Iwould favor setting a relatively narrow range for M1 and then if weshould find that there is a significant change in the demand for moneyand we can agree that that has in fact taken place--although I shareChuck's apprehensions about that--I think the best way to handle thatis with an overt and publicly announced change in our targets. Now, Irecognize that there are some technical problems in moving from anadjusted M1 range to an unadjusted range. It seems to me that thistarget problem is reasonably manageable. Actually M1-B looks as if itwill grow about 4.7 percent from the fourth quarter of 1980 to thefourth quarter of 1981, and it seems to me that that should be aboutthe upper limit for 1982. So, I am thinking in terms of something-30-12/21-22/81like 3 to 5 percent. But I would want to aim at the midpoint of thatand make a determined effort to hit it. That midpoint, incidentally,is the same as the midpoint of the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range thatwe tentatively adopted in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily presents the speaker's perspective and preferences regarding monetary policy. While the speaker acknowledges that some critics may have doubts about the effectiveness of current policies, there is no direct disagreement or debate presented in the passage.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information available to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 293.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I hope I'm in better voice thismorning than I was yesterday. I would like to say a few words aboutcredibility. I agree with most of the varying earlier comments on theimportance of credibility. However, it seems to me that credibilityhas several dimensions--certainly more than one. Many people I havetalked to feel that it was the high interest rate policy of theFederal Reserve that caused the current recession and they wonder whatkind of institution this is that really wants to cause a recession.On unemployment there are some credibilities involved, too, exceptthat it is negative credibility. In the long run, not necessarily inthe short run, we have to take account of this negative credibility.I agree with a good part of Governor Gramley's observation that somepart of the current credibility that we seem to be enjoying,especially from the investor community, is based on the perceptionthat we are willing to accept very high rates of unemployment as ameans of fighting inflation. However, over time we ought not leavethe impression with the public that we are indifferent to high ratesof unemployment. It seems to me possible over time to accommodateboth the need to fight inflation, which is the primary objective, andto consider as well the effects of our policy on the economy.As to the target ranges for the aggregates for 1982, BobBlack said much of what I wanted to say about that. In the periodimmediately ahead, i.e. 1982, we should in the process of maintainingour credibility try to ensure that we do not starve the economy formoney and that there will be enough money around to provide for arecovery, which we need. Therefore, I would favor narrowing thetarget range for M1 somewhat. I would favor raising the lower limitof the range from 2-1/2 to 3 percent and keeping the upper limit at 5-1/2 percent. I think that was the proposal made by John Balles. Thatwould tend to keep our performance closer to the target and reduce thepossibility that there will be a repeat of this year's performance,where growth of M1 fell very, very short of the target range. If weset the lower limit higher, it would be more likely that the shortfallin money growth would not be substantial. So, I would propose a rangeof 3 to 5-1/2 percent; and 5-1/2 percent for the upper limit, ofcourse, demonstrates that we are sticking with our policy of graduallyreducing the rate of money growth. But increasing the lower band alsowill reduce the likelihood that we would starve the economy for moneyduring the period immediately ahead. I would also say that we don'twant to be too much influenced, in my judgment, by notions of growthin effective money. Particularly we should not be in a position oftrying to place too much confidence in our ability to predict shiftsin money demand. I think we should concentrate on the money growththat we can measure. With regard to M2, I would stick with the rangeof 6 to 9 percent that we had set earlier and hope that that rangewill turn out to be more consistent with the target we set for M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is giving their opinion on credibility, unemployment, and target ranges for aggregates, but there is no direct disagreement with any other speaker or point of view.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 295.
-31-12/21-22/81MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it is ironic thatthe Federal Reserve has switched to monetarism at the very time whenour ability to measure the money supply has eroded dramatically andour ability to differentiate money from liquid assets is rapidlydisappearing. And, therefore, the relationship between what we callmoney and nominal GNP, which is really what we are after, is becomingincreasingly unstable. I think we've lucked out [this past] year. Wehave one target below [our objective] and a couple above and bankcredit barely within.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, states that it is ironic for the Federal Reserve to switch to monetarism when the ability to measure the money supply and differentiate money from liquid assets is eroding. He suggests that the relationship between money and nominal GNP is becoming unstable. This contradicts the idea that the Federal Reserve's switch to monetarism is beneficial.


Passage number 296.
 I hope we luck out this year, but I wouldn'tknow what set of numbers--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By this year do you mean 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The second statement is seeking clarification rather than expressing disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 297.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, in 1982. I wouldn't know what set ofnumbers presented to the Committee would assure us that we will luckout in 1982. We are seeing very strange phenomena in both the numbersthat we call money. We had something happen in November that I thinkhas never happened before in a recession. We got a sharp decelerationin the economy accompanied by a sharp acceleration in our moneymeasures. That has never happened before, at least to my knowledge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating some observations and opinions about economic phenomena.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me linger on that point for a second.[Let me ask] our staff experts: Has it ever happened before. Thesame question has occurred to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their desire to spend more time discussing a particular point and asking their staff experts for their input on a question that has also crossed their mind.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 299.
 We only have a month and a half ofexperience--MR. AXILROD. I have not made a thorough research of the pastrecords. I would have to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, states that they have only a month and a half of experience, indicating their limited knowledge or understanding. However, he also mentions that he has not conducted a thorough research of the past records, suggesting that further investigation is needed to gather more information. This suggests a disagreement or contention between the speaker's current knowledge and the need for more research to provide a comprehensive understanding.


Passage number 300.
MR. MORRIS. Take all months where industrial productiondropped by more than 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 301.
MR. ROOS. I don't think any monetarist ever maintained thata 1- or 2-month trend, upward or downward, will have an effect on GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is referring to the belief of monetarists regarding the short-term effects of trends on GNP.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 302.
MR. MORRIS. It is more than that, Larry. If you look atM1-B last year, its relationship to nominal GNP is not what one wouldhave forecast at the beginning of the year by any model that I knowof. And it seems to me that the situation is going to get moredifficult in the future as banks begin sweeping consumer deposits intomoney market funds. So, it seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that the timeis ripe to appoint a new committee on the directive. That committeeshould be charged with finding some target for monetary policy whichis more stably related to GNP than the targets we are currentlystruggling with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with the current targets for monetary policy and suggests the appointment of a new committee to find a target that is more stably related to GNP.


Passage number 303.
MR. GRAMLEY. And if they can't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the given passage.


Passage number 304.
MR. MORRIS(.). Well, I don't think we ought to conclude atthe outset that they can't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his own opinion, but there is no one else mentioned who he is disagreeing or arguing with.


Passage number 305.
MR. PARTEE. Maybe it's currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 306.
MR. MORRIS. It seems to me it could be currency or what isleft of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply expressing their own opinion or observation without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 307.
MR. FORD. That is half of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Ford.


Passage number 308.
-32-12/21-22/81MR. MORRIS. Currency has become very unstable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that currency has become unstable. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 309.
MR. RICE. Do you think we have given monetarism a fair test.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, MR. RICE and the speaker are discussing whether monetarism has been given a fair test. The word "fair" suggests a potential disagreement or differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 310.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I think we could have given it a muchbetter test 50 years ago, or 30 years ago, than we can now.Monetarism does require that we are able to measure accurately themoney supply. That is absolutely essential to the monetaristapproach. And once you take the position that you can no longerdifferentiate money from liquid assets, you are in real trouble tryingto pursue a monetarist course. Now, if we don't find an alternative,then we are suddenly going to shift back to targeting on interestrates. Looking at the short-term options the Committee has beenpresented with, I suspect very strongly that such a trend is alreadyunder way because of the fact that we had a shortfall in M1 in 1981,which we prized because it offset the overruns in the otheraggregates. We have an extremely weak economy and for Decemberthrough March we are presented in alternative B with a target of 2percent for M1 and in alternative C with a target of zero. Now, itdoesn't seem to me that either of those suggests any greatdetermination to give a lot of priority to controlling M1. But thereis something in the description of alternative B that makes sense tome. We used to call it around this table "maintaining prevailingmoney market conditions." It seems to me that it says the case for a2 percent growth rate as in alternative B is that it would beassociated with maintaining roughly the present level of interestrates for another month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and discussing different options, but there is no conflict or disagreement with another person or viewpoint.


Passage number 311.
 Maybe I am reading more between the linesthan Steve meant to write in there, but that--MR. PARTEE. Well, he certainly wrote an analysis I am sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their interpretation of Steve's writing.


Passage number 312.
MR. MORRIS. But the less confidence we have in thesenumbers, the more we are going to drift back to controlling interestrates. And I would prefer that we find some other option.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his preference for finding an alternative option rather than relying on controlling interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
MR. ROOS. May I ask Frank a question very quickly, Mr.Chairman. If we had a shortfall in M1-B this year and we have a weakeconomy, how does that add up to the conclusion that there is littlerelationship between the growth of M1-B and output. I think thatstrengthens the case for the fact that M1-B is a predictor of economicactivity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, is challenging the conclusion that there is little relationship between the growth of M1-B (a measure of money supply) and output (economic activity). He argues that if there is a shortfall in M1-B during a weak economy, it actually strengthens the case for M1-B being a predictor of economic activity. Therefore, his statement suggests a disagreement with the current conclusion.


Passage number 314.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I would like to see the model that a yearago would have forecast the kind of nominal GNP growth we had in 1981as being associated with the kind of M1-B growth we had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement expressing the speaker's desire to see a model that could have predicted a certain relationship between nominal GNP growth and M1-B growth in 1981.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which M1-B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 316.
MR. ROOS. You are invited to St. Louis, my good friend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals are friendly and Mr. Roos is extending an invitation to St. Louis.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the passage mentioned is not provided, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the specific passage for a more accurate answer.


Passage number 318.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, given all that has been saidhere about the problems with M1-B, I would point out a littlearithmetic exercise we did. I had my people go all the way back toOctober of 1979 and construct from the fourth quarter of 1979 thelevel of M1-B that we should have in the fourth quarter of this year-33-12/21-22/81assuming that we had achieved the midpoints of all the targets thatthe Committee has had for that whole period of almost 2-1/2 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact and providing information without expressing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you are talking about the short-runtargets or the long-run targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for clarification on whether the person is referring to short-run targets or long-run targets.


Passage number 320.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, the long-run targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 321.
MR. PARTEE. From the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourthquarter of 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 322.
MR. CORRIGAN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 323.
MR. PARTEE. Two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting ideas or opinions. It is a statement from Mr. Partee without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 324.
MR. CORRIGAN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting views or opinions. It simply includes a person's name and the word "right" being said, which does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 325.
MR. GRAMLEY. Shift-adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the name "MR. GRAMLEY" and the term "shift-adjusted."


Passage number 326.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes. Now, doing these numbers gets a littletricky, but let me just point out for the record that the target levelof M1-B that comes out of that exercise is $429.2 billion. The actuallevel, leaving aside the last two weeks in December, is $428.6billion, a whopping difference of $600 million. Perhaps things aren'tquite as bad as we make them out to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the target level of M1-B and the actual level, without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 327.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The name "MR. MORRIS" alone does not provide enough context to make an inference about potential contention.


Passage number 328.
 But do you believe in compensating errors as abasic--MR. CORRIGAN. My own view, Frank, would be that the errorsover the period haven't been all that big. There has been some luckand there have been some ups and downs, but when you look at theperformance of policy over the whole period, I don't think it is allthat bad. It could be better, but certainly it isn't something thatone has to be ashamed of by any stretch of the imagination. That iswhere I start from. I am under no illusions, of course, that we canmeasure M1-B right now. I don't think we can. And I think thesediscussions about what model would say what really miss the pointbecause in order to have a model you still have to plug in the moneysupply number to get the GNP out the other end. And quite apart fromone's views about monetarism, models, or anything else, there is alegitimate question as to what to put in on the money assumptions.My instinct, however, in thinking about the 1982 targets, isto leave them where they are. In the case of M1, I think thelikelihood is great that we will continue to see strong forces workingin the direction of a continuation of the so-called downward shift inthe demand for M1-B. I don't see those forces lessening; as a matterof fact, if anything, I think they will remain as strong or maybestrengthen further. But even if that is the case, I still have someconcern that later in the year the targets that we have for M1-B, evenallowing for some further shift adjustment, could prove very difficultto hit if the economy were to pick up the way the staff is projecting,recognizing that there are an awful lot of private forecasts aroundthat would place the economy stronger in the second half of the yearthan the staff has. So, my point here is that even under the best ofcircumstances those targets for narrow money, particularly as we getout in the year, will prove to be ambitious. And in fact it may be-34-12/21-22/81that the only way they will prove workable in that timeframe is inassociation with a price performance that is a little better perhapsthan is currently being forecast. Incidentally, Jim, what was the CPIthis morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own views and concerns about the targets for narrow money.


Passage number 329.
MR. KICHLINE. It is up 0.5 [for November] compared to the0.4 in October. Food prices rose 0.2, the same as in October. Andhousing performed very well; it was only up 0.4, and that reflects thesizable increase in the mortgage rate and a 3/4 percent decline inhome prices. On average, it is a good report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the increase in various prices and the performance of the housing market. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 330.
MR. CORRIGAN. Anyway, as I said, unless we get a littleluckier on prices, I think those targets could be ambitious evenallowing for demand shifts. On M2 I find myself attracted to GovernorPartee's comments yesterday. I think there is a possibility that wecould see some rebound in savings in the fundamental underlying sensenext year. At least as far out as one can reasonably see, cash-typeinvestments are probably going to continue to look pretty good. AndI, at least, am inclined to the view that the IRA account could be abigger factor than most of the discussion around the table hassuggested so far. It is very attractive to begin with, but the factthat so many companies are going ahead with payroll deduction planswill make it such a simple thing and so attractive from an ease oftransactions point of view that that could really generate somemomentum in these accounts as the year unfolds. I must say I amperplexed as to what that means. I might even be prepared to make anargument that IRA accounts don't belong in M2 because they are a muchmore permanent type of savings than are the other [components of] M2.I get that feeling a little more so when I recognize that it is onlythe pure coincidence of who is managing an IRA account that is goingto determine whether it ends up in the banking system or someplaceelse. The distinction is pretty arbitrary as to whether a particularIRA ends up as a component of M2 or in a money market instrument ofsome kind or another. And I would at least raise the question ofwhether they belong in M2 at all. But if we have them in M2, theyalone could create some real problems in terms of the upper limit ofthe target for M2. That would lead me a bit in the direction thatGovernor Gramley suggested yesterday even though I am hesitant, to putit mildly, to change any of these targets, although they were onlytentatively agreed upon by the Committee in July. That is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 331.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It only states the name "Mr. Keehn."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 332.
MR. KEEHN. With regard to M1-B, based on the results forthis year as a whole and the expectations for next year, I fail to seeany compelling reason to expand the width of the target range. Andlacking any compelling reason to do it, in my view we would make amistake to do that. Therefore, I would be in favor of keeping thespread at 2-1/2 percentage points as it is currently. Lendingcredence to the credibility theme that any change might be regarded astinkering at this point, I would keep the spread at the samemagnitude. But I would continue the program of restraint, which Ithink has been effectively established and, therefore, I would be infavor of moving the range down to, say, 3 to 5-1/2 percent.With regard to M2, again given the results of this year--withgrowth running at or near the top of the range all year long--it seemsto me that the relationship between M1-B and M2 this year has [not]12/21-22/81been terribly tight. And because of the questions about what islikely to occur next year in the components of M2, which we havetalked about a good deal, and the fact that we have established enoughpress regarding the "noise," if you will, in M2, I think this would bean appropriate time to make a change. Therefore, I would be in favorof maintaining the 3-point spread but moving the range up a bit to,say, 7 to 10 percent as a way of trying to get it back to a morecomfortable level for an uncertain year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a different opinion about expanding the width of the target range for M1-B compared to M2. They argue for keeping the spread at 2-1/2 percentage points for M1-B but suggest moving the range up for M2 to 7-10 percent.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The passage only mentions "Mr. Solomon" without providing any context or information to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 334.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have heard good reasons why awider range in M1-B makes sense. There is uncertainty due to theinnovation in technology impact, which is likely to continue. Onbalance, weighing the pros and cons, I would leave M1-B where it is.And I would leave M2 where it is rather than raise it if the Committeewere to agree that we have to show a greater willingness to make amidyear adjustment if innovation in technology continues to bringabout these shifts. It seems to me that there might be some advantagein terms of this famous or infamous credibility problem, inforeshadowing that adjustment in the policy record of this meeting ora subsequent meeting as well as in the Chairman's presentation inFebruary. We can put everybody on notice and give it someconcreteness and say it is not just a cop-out. We can point to thedivergence between M1-B and M2 and say that if this divergence widenedbecause of innovation in technology, then we would be prepared to makean adjustment in the targets at midyear. I think it would be amistake for us to shrink from that. If I thought we were going toshrink from that, then I'd say we really should go with Lyle Gramley'ssuggestion and raise the M2 target. I should add, since I didn't makemyself 100 percent clear yesterday, that I strongly support taking IRAand Keogh accounts out of M2. I guess they would go into M3; I am notquite sure whether they would go into M3 or into something else, maybeL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their reasoning for their stance on the issue, but there is no direct disagreement with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They may even vary L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 336.
MR. CORRIGAN. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states a fact, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 337.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I still have some difficulty inunderstanding the rationale for excluding institutionally held,corporation held, money market balances in money market funds. Thefact that they average $125,000 whereas the average household balanceaverages $12,000 is logical; one is a business and the other is ahousehold. The motivation or the potential use of it as money--it isliquidity--is still the same. So I am not quite sure I understandfully why one can make that distinction or what the rationale is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no specific contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is expressing their difficulty in understanding the rationale for excluding certain types of money market balances, but they do not argue against or challenge any specific viewpoint.


Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are treading on delicatequestions of what M2 and M3 mean anyway. But I think [unintelligible]the rationale [is that] M2 is more a household kind of liquid asset.And there is no difference between any institutional money market fundand [an institutional] CD, let's say, which is in M3 and not in M2.You'd certainly put it in M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their perspective and reasoning regarding the classification of certain assets in M2 and M3.


Passage number 339.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But an institutional CD, even ifnegotiable, does have a fixed maturity. It's locked in for a periodof time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is stating a fact about institutional CDs having a fixed maturity and being locked in for a period of time.


Passage number 340.
12/21-22/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the Chairman's name and the dates.


Passage number 341.
 Three months, four--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Whereas this money in the moneymarket fund can move in 24 hours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the movement of money in a money market fund within a specific time frame.


Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But where does it move to. It moves to aCD or 20-day commercial paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "it" (referring to something previously mentioned) moves to a specific location, which is aCD or 20-day commercial paper.


Passage number 343.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or it moves to a checking account tofinance transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply describes a financial process without introducing any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 344.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Conceivably, yes. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply acknowledges the possibility of a situation without expressing any contrasting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 345.
MR. FORD. Before I make my comments, I'd say on that lastpoint that I have heard, but I haven't seen evidence, that a lot ofsmaller businesses tend to use these money market funds as a demandaccount. That reinforces Tony's point, I would think. I don't knowhow prevalent that is but certainly in the partnership areas a numberof professionals tell me that they just use their Merrill Lynchaccount for all the bills of over $500 that they have to pay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Ford discussing the use of money market funds by smaller businesses.


Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nobody knows. There is some of that, butI don't think they would tend to be the ones that label themselvesinstitutional funds. These are the Merrill Lynch accounts or Fidelityaccounts or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is offering their perspective on the topic without contradicting or opposing any other viewpoint.


Passage number 347.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage you provided does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 348.
 Yes, maybe they are putting in the--MS. TEETERS. We are going to undertake a special survey ofthe money market mutual funds at the beginning of next year, isn'tthat the timing, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is confirming the timing of a special survey with someone named Steve.


Passage number 349.
MR. AXILROD. It might be a little later than that, but itwill be early next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a simple response indicating a general time frame for an event without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
MS. TEETERS. And we'll try to find out what the transactionuse is and what the turnover is on them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a plan or intention to find out the transaction use and turnover of something.


Passage number 351.
MR. BALLES. Oh, good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement by Mr. Balles without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 352.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not going to find out. We can try.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker/author is uncertain about finding something out, but they are willing to try.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 353.
MS. TEETERS. We can try.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The use of "can try" suggests that there may be uncertainty or doubt about the feasibility or success of the action proposed. This introduces a potential point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 354.
MR. FORD. Well, that then leads into another suggestion Ihave but first, with regard to M1-B, we feel we can be comfortablewith the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent tentative target we announced or with2-1/2 to 5 percent, either one. I don't think the 1/2 point makes abig difference. I have some sympathy with what Si said, certainly, ofnot making the range too much wider. Dropping the NOW accountadjustment seems to make lots of sense. So, we would say: Let's gofrom the end of year [and use] the last quarterly average as the base,as we normally do and as I think is recommended in the Bluebook, andgo with perhaps the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range. But we are veryconcerned about the nature of the innovations that will be comingalong, some of which we hope will be at least partly visible by thetime of the next meeting. Nancy just mentioned that she thought weought to do some more research on some of these things such as the-37-12/21-22/81MMFs. I would suggest that we gear up either at the Washington leveland/or at some of the Reserve Banks to get on top of the IRAdevelopments, because the potential there is tremendous. If you takethe number of American households and even if you assume that only 10percent of them go into a $2,000 IRA, it comes to something on theorder of just under $15 billion that could be moved around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is discussing his views and suggestions regarding monetary policies and potential financial developments.


Passage number 355.
 And ifyou assume it is 20 percent or--MR. PARTEE. I just figured 10 million accounts at $2,000 is$20 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their calculation based on a set assumption.


Passage number 356.
MR. FORD. Yes. Okay, there you go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Ford simply agrees with something or acknowledges a statement.


Passage number 357.
MR. AXILROD. For sure, President Ford, we are going to bedeveloping and suggesting a data system to capture the flows as muchas possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is expressing agreement with President Ford's statement and confirming that a data system will be developed.


Passage number 358.
MR. FORD. Right, [that needs to be done] early on. I wouldsay even before that if there is any way to find out intentions--thatmight be too romantic for research--it would be interesting to findout not just how many households but obviously the source [of thefunds]. If people shift out of NOWs, obviously that is one thing; ifthey shift among M-2 type assets, then it is less scary. I'd becurious to know whether people are just going to take a largepercentage of the funds out of their NOW accounts or whether they willshift out of other M2 assets or whether the funds will come fromthings outside of M2, all of which have very different implications.I'd just encourage everybody, especially our Washington leadership, tolook at the early returns on IRAs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their curiosity about different possibilities and encourages others to consider the early returns on IRAs.


Passage number 359.
MR. PARTEE. Or [it could] raise the saving rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 360.
MR. CORRIGAN. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees and confirms that the statement made is correct.


Passage number 361.
MR. PARTEE. It could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: be argued that there is a mild form of disagreement or contention in the following passage. While the statement itself is neutral, the use of the word "could" leaves room for disagreement or differing perspectives. It suggests that there is the possibility for someone to argue against the point being made. However, without more context, it is not possible to determine the exact nature or intensity of the contention.


Passage number 362.
MR. CORRIGAN. That is what the payroll deduction could do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan, stating what the payroll deduction could do. There is no indication of contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 363.
MR. FORD. While we are at it, if we could find out anythingabout these sweep accounts, they, too, as a financial innovation havetremendous potential for bombing us on M1-B. So we should take a lookat whether among some of the major institutions there really will bean outbreak of virulent competition in that area, which could furtherput us in the box of having undershoots on the M1-B target andpossibly overshoots on M2. What concerns me most is the fact that allyear long--while Jerry's calculation was a very elegant one and speakswell for how we actually came out on M1-B--I've had the feeling thatwe were undershooting one target and overshooting the other. And forthe next year we ought to try to figure out a way, if we can, to getout of that box so that we are not always damned on the one side forbeing too tight and damned on the other side for being too loose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing concerns and discussing potential issues related to financial innovation and monetary targets.


Passage number 364.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you suggest we do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for suggestions, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 365.
MR. FORD. Well, if the research supports it and if the earlyreturns on IRAs give any evidence that we should expect M2 to getlooser and wider, I'm leaning to the view that we ought to considerjust biting the bullet and raising the upper end of that target while-38-12/21-22/81doing other things to indicate that it is consistent with a lower ortighter target on M1-B. For example, we might choose a base thatinvolves a little less drift--take the year-end M1-B figure if ithappens to be lower than the quarterly average. Or if there is someother way we could start from a lower point, keep it down at 5-1/2percent and do something which in combination says we are anticipatingthat M1-B already is going to be overshooting, so we are tightening upin that area and we think financial innovations really are going tomake M2 behave in a way that suggests we can anticipate a higher upperend if the research supports it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their leaning towards a certain view based on their interpretation of the research and early returns on IRAs. They suggest raising the upper end of the target for M2 while also indicating a lower or tighter target for M1-B. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 366.
 That is why I hope we [won't] waituntil--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I interjected my question because Iam not sure the research supports anything. And I am not sure we willhave the research that is going to support anything. The nature ofthe problem is that we don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses uncertainty and doubt about the research supporting any conclusions, which indicates disagreement or contention with the idea of waiting until the research is available.


Passage number 367.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The phrase "MR. FORD" by itself does not provide enough information to make a judgement.


Passage number 368.
 We can't know, but don't you think we can learn alittle about IRAs because by the middle of February we will--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can learn a little something, [but]experience not only here but internationally suggests that we are notvery good at predicting this [kind of development].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It presents a statement followed by a suggestion based on past experiences, but there is no conflicting viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 369.
MR. FORD. Then maybe we have to go to Mr. Morris' idea thatwe look at some other things, although my thrust in the research wouldprobably be different than his. I'd say, if we are going to reexaminewhat we shoot for, that we ought to pull out the monetary base andtotal reserves as possibilities, along with whatever [measures] he hasin mind, although those two present difficulties that everybody herehas commented on at one time or another. Where we are presentlystructured, as I see it, is that we are making ourselves subject tothe same problems we had this year. And I would be inclined not togive up so easily, Paul, on being able to find out something about thetrend in financial innovation. You may well end up being right, but Iwould want to come down on the research to see if we can find outsomething about IRAs and sweep accounts at least.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges a different perspective and suggests looking at different measures for research. They also express a desire to further investigate financial innovation.


Passage number 370.
MR. SCHULTZ. Some information on the payroll plans probablywould be the best indicator that we could get, if there is a way tofind that out relatively soon. I think that would give us some realindication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Schultz suggesting that obtaining information about payroll plans would provide useful indicators.


Passage number 371.
MR. FORD. I don't know about the public sector, but our ownbenefits people are putting it into our plan to make it easy, in linewith the comment that Jerry made.SPEAKER(.). Yes, we are proposing to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Ford and the speaker are discussing a plan to make something easier, showing agreement and alignment.


Passage number 372.
MR. FORD. It may be that if all other government agenciesare going to do that, we might have a big chunk [of employers doingthat]. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge.


Passage number 373.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee expresses his opinion, but there is no conflicting viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 374.
MR. FORD. Maybe we ought to do a little survey of majoremployers or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a possible action (conducting a survey of major employers) for consideration.


Passage number 375.
-39-12/21-22/81MR. RICE. But we don't know what the [employee] receptionwould be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the employee reception is unknown.


Passage number 376.
MR. BLACK. We don't know when it would [go into effect]either, do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement acknowledging the lack of knowledge about when something would go into effect.


Passage number 377.
MR. RICE. Yes and no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The response by Mr. Rice could be indicating both agreement and disagreement depending on the context.


Passage number 378.
MR. BLACK. It won't be until April or May sometime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a time frame.


Passage number 379.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We won't know where the money comes from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is simply stating that the source of the money is unknown.


Passage number 380.
MR. CORRIGAN. This really gets murky because people can[wait to put in the] money all the way out until April of 1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple fact regarding the deadline for putting in money, without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 381.
MR. BLACK. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 382.
MR. FORD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Yes" in this context does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a response to a statement or question.


Passage number 383.
MR. CORRIGAN. They can put it in [then] and get the taxdeduction for 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact regarding the possibility for someone to receive a tax deduction in 1982 by putting something in.


Passage number 384.
MR. BLACK. I bet a lot of people will borrow money in Aprilof 1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states an observation or statement made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it is useful tospeculate on this at great length at this point. Are you finished,Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and lack of interest in speculating further. Mr. Ford's response is not included in the passage.


Passage number 386.
MR. FORD. Yes, I'm sorry. I just hope you are not rightabout it, Paul; you might well be right. But I would hate to give upso easily on saying we can't foresee innovation in the financialmarkets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Ford acknowledges the possibility that Paul might be right in his views about innovation in financial markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 387.
MR. RICE. I don't think we ought to give up on the principleof how to treat these various [monetary measures]. We ought to decidewhere they ought to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Rice expresses a different opinion by suggesting that they should not give up on the principle of how to treat the monetary measures and should instead decide where they ought to be. This implies that there is disagreement or debate about whether to give up on the principle or not.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that and I agree we ought todo all we can to understand what is going on. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states their agreement with the mentioned idea or statement.


Passage number 389.
MR. PARTEE. I wonder where the thrift plan is in these Ms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions Mr. Partee's curiosity about the location of the thrift plan.


Passage number 390.
MR. RICE. It is harder to understand what is going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Rice simply states that it is difficult to comprehend or grasp the situation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as no conflicting viewpoints or arguments are presented.


Passage number 392.
MS. TEETERS. I simply want to support maintaining the M1-Btarget. I have a lot of sympathy with what Frank has said. I thinkwe do need to see whether we can find something else. It may be inbetween the two ways that we operate but I am not satisfied with whatwe have. I am really very concerned about the M2 target because wehad a 7 percentage point gap between the growth of M1-B shift-adjustedand M2. We got ourselves into this situation where we are below one[target] and at or above the other. I would guess that the midpointof M2 that is consistent with the midpoint of M1-B at 4 percent is 9percent so that we are going to find that we will do again what we didlast year. If we hit the 4 percent midpoint of the M1-B target, we-40-12/21-22/81will hit M2 at 9 percent or above. So it seems to me this is aperfect time to adjust it. We have a history of a 7-point gap. If weaim for a midpoint of 9 percent or thereabouts for M2, that is only a5-point differential instead of 7, so we are not repeating completelywhat we did last year. And we'd have a better chance, I think, ofstaying within the targets and not agonizing all year long about whichone is the most important and which one is going over. So, I wouldassociate myself with those who would accept the existing M1-B target,increase the M2 target, and remove the IRAs and Keoghs [from M2]. Wedon't have a record of changing in midstream, Tony. We have neverchanged a target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for maintaining the M1-B target and suggesting adjusting the M2 target. They acknowledge the need for finding something else but seem to be primarily concerned about the gap between the growth of M1-B and M2. They propose increasing the M2 target and removing IRAs and Keoghs from M2. There is no direct disagreement or opposition presented in this passage.


Passage number 393.
MR. PARTEE. Never.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is too short to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 394.
MS. TEETERS. We never have, from the time we [establishedthe tentative ranges] on down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement from Ms. Teeters without any contradictory or conflicting views mentioned.


Passage number 395.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's because we are always afraidour credibility will be injured if we change. But if we foreshadowit--put people on notice that we have a very clear, honest case oninnovation in technology--and everybody is aware of it, we can beginto educate people more and make it easier for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is a statement made about people's fear of changing, but there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 396.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, but then when we get down to doing it, wealways say we won't do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 397.
MR. WALLICH. Or we make another shift adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Wallich suggests the possibility of making a shift adjustment, but there is no conflicting opinion or opposition expressed.


Passage number 398.
MS. TEETERS. We'd rather overshoot than change the target.That is why establishing them in July a year ahead of time is such amistake. We have no idea what the next year is going to be like. Andthis is not a very good forecast. As of the fourth quarter of thisyear, we will be exactly where we were in the fourth quarter of 1979.And if the forecast is accurate for next year, in the fourth quarterof 1982 we will be exactly where we were in the first quarter of 1981.That is really a galloping economy over two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, therefore it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement within it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
MR. WINN. I would like to join the chorus of those who arecalling for a re-examination of these measurements because I think weare just playing mumbo-jumbo with the numbers game now. I think wecan do a better job of providing measurements of what money is allabout. And until we do that, Fed targets don't make much sense to mebecause we just explain them away by all these deviations. InColumbus, for example, our money market fund clearings have gone from25,000 a day to 115,000; that gives you some idea of the kind ofactivity that is going on in that area. This is the Merrill Lynchclearing setup. And here is a backward way of getting into thatmeasurement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Winn, is expressing disagreement and calling for a re-examination of the measurements and targets used by the Fed. He argues that the current measurements are just "mumbo-jumbo" and do not provide a clear understanding of what money is all about. Mr. Winn also mentions specific examples, like the increase in money market fund clearings, to support his argument.


Passage number 401.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the number of checks or--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement presenting a fact without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 402.
MR. WINN. On the money market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a topic or subject (money market funds) without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 403.
MR. PARTEE. It certainly is the most active.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Partee with no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 404.
12/21-22/81MR. WINN. I think we have to get on with the measurements.[As for] Frank's point on seeking other measurements, unless we havesome measure of the reserve base or something else, we don't reallyhave reserveable assets involved in the money concept. I just thinkwe must get on with an attempt to remeasure some of these magnitudes.They may not be very accurate, but they are a lot better than reachingin the dark for some numbers that really don't mean anything. Andthen if we don't hit them, we explain it away because of all thesedeviations. In view of that uncertainty, I would prefer to stay rightwhere we are with these targets but to get on with the recalculationof some of these numbers. Unless we do that, we won't have any way ofestablishing a reserve basis for these items. We are playing more andmore an inequitable game in terms of those who participate in theconventional forms. It just behooves us to get on with the problem ofmeasurements. I don't think we have any real basis for our shiftadjustment; it [involves] numbers that we had some time ago but Idon't think those are accurate. I urge that we get on with theproblem of a re-examination of these targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Winn, is urging for a re-examination and recalculation of the measurements, while also expressing uncertainty about the accuracy of the current numbers. This suggests that there is contention about the validity and usefulness of the current measurements and a need for a different approach.


Passage number 405.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, instead of urging, I would suggestthat if you have some practical way of going about this, reduce thatto a piece of paper and tell us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a practical way of approaching a task.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 406.
MR. WINN. Yes, I will make an effort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Winn, is stating that he will make an effort, implying that there may be some disagreement or opposition to his action.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 408.
MR. BOYKIN. Back to the credibility problem: In terms ofthe long-term ranges, it seems to me that the tentative ranges that wehave published and that have been discussed and seem to be understoodon the outside probably should not be changed at this point simplybecause I don't think we know enough to improve that in any way. I amnot saying they are the best; I doubt that we know what is the bestright now. But M1-B and M2 at least as of midyear seemed to be givingmore consistency in terms of a relationship. Whether that will holdup remains to be seen. I think we should hold to [seeking] a gradualreduction [of these ranges] over time; it's a perception that I stillthink is very important, particularly to those who are lesssophisticated, and we should hold to that. What is actually going tohappen with regard to the innovation that is coming is merespeculation on our part, as we can tell from going around the tablehere. And I agree very much with Tony Solomon that the time to makean adjustment is when we have some pretty firm facts or a basis fordoing it and doing it in a supportable way rather than by conjecture.The idea of giving the first signal that this will be rethought has alot of appeal to me. I don't think the fact that we have never made amidyear shift should [mean] that we never would, if the facts arethere and a change is supportable. So, I would be inclined to staywhere we said tentatively we were going to be and let events unfold;and I'd be ready to make adjustments or changes in definitions, orwhatever will be necessary, but based on more knowledge than we havenow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin suggests that the long-term ranges should not be changed at this point because there is not enough knowledge or improvement to do so. However, he acknowledges that M1-B and M2 have shown more consistency in a relationship and that a gradual reduction of the ranges should still be pursued. This contradicts his previous statement about not changing the ranges. He also agrees with Tony Solomon that any adjustments should be based on firm facts rather than speculation. Overall, there is disagreement on whether or not to make adjustments to the ranges and when to do so.


Passage number 409.
MS. TEETERS. It is not just a midyear shift; it is a mid-18month shift or any shift in announced ranges. We just don't do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker is stating a fact and there is no indication of any opposing views or disagreement present.


Passage number 410.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, whether we do it at midyear or do itbefore then or after, it seems to me that it would be incumbent upon-42-12/21-22/81the Committee to reach a judgment and make a determination when thefacts support it, whatever point in time that is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided is incomplete and does not contain any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide a complete passage or question for a more accurate response.


Passage number 412.
MR. BALLES. I have just a couple of comments, Paul. I shareFrank's frustration on knowing what money is these days. He proposeda new Committee on the directive. A couple of months ago I think Ispoiled Steve's whole day by suggesting that maybe first and foremostwe needed a major restudy of the monetary aggregates. And that is whyI was so glad to hear Governor Teeters say that we are going to dosomething about money market funds early in the year. Could I ask alittle more about that. For example, Steve, we know that some of theinvestment houses are arbitrarily adding to observed M1-B either 10percent or 20 percent of money market funds on the assumption thatsome of these must be transactions balances. I would like to ask thequestion whether our look-see is really going to zero in on whatpercentage of these [funds] are turning over at the rate of normaltransactions balances. I think we really need that kind of studybefore we need a Committee on the directive, Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and sharing frustrations with others.


Passage number 413.
MR. AXILROD. That is our hope. In response to a Boarddiscussion, we are in the initial stages of outlining a one-timesurvey; whether it will be a sample or complete [coverage] we are notcertain yet. For the money market funds, we have attempted todetermine in more detail than we now have the various characteristicsof the account: the ownership, size, turnover, and other[characteristics] we may think of. We would expect to have a draft ofthe survey in a few weeks to bring before the Board. That is thestage where we are now and we hope to have it in the field relativelypromptly. Whether it could be done and accomplished before theFebruary meeting, I don't know; that seems like a very tight schedule,but we are trying to [meet it].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing the progress and plans for a survey and acknowledging that the timeline may be tight.


Passage number 414.
MS. TEETERS. Steve, I am fascinated by Willis' observation.Can we get at some of this from the clearings [data].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Teeters expresses curiosity and interest in Willis' observation.


Passage number 415.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have data on some of this and wehave done some analysis, good or bad, that takes as its point ofdeparture how many checks, the value of checks written, or the valueof turnover and says: If that is representative of a transactionsaccount and has a normal turnover of an individual's checking account,x amount of the money market funds are like M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have data and analysis regarding the number and value of checks written in relation to transactions accounts and money market funds. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting information present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 416.
 And it came out toabout a little less than 2 percent the last time we--MR. KOHN. It was 4 percent, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the percentage is a little less than 2 percent, while MR. KOHN disagrees and says it was 4 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 4 percent of the money market funds,but adding 2 percent or a little less than 2 percent or a little lessthan 1 percent is a very [unintelligible]. There are all kinds ofquestions that can be raised about the methodology. There is someturnover to savings accounts that we don't put in at all; there issome turnover to CDs that we don't count at all. On the other hand,it makes no allowance for the fact that if somebody owns a moneymarket fund, even if he doesn't write any checks on it or doesn't takethe money out except rarely, the fact that he has it and knows he canwrite a check on it induces him to hold a lower cash balance than hewould otherwise keep. Now, how do we measure that. I think it is-43-12/21-22/81basically immeasurable, and it is undoubtedly there. We have aspectrum of assets and we are trying to draw an arbitrary line throughit and say this much is M1 and that much is M2 or M3; in fact thearbitrary line doesn't mean anything because it's a spectrum. Iunderstand the frustration. We ought to know all that we can knowabout it; but in fact we are dealing with a spectrum and there isn'tany answer. Nothing is going to fall neatly into what is M1 and M2and M3. We'd have a little trouble if we sat around this table tryingto rationalize the distinction between M2 and M3 and M3 and L. Anysense that after that discussion we're going to get a clean,conceptual difference between these Ms I'm afraid is an illusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are questions and uncertainties about the methodology used to measure certain financial assets. They argue that the distinctions between different money market funds and account types are arbitrary and don't necessarily reflect the reality of how people use their money. Therefore, the speaker suggests that trying to define and differentiate between M1, M2, M3, and L is futile and illusory.


Passage number 418.
MS. TEETERS. But the troublesome thing about the moneymarket mutual funds is that the data we're getting on low turnover andall the rest goes against what all of us hear that people are usingthese funds as checking accounts. My own sample indicated that 99percent were using them as checking accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MS. Teeters is explaining her observations about moneymarket mutual funds and how they contradict the common belief that people use these funds as checking accounts. She also mentions her own sample to support her statement.


Passage number 419.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that's the problem with turnover. Oneof the ways that people use the money market mutual funds is that theywrite a check at the end of the month against them and put it in theirchecking account and then write 20 checks against the one check. Andif you just measure turnover, you get one check.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the potential problem with turnover in money market mutual funds.


Passage number 420.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it's a big check in that case. Theonly explanation I have for the phenomenon that I think you correctlyobserved is that it is a mixture. A large portion of that isbasically savings or investment in the broader sense. Some fractionof it is transactions accounts. That is the nature of it. M1 is only$400 billion and M3 is $2 trillion or whatever it is. And moneymarket funds are an indistinguishable blend of the two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and explaining the different components of the phenomenon being discussed. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 421.
MS. TEETERS. Then what do we do when everything becomesmoney market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing uncertainty about what to do in a certain situation.


Passage number 422.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Precisely, we don't know. I am sayingthat I think it's a little difficult, however much study we give this,to say we're going to come up with a number that says this portion ofit is M1 and this portion of it is M2 because it doesn't come thatway. It doesn't come in that kind of package.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 423.
MR. WALLICH. It doesn't have to come into the money marketfund. Merrill Lynch lets you draw checks against your securities andputs the money into a bank account that has a money market fundassociated with it; that fund is up to $12 billion now. You can drawa check for fifteen cents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains how Merrill Lynch allows customers to draw checks against their securities and deposit the money into a bank account that is associated with a money market fund.


Passage number 424.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am not arguing at all over this;obviously, we should get as much information about this phenomenon aswe can. I just think people are suggesting more than is practicallyfeasible to say that we are going to have some great study and somehowthe numbers are going to come fluttering down and on this half of thetable they are going to be M1 and on the other half they are going tobe M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker clearly states that they are not arguing and agrees that it is important to gather information about the phenomenon. They only express their thoughts about the practical feasibility of conducting a study with specific outcomes.


Passage number 425.
MR. PARTEE. I couldn't agree more, Paul. It is veryanalogous to our difficulty in dealing with savings accounts overtime. Savings accounts have more turnover than money market funds and-44-12/21-22/81yet we never put any portion of savings accounts in M1. Indeed, wedidn't even blink an eye when [depository institutions] went frominterest figured on the minimum balance to interest from day ofdeposit to day of withdrawal, which was a big change in savingsaccounts. We never did a thing about it. I don't think we have everhandled the notion of savings accounts at all well in research that Ican recall, extending back into the 1950s, in terms of what to do withsavings accounts and how to treat their "moneyness" in looking atmonetary expansion. So, I think it is not really the turnover but[their use as a] backup that's terribly important. The differencebetween a money market fund which you can have immediate access to andan IRA account which you can't draw on until you're 59-1/2 years oldis really phenomenal, and yet they are both in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee where he is expressing his agreement with Paul on the difficulty in dealing with savings accounts over time. He then provides his own perspective and reflections on the treatment of savings accounts in research and their "moneyness" in looking at monetary expansion.


Passage number 426.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just inject a thought onIRAs. Conceptually, the argument is very strong, as I see it, to takethose out of M2 on liquidity grounds. But suppose we went ahead anddid that. What we don't know is how much money is going into IRAaccounts that otherwise would have been in M2 or is already in M2, sowe'd get an artificial deflation of M2 in an attempt to improve thefigure. In some long run sense it probably would be an improvedfigure, but it is not going to help us in 1982 in understanding M2, Isuspect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply introducing a thought and discussing the potential consequences of implementing it.


Passage number 427.
MR. WALLICH. You'd turn it into another M1-A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is a statement being made by MR. WALLICH, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 428.
MR. CORRIGAN. You'd have a shift-adjusted M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply stating a fact or suggestion.


Passage number 429.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's inherent in almost anything welook at. Where's the money coming from, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a common concern or question about the source of money.


Passage number 430.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The word "Right" is not sufficient to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as it does not provide enough context.


Passage number 431.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only mentions the position of Vice Chairman Solomon without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 432.
 It can't stop us from--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But this is a reflection of a change inlaw. It's like the M1 adjustment problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the reflection of a change in law, specifically the M1 adjustment problem.


Passage number 433.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's so clearly understandable byeverybody that there's a rationale for taking it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a fact that is readily understandable by everyone.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not arguing against taking it out.I'm just arguing against the notion that it will give us a cleananalytically nice figure when we take it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion but not engaging in a debate or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 435.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, one more observation: I'd justlike to remind you that back in the mid-1970s we had one of theseveral Committees on the directive--some of us at this table servedon it--chaired first by Bob Holland and later by Chuck Partee. Wetook a long, hard look at optimal control, working on the ultimatevariables and not using money as the intermediate target. And the netof that was a dry hole. It just didn't prove to be doable inpractice. So, despite all of our frustrations about what money is,how it behaves, and what should be in M1 and M2, it is still the onlygame in town as far as I am concerned. Some of the academics--and itis a real minority--are urging us to target on real interest rates orto target on nominal GNP. They get little, if any, support from theirpeers. That came out loud and clear in this recent academic-45-12/21-22/81conference that I mentioned yesterday. Despite the frustrations aboutthe money supply--will the real money supply please stand up.--I thinkit's the only hope we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 436.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that comforting thought, Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Boehne is comforted by a certain thought.


Passage number 437.
MR. BOEHNE. Taking into account all this frustration,uncertainty, and credibility, which I don't think I can add to afterthis dinstinguished discussion, we still have to set some targets fornext year. I think John is right that we still have to deal withthese. I come down for lowering the M1 range to 2-1/2 to 5-1/2percent, which is what we tentatively agreed on in July. And I amsympathetic to the notion of raising M2. It does seem to me that weought to make these as consistent as we can. I don't think it adds toor subtracts from our credibility if we make an adjustment in M2 tomake it consistent with M1. So, I would favor such an adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 438.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided phrase, "Governor Partee," does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply refers to a person's title or name.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 439.
MR. PARTEE. Well, just so we have everything in front of us,I also would like to point out that there is the problem of choosingthe base in doing next year's targeting. We've rather easily slippedover the fact that there was a considerable shortfall in M1-B thisyear. In fact, Jerry had an interesting explanation for it--and Ithink it's something we ought to work on--that involves a 2-year lookat the expansion of M1-B. But there are a good many people who havebeen greatly afflicted by high interest rates and poor business andbankruptcy who won't quite understand why it is that we just disregardthe shortfall entirely and go on and assign the same old lower growthrate to M1 in the year to come. I think it is a very serious problemthat we have to deal with in explaining, if that is what we want todo, why it is what we want to do. Most people would say we ought toadd our shortfall in 1981 into the 1982 expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, points out a problem with choosing the base for next year's targeting, mentioning a considerable shortfall in M1-B. He believes that it is a serious problem that needs to be explained and suggests that adding the shortfall in 1981 into the 1982 expectations would be a more appropriate approach. This indicates disagreement with the current approach of disregarding the shortfall entirely and assigning the same growth rate to M1 in the upcoming year.


Passage number 440.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But last year didn't you accept thebase drift in Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The statement simply appears to be seeking confirmation or clarification about accepting the base drift in Ml.


Passage number 441.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, but it didn't involve bankruptcy the way itdoes now. I am talking about builders and realtors and people likethat who just aren't going to understand it and quite a fewCongressmen who already have begun to focus on this issue in lookingat 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about builders, realtors, and Congressmen not understanding the issue and focusing on it in 1982.


Passage number 442.
MR. WINN. Chuck, what do you do with M2, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question.


Passage number 443.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think most people would regard M2 as avery much lesser target of policy. That hasn't been the emphasis atall, for a very good reason in my view. Of course, we differ on that,but it is a problem we have to take into account now. It happens tobe most pointed in this particular Bluebook because in this Bluebookwe have the sense--and it was referred to earlier, I think, by Frankin a somewhat negative way--that we have a year in which we've fallenprogressively short in M1-B and we finally got 2 or 3 months that areup. October was a normative or maybe a slightly more than normativemonth; November was a little strong; and December is another sort ofnormative month. But choosing the fourth quarter as the base meansthat December is above the fourth-quarter average so that when we ask"How are we going to be on track for the first quarter." we get very-46-12/21-22/81low money rate objectives, and everyone notices that. [Growth] isonly 1/2 or 2 percent, depending on which alternative one takes; thefact is that it is very hard to explain. We are still below targetand now we are talking about getting down to the new target in thisvery meeting, in the second part of this meeting that we are going tohave. It seems to me that's a very [unintelligible] representation ofthe problem we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and acknowledges that others may have a different view. They also mention that the issue is a problem that needs to be taken into account.


Passage number 444.
MR. ROOS. Chuck, doesn't the law say that we have to use thefourth quarter as a [base].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the law. There is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 445.
MR. PARTEE. No, the law doesn't say that. It says the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Partee disagrees with the statement being made or the interpretation of the law. He states that the law does not say what is being claimed.


Passage number 446.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would observe in this connection that Ilike to look at a somewhat longer perspective than these fourth-quarter [measures]. This doesn't deal with the short-run problem ofwhat to do when we have a sudden increase such as we have now. We endup with a high December and all the rest. But on an annual basis thetable on page 6 [of the Bluebook] in a sense is another way of lookingat what Jerry Corrigan was looking at; it overlaps, anyway. If youlook at these annual [growth rates] year over year, which are thenumber 2 figures here, [for M1-B] it's 8.2 percent in '78, downslightly in '79, down more in '80, and down more in '81. It's afairly smooth pattern, though you can argue that it's too much, toolittle, or whatever. But it doesn't give that extreme movement we getwith the fourth quarter figures because that reflects the obvious; infact we started high this year and ended up low [given] the decliningtrend during the year. Last year we did the opposite. When youaverage through the 12 months you get a reasonably smooth pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an observation about annual growth rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 447.
MR. PARTEE. Well, if we wanted to take that 4-1/2 percent[year-over-year growth] for '81 and have, say, 4 percent for '82 forthe annual average, I think we'd find that the quarterly growth ratewould have to be quite a bit more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, suggests that in order to achieve a 4 percent annual average for '82, the quarterly growth rate would have to be higher than 4 percent. This implies a disagreement or contention with another viewpoint or assumption about the necessary quarterly growth rate.


Passage number 448.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve has done that calculation. If Iunderstand it correctly, if we stayed exactly on the target quarter byquarter at the 4 percent midpoint of this tentative range, the annualaverage also comes out to 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a calculation and the potential understanding of the speaker. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 449.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's tricky because that's the actual M1not shift-adjusted over last year's regular M1, so it works outfortuitously that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that there is a complexity involved in the situation.


Passage number 450.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But what's the meaning of that. It comesout considerably higher if you measure the actual M1 in '82 over theshift-adjusted in '81.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply questioning the meaning or significance of a certain measurement.


Passage number 451.
MR. AXILROD. No, in '81 the year over year not shift-adjusted so-called M1 grew [6.9] percent, so we would get that goingdown to 4.0 percent. And the shift-adjusted M1 grew 4-1/2 percent,and we get that going down to 4.0 percent. So we really are getting ayear-over-year drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating numbers and calculations without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 452.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a direct statement by Mr. Partee, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 453.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I fully understand how wecome out on the number 2 basis but any way we do it I take it that if-47-12/21-22/81we stayed on path, we'd come out with another drop year over year onthis tentative target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 454.
MR. AXILROD. If it was exactly a 4 percent increase month bymonth after the first quarter, with a little slower growth in thefirst quarter, it would come out at 4 percent on this measure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 455.
MR. GRAMLEY. I wonder if anybody has noticed how beautifullywe have come out by way of the performance of nominal GNP in terms ofdeceleration. Page I-V in the Greenbook shows the fourth-quarterchanges. Starting from 1979 it shows 9.9 to 9.4 to 9.1 to 8.6percent. Now, that is about as good a target for nominal GNP as onecan possibly imagine--fortuitous, but very well balanced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a observation about the performance of nominal GNP.


Passage number 456.
MR. AXILROD. If I might take a minute before I do that, Idid look up the answer to the question that President Morris raised ofwhether we have ever had rapid growth in M1, such as the 4-1/2 percentrate of growth we are having in the fourth quarter, with a markeddeceleration of the economy, where it is going down as it is thisquarter at a 5-1/2 percent rate. There are a surprising number ofquarters of negative growth in the economy and positive growth inmoney--I am talking about on a quarterly average basis. There wereeven quarters where we had a deceleration and then an acceleration ofmoney, surprisingly enough. For example, in the second quarter of1979 real GNP was [minus] 1-3/4 percent after being plus [3.9] percentin the first quarter, and money growth went from 5-1/2 in the firstquarter to 10 percent in the second quarter. Similarly, in the thefirst quarter of '74 real GNP had dropped at around a 4 percent annualrate after rising at a 3-1/4 percent rate in the fourth quarter of'73, and money growth accelerated from 4.8 to 6.7 percent. So it isnot an extremely infrequent occurrence that something like thathappens and, of course, we are aiming at it this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing evidence and examples to support their argument or point of view.


Passage number 457.
MR. WALLICH. Money is supposed to lead the economy with along and variable lag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a general belief without any opposing view or conflicting information.


Passage number 458.
MR. AXILROD. This is only quarter to quarter. I didn'ttrace out the averages. I was just responding to the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply clarifies the scope of their response and explains that they did not calculate averages, but instead focused on the specific question at hand.


Passage number 459.
MR. MORRIS. The examples you gave were all relativelyrecent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that the examples provided were relatively recent.


Passage number 460.
MR. AXILROD. But it's even the case going back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or contrasting ideas. It appears to be a straightforward statement without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 461.
MR. ROOS. I wonder, Steve, if you compared the quarterlyrate of money growth to the trend rate, if there is any instance wherewe had two quarters of M1-B growth falling below the trend rate wherewe haven't had a significant downturn in economic activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question to Steve, seeking information or clarification.


Passage number 462.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that is a different question. I was justresponding to the question that President Morris raised of whetherwithin a quarter we had had this kind of movement. Our observation isthat it's not as rare as one might have thought it would be.Mr. Chairman, we designed the short-run alternatives on thebasis of the tentative range of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent that theCommittee had set for M1-B and on the basis of the Committee'sprevious practice of, in effect, shifting the base to the actual levelof money. Alternative A was designed to hit the upper end of that2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range, alternative C to hit the lower end, andalternative B to be in between by March. It is a fairly mechanicalsetting of the ranges. Thus, from the fourth-quarter average that wesuggested as a base, the growth rate for alternative A is 5-1/2percent, the upper end of the range. That [took account of] how theCommittee has set short-run ranges before. Our thought was thatDecember as a base is somewhat unstable because we don't know the-50-12/21-22/81number yet. If it did come out as we are projecting, the impliedgrowth rates are so low that they raise the possibility of beingsubject to some misinterpretation when put out in the directive. Analternative way of doing it would be to make the base November, whichthe Committee has done before, and the growth rates for alternativesA, B, and C would be about 0.3 lower. That is, the 5-1/2 percent withNovember as a base would be 5.2 percent to hit the upper end of therange; and that 0.3 would extend across all of the other alternatives.That, as I say, the Committee has done one time before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply explaining the different alternatives that were designed based on the Committee's previous practices.


Passage number 463.
MR. CORRIGAN. That would be November-to-March then, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement of fact between two individuals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 464.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. With regard to the implications of thesealternatives for credit markets (and assuming less of a demand shift,so to speak, than took place in 1981) our analysis suggested that theodds were--unless the economy was considerably weaker than is beingprojected--that there would be not much room for further interest ratedeclines under either alternatives B or C, which call for really quitemodest growth in money consistent with the Committee's long-run range.Under alternative A it looked to us as if there was more of apossibility for declines in interest rates given the GNP projection.So, in a sense, one way of putting it is that the Committee's choicewould be to set a target depending on how it tends to lean in itsattitude toward credit markets at this time, before the recovery hasstarted. To the degree that the Committee wishes to give a littleimpetus to easing in credit markets in order to encourage therecovery, that tends to argue, of course, for the more liberal [fourthquarter to March] alternative within the Committee's range. To thedegree that the Committee would want to leave more room for expansionlater and believes the recovery has enough momentum and can turnaround on its own, that tends to argue for an alternative of lowergrowth, leaving a little more room later to finance the expansion asit develops.I should mention one other point, Mr. Chairman, with regardto the borrowing assumption. We have assumed borrowing in alternativeB of around $450 million, which is a little higher than we haveactually attained in recent weeks. Again, to the degree that theCommittee wants to lean toward a little easing in credit markets insetting its monetary target, consideration could be given to loweringthat more toward the levels of borrowing that are suggested foralternative A, which would be around $250 million. That leaves arange, obviously, in between.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents different viewpoints on the appropriate course of action for the Committee in relation to credit markets and interest rates. The mention of different alternatives and their implications indicates a potential disagreement or contention among the members of the Committee.


Passage number 465.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a couple of quick commentsjust in terms of presentation. I am not crazy about that firstalternative in the Bluebook, [shifting the base] from a quarterlyaverage to a monthly number. That looks a little awkward to me and Irecoil a bit. I don't like the December-to-March approachparticularly because we don't yet know December. It seems to me wehave done that before and then gotten mixed up by the fact thatDecember, or whatever the last month in the quarter was, didn't comein the way we expected. This leaves me thinking that maybe theNovember-to-March method of looking at it is the most fruitful. Thisis just arithmetic in presentation.On the substance, I find myself thinking these numbers meansomething quite different if in fact we continue to get sizable growth-51-12/21-22/81because NOW accounts are bulging--and we don't quite know why but itmay be [related to] this interpretation of a temporary parking place--than if NOW accounts are not bulging the way they have been in thelast few weeks. I guess that's all I have in the way of preliminarycomments. Why don't we have coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing personal opinions and thoughts, but there is no mention of any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 466.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make one other comment just to setthe stage for what we're talking about and to give us a due sense ofhumility. If I recall the discussion correctly at the last meeting, Idon't think anybody around the table--I certainly speak for myself--had any conviction that, almost regardless of what we did, we weregoing to have high money supply figures in the period from the lastmeeting to this meeting. Everybody was worried that whatever numberwe put down we might fall way short even if interest rates declined.Instead, we had interest rates tending to be under a little morepressure in the money market and the money supply figures movingsignificantly in excess of the target we put down. I don't think thatis a tragedy. I am just saying that is an indication of the [limited]degree of precision that we have in setting the target for a one-monthperiod; whatever effects there will be on the money supply in the nextmonth are probably already [determined] in the market, rather than bywhat we do today. But we are setting a money supply target here for aquarter. Let's proceed with the discussion. Is there a generalagreement that we ought to use November as a presentational base.SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 467.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not contain any evident contention or disagreement. It simply states the name and title of the person being referred to.


Passage number 468.
 It may just make it a bit less confusingif we--MR. MORRIS. Paul, how would that influence the money growthnumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question, suggesting a desire for clarification or explanation.


Passage number 469.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's just what Steve said. Ifyou're looking at the fourth quarter-to-March numbers, take off 0.3 toget the equivalent number on M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply relays information given by Steve.


Passage number 470.
 I don't know what it does--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On M2 the numbers are 9.8, 8.9, and8.1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement stated in the passage. It simply mentions that the numbers on M2 are 9.8%, 8.9%, and 8.1%, and the speaker admits to not knowing what it means.


Passage number 471.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those are the equivalent numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "those are the equivalent numbers" is stating a fact without any indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 472.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Those are the equivalent numbersaccording to our calculations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply presents the numbers derived from calculations.


Passage number 473.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just write those down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that they will write something down.


Passage number 474.
MR. BALLES. Say them again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles is simply asking someone to repeat what they said.


Passage number 475.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Taking the November base to March,for alternative A M2 is 9.8 percent, alternative B is 8.9 percent, andalternative C is 8.1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The provided information simply states the percentages of M2 for different alternatives from November to March.


Passage number 476.
MR. BALLES. How about M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement by "Mr. Balles."


Passage number 477.
-52-12/21-22/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. M1, as Steve said, is 5.2, 3.7, and2.2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply provides a mathematical expression and gives an example of what M1 could represent as stated by Steve.


Passage number 478.
MR. BALLES. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 479.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions someone's name.


Passage number 480.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I would recommend, Mr. Chairman,is taking the November base and liberalizing alternative B somewhat byrounding up the 3.7 to 4 percent. I'd start with around $350 millionof initial borrowing and lower the fed funds rate range by 1 point,which would bring it down to 10 to 14 percent or we could use 10 to15 percent if we want to go back to the 5-point spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is giving a specific recommendation and proposing a specific course of action.


Passage number 481.
MR. PARTEE. Tony, the 4 percent is the quarterly average.Is that what you're explaining.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply seeking clarification and confirming his understanding of the information.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it's November to March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "No, it's November to March." The statement simply provides a timeframe without any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 483.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Which is a liberalization of "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for information on a specific topic ("Which is a liberalization of 'B'"), but there is no stated contention or disagreement.


Passage number 484.
"MR. FORD. You're saying make the fed funds range 10 to 15percent, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 485.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 486.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or 10 to 14 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or statement that can be considered as contentious or disagreeable. It simply states a numerical range without any accompanying argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 487.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Either 10 to 14 or 10 to 15 percent,I don't care. There's some advantage in changing that range from timeto time whether it's 4 points or 5 points. I don't feel stronglyabout that. But I do think the lower end of it ought to be lowered by1 point and that the initial borrowing ought to be around $350million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a preference for adjusting a range and suggests a specific change in borrowing amount.


Passage number 488.
MR. MORRIS. Sounds like a Solomonic judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating that the judgment sounds like a Solomonic judgment, which refers to a wise and fair decision.


Passage number 489.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'll vote for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Schultz expresses agreement and states that he will vote for a certain proposition or idea. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 490.
MR. PARTEE. What was your M2 number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for a M2 number.


Passage number 491.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, the M2 number then becomesaround 9 percent. It's 8.9 percent technically, but if we round upthe 3.7 on M1-B to 4 percent then it would be shading M2 to a littlemore than 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a numerical calculation and the rounding up of percentages.


Passage number 492.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only provides the name "Mr. Gramley" without any further context or information, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 493.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to say first that I don't thinkanything we do here today is going to help this recession come to anend soon. It's going to run its course for a while. I do believethat if we are not careful in the selection of where we go, we coulddraw out the recession and make it longer. Therefore, I want to avoidany alternative that would result in rising interest rates at thisstage. I think that would be a grave mistake. What we ought to beaiming for is to set the stage for a recovery later this spring butone of moderate dimensions. We ought to be very careful to avoid thekind of problems we got into in 1980. I'm cognizant of the enormous-53-12/21-22/81uncertainties we face in interpreting the monetary aggregates, notonly in the long run because of these tremendous innovational changesbut also the point you made earlier, Mr. Chairman, that we havesomething going on here in the OCD area that we ought to be awfullycareful with. I would opt for alternative B. I could live with asomewhat lower borrowing level, but $450 million or $400 to $450million is acceptable. I would say, however, that in addition toadopting the specs of "B" for growth rates of M1 and M2 we ought to bewilling to live with a larger increase in M1-B if it results from thekind of increase in OCDs we've been seeing recently, which we have areasonable basis for interpreting. This parking of funds while thereis uncertainty is clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and preferences, without directly addressing or contradicting any other viewpoints. They acknowledge uncertainties and express caution, but there is no direct disagreement with any other person or idea.


Passage number 494.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just as a matter of clarification, whenyou say "B," are you willing to accept something like Mr. Solomon's[numbers].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a request for clarification and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 495.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, that's all right; I would go with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is simply acknowledging his agreement with the statement or suggestion presented to him.


Passage number 496.
MR. WALLICH. You know that when we set something and accepta higher amount that it has the effect, really, of pegging the fundsrate. Is that what you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on a specific point.


Passage number 497.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 498.
 I tried not to use--MR. PARTEE. He doesn't want interest rates to go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their attempt to avoid using "Mr. PARTEE," without any indication of disagreement with him or anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 499.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think there's a difference ofview among the technical people as to whether initial borrowing of$350 million means a lower rate or the same rate as we've been seeinglately. Borrowings have been running on average less than the $450million. We might ask both Steve and Peter to comment on what theythink the implications are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen when the speaker mentions that there is a difference of view among the technical people regarding the implications of the initial borrowing amount of $350 million. The uncertainty about whether this amount will result in a lower or the same interest rate as before creates disagreement among Steve and Peter.


Passage number 500.
MR. AXILROD. We've assumed in the Bluebook that if the pathwere $450 million and it was successfully hit, probably there would besome little upward tick in the funds rate, but maybe not a lot. Iwould assume that $350 million at a minimum would probably avoid that;whether that would cause the funds rate to drop initially, I feel moreagnostic about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their assumptions and their own uncertainty about the effects of different amounts of money on the funds rate.


Passage number 501.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't disagree with that. I would tendto think of something like $250 million of borrowing as perhaps likelyto keep the funds rate just around the discount rate, $350 millionmaybe 1/4 percentage point over it, and $450 million a little more--maybe 1/2 point--over it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 502.
MS. TEETERS. To what extent does the discount rate act as afloor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply poses a question about the extent to which the discount rate acts as a floor.


Passage number 503.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The discount rate becomes a kind of anchoraround which the funds rate clusters once there's enough borrowing tomake that discount rate meaningful. If there's so little borrowingthat a great majority of banks hardly ever [come to] the discountwindow, then the discount rate isn't too meaningful and we fall intothis zone of indeterminacy. I don't know whether it's $200 or $250million or what, but once there's something like that level ofborrowing then there will be enough borrowing so that the discount-54-12/21-22/81window is a meaningful alternative that a number of banks want toavoid; they will be willing to pay the rate in the funds market ratherthan come to the window. And the more of that borrowing gap there is,the more demand for funds there will be by banks that want to stayaway from the window; so, they'd be willing to pay up a little higherin order to stay away [from the window].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is providing an explanation of how the discount rate and borrowing levels affect the funds rate.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response without the passage you're referring to.


Passage number 505.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I find very little to disagree within either Lyle's or Tony's statement, and since it sounds a littlepoetic I'll say that I'll just go with the wisdom of Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black explicitly states that he finds very little to disagree with in the statements made by Lyle and Tony.


Passage number 506.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only states Mr. Ford without providing any additional information or context to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 507.
MR. FORD. I want everybody to know that I am the one whofirst said that I don't think anybody here is wise enough to determineinterest rates except Solomon. I, too, tend to agree with him. Thisis getting to be easy except that I'd like to reinforce one point hemade and that relates to the fed funds rate range. If I read theGreenbook forecast correctly, the staff is saying that in the firstquarter of next year we're going to have a negative GNP of 2.2percent, a GNP deflator of under 7 percent, and unemploymentapproaching 9 percent. And with a GNP deflator that low, other priceindexes are probably going to be down. We're talking about realinterest rates on average in those three alternatives of 5 percent on"A," 6 percent on "B," and 7 percent on "C." I think we should atleast allow the possibility of seeing [real] interest rates get intothe single digit range at the nadir of this deep recession. So, I'dargue for "B" with a wider fed funds range, maybe going from [a lowerlimit of] 9 percent and centering on the present rate, which Iunderstand is just over 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is simply expressing his agreement with Solomon's statement and explaining his own position on interest rates.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as only the title "Mr. Corrigan" is provided, which does not convey any conflicting information or opposing views.


Passage number 509.
MR. CORRIGAN. I am comfortable with Mr. Solomon's variationof "B," although I'd like to think of the initial borrowing as morelike $400 million or maybe a bit higher rather than the $350 millionthat Tony suggested just because I'd still like to leave a little roomdown the road. But, basically, I'd go along with something like Mr.Solomon's suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan expresses agreement with Mr. Solomon's suggestion, with only a minor difference in the borrowing amount.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions the name "Governor Partee" without providing any further information or context to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 511.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I have no difficulty with the funds rangethat you specified Tony, of 10 to 14 percent. We're right about atthe midpoint of it now and that assumes that it might drift a littlelower but not very much, at least initially. I don't know but I thinkeither $350 or $400 million on borrowing would be all right. I'dcertainly accept the $350 million. I do think that your objectivesfor M1 and M2 are pretty stingy. Page 2 of the Bluebook shows aSeptember-to-Deceber increase in M1-B shift-adjusted of 6.3 percent.Now, that has benefitted some from the shift adjustment; that is, Idon't have an M1 figure here. But if it weren't shift-adjusted, itwould be somewhat higher than that--7-1/2 percent or something likethat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you looking at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is a simple question asking about the object of someone's attention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 513.
-55-12/21-22/81MR. PARTEE. I am looking at page 2; I can't work with thesealternatives which don't have the correct figures on that. So I amtrying to look at what experience has been recently as against whatwe're plotting for the period ahead. It shows an increase fromSeptember to December--but if anything December is raising it just alittle--and that goes into our numbers that we're calculating lookingahead as maybe something like 7-1/2 percent in M1 as newly defined and12-1/2 percent in M2. You are cutting those to 4 and 9 percent.That's a pretty sharp cut in the growth rate compared with what wehave been experiencing recently. And I think that's too abrupt. Iwould prefer an M1 of 5 percent and an M2 of 10 percent as a centerpoint for November to March. I don't think anybody would be surprisedat that or regard it as being unduly expansive; in fact they mightregard it as being pretty restrictive compared with recent experienceand [given] the shortfall we've had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with the proposed sharp cut in the growth rate of M1 and M2 and suggests a lower growth rate instead.


Passage number 514.
MR. BOEHNE. What was your M1, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes a question asking for a specific value (M1) from Chuck. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this exchange.


Passage number 515.
MR. PARTEE. Five. I am just picking it almost out of theair but a 5 percent M1 seems to me like a normative M1; and if we took5 percent and 10 percent for the two numbers, that's really quite abit less [growth] than we've had recently in both M1 and M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the growth rate of M1 and M2.


Passage number 516.
MS. TEETERS. Well, if we have a big December; this is aNovember-to-March number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 517.
MR. PARTEE. That will mean even less in the course [of the4-month period]; and we'll review it again in early February. Theother thing I'd just comment on is that I don't know what to make ofthose NOW accounts. I'm inclined to think it is an error in theseasonal adjustment but I am not sure. It could be that there is abig build-up in precautionary balances in NOW accounts, as the staffsays, and that might well continue right on through the winter if thatis the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating the speaker's uncertainty and questioning the nature of NOW accounts.


Passage number 518.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it might be temporary parkingfor Christmas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the parking might be temporary for Christmas without presenting any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 519.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's right. And that is why I think[the explanation] may be the seasonal. The seasonal doesn't have theadvantage of knowing what those household accounts have done in pastyears.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is providing his own explanation but is not contradicting or arguing with anyone else's point of view.


Passage number 520.
MR. SCHULTZ. Or a temporary parking for IRA-Keoghs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Schultz regarding temporary parking for IRA-Keoghs.


Passage number 521.
MR. PARTEE. Or just temporary parking because people arescared they may lose their jobs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating the possibility of people choosing temporary parking because they are scared of losing their jobs.


Passage number 522.
MR. BLACK. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black simply affirms that something is right.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 523.
MR. PARTEE. You know, it makes a difference. I think Lyleis right that we want to watch that carefully to see whether [NOWaccounts] continue to be the source of strength in M1 and regard thata little differently than if it is in corporate balances or intraditional demand accounts where one might think that a build-upwould be a predecessor, as Larry likes to say, to an expansion inactivity, which also could be the case. We might be right on the edgeof a recovery in the economy and not know it. But it is just not-5612/21-22/81clear to me which is the case. Nevertheless, my basic point is that 4and 9 percent are so far below what we recently have had that they aretoo low to shoot for, and I would rather have 5 and 10 percent butwith your parameters on the funds rate and initial borrowings, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses disagreement with the idea that a build-up in NOWaccounts would be a predecessor to an expansion in activity. He also disagrees with the idea that the target percentages of 4 and 9 percent are too low, stating that he would rather have 5 and 10 percent.


Passage number 524.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 525.
MR. BOEHNE. I'd prefer something between "A" and "B," and Ican't get excited whether it's Tony's or Chuck's [formulation]. I dohave stronger feelings about the funds range; I think it ought to be10 to 14 percent. I would look with considerable disfavor if thefunds rate rose; I could accept some decline. And somewhere betweenthe $350 and $400 million range on borrowings makes sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states his preference for a middle ground between two options (A and B) but does not express any disagreement or contention. He also shares his views on the funds range and borrowing range without opposing any specific viewpoint.


Passage number 526.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is incomplete and does not present any conflicting points of view or opinions.


Passage number 527.
MR. BALLES. Generally I come out in favor of "B+," abouthalfway between those two revised numbers, starting with November [asthe base]. I share the concern that Lyle and some others haveexpressed that this recession might be worse than the staff is nowforecasting. If there is an error, it is likely to be on the side ofthe recession being deeper through the first quarter than both ourstaff and the Board's staff have suggested. And for that reason Iwould agree with Bill Ford on the federal funds rate range. I'dprefer to see the bottom of it as low as 9 percent, and I would notlike to see us strongly resist the decline in interest rates thatwould accompany a really soft economy. So I'd accept either 9 to 14or 9 to 15 percent on the funds rate range. And as far as theborrowing assumption is concerned, $350 to $400 million would be okaywith me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MR. BALLES agrees with Lyle and others who express concern about the recession being worse than forecasted. He also agrees with Bill Ford on the federal funds rate range and the decline in interest rates. Additionally, he is okay with the borrowing assumption mentioned.


Passage number 528.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage given to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 529.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I find myself leaning toward the easyside this time because what we have done is to avoid following theaggregates as far as we might; had we done so, interest rates would bea lot lower. Not having done that, I think we ought to give theeconomy a chance to recover at this interest rate level and try tostring that [level] out as long as it will last, giving [firms] achance to issue more bonds and so on. I would not welcome a furtherdrop unless the economy weakens substantially because that wouldsimply be what I think has been the error that we have avoided in thefirst place. But we have to compensate somewhat for not having letrates drop that far by now smoothing them out for the future. So, Iwould go with the higher aggregate [growth rates] proposed--that is M1at 5 percent and M2 at 10 percent, a low borrowing assumption of $250or $300 million, and a funds rate range of 10 to 14 percent. Iwouldn't see any advantage in letting fed funds get into the single-digit range; I'd try to hold it here for a while if circumstancespermit. There is a cost to this; later in the year we may have toaccept higher interest rates to stick by our overall targets. Thatcost I think we have to be prepared to pay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their personal opinion and explains their reasoning without conflicting with any opposing views.


Passage number 530.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions the name "Mr. Keehn" without providing any context or further information to indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 531.
MR. KEEHN. I'd be comfortable with Mr. Solomon's proposalfor both M1 and M2, given the current state of the economy, with thethought that a little reduction in the fed funds rate might provide-57-12/21-22/81some encouragement. I'd be in favor of a $350 to $400 millionborrowing range and a federal funds target range of 10 to 14 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement by Mr. Keen with Mr. Solomon's proposal, expressing his comfort and favor towards the suggested measures for the current state of the economy.


Passage number 532.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context or information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 533.
MR. GUFFEY. I'd be comfortable with Mr. Solomon's proposalwith one exception. It is maybe a fence-riding caveat. I amconcerned about interest rates rising and, to ensure against that, Iwould like to suggest that we adopt the modified "B" as Tony hassuggested, with $400 million borrowing but by the same token have anunderstanding that if money in January begins to come in a bitstronger than projected, there wouldn't be any overt action taken thatwould result in higher interest rates until we got to [M1 growth] atabout the "A" level. In other words, we'd have a range, if you will,of 4 to 5 percent M1 growth under that kind of proposal before theDesk would alter the path that was set based upon a November base.Also I'd favor a federal funds range of 10 to 14 percent, whichprovides a bit of insurance that we would have a consultation if thefunds rate begins to rise early in the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing one person's thoughts and suggestions.


Passage number 534.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Teeters without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 535.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I can endorse Tony's suggestion, whichwas modified by Roger, Chuck, and others. If you look at it visually,we need something more than 4 percent [M1 growth] to come in ontarget. So, if we take Roger's suggestion of 4 percent for M1 and use9 percent for M2, a funds range of 10 to 14 percent, and borrowing of$350 million with the understanding that if M1 growth begins to go upwe won't try to restrain it if it means a rise in interest rates, thatwould be a perfectly acceptable decision for me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Teeters is stating her agreement with the suggestion made by Tony and modified by Roger, Chuck, and others.


Passage number 536.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not quite sure about one comment youmade. What you are suggesting is low relative to the targets, as Iunderstand this, because if you are talking about next year's target,it is right on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification about a comment made by someone. They are stating their understanding that the suggestion aligns with the targets for the next year.


Passage number 537.
MS. TEETERS. No, I am talking about Chuck's point that bygoing from November to March we have a December which is probablygoing to be above November and we have a high first month in there sowe may need a little leeway to accommodate for the fact that Decemberis coming in above the November level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is providing additional information and explaining why there may be a need for leeway due to December coming in above the November level. There is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 538.
MR. PARTEE. If you look specifically at the staff's numberson page 12 for M1 under alternative B, which is about what Tony had inmind, that calls for a December of 8 percent and then a January andFebruary of 2.2 percent in each month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply referring to a specific detail on page 12 and summarizing the percentages mentioned.


Passage number 539.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, that's reflected in the secondpart of page 11.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 540.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I should say that New York, for whatit's worth, has a lower projection for December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is presenting a fact about New York's projection for December without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 541.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it is very hard to know what December willbe. There is some exposure here to having to seek quite low numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that it is difficult to predict what will happen in December and there is a possibility of having to seek low numbers.


Passage number 542.
MS. TEETERS. If we need a little leeway, we could have aconference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests having a conference as a possible solution, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 543.
-58-12/21-22/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a mathematical expression that can be simplified to a single value.


Passage number 544.
MR. ROOS. As a means of achieving growth in M1 next year of5 percent, for the reasons I attempted to enunciate yesterday, I wouldfavor the alternative A choice. I wouldn't jump off the bridge if youadopted Tony Solomon's "B+;" I would be happier on Christmas Eve if wedid widen that funds range a little, maybe to 9 to 14 percent orsomething like that. A $350 to $400 million borrowing assumptionwould be consistent with this, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their preference for the alternative A choice and also mentions another option (Tony Solomon's "B+") but indicates that either option would be acceptable. The speaker also suggests widening the funds range and mentions a borrowing assumption that would be consistent with their preferred choice. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 545.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only provides the title "Governor Rice" and does not provide any further context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 546.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I would want to rush to supportGovernor Wallich's proposal while I can, for the reasons given byGovernor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, expresses agreement with Governor Wallich's proposal and gives reasons for his support.


Passage number 547.
MR. PARTEE. It seldom happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. "It depends" suggests that there is uncertainty or differing opinions about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 549.
MR. PARTEE. I want to be associated with those remarks andI'd like to join Governor Wallich, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses agreement and a desire to join Governor Wallich in their remarks.


Passage number 550.
MR. RICE. I would say 5 percent for M1 and 10 percent forM2, borrowing of, say, $350 million, and on the funds range 10 to 14percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, Mr. Rice is making a statement about what he believes the percentages should be for M1 and M2, as well as the borrowing amount and interest rate for funds. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 551.
MR. FORD. I didn't hear that. Could somebody repeat it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 552.
MR. RICE. I said borrowing at $350 million and a funds rangeof 10 to 14. Did you hear what I said about M1 and M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 553.
MR. FORD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Ford responded with "Yes", indicating agreement or affirmation. It does not suggest any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have no more volunteers. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement indicating that there are no more volunteers available.


Passage number 555.
MR. WINN. I would take to heart your caution that we betterlook down the road in terms of the short-term target as well as justthe immediate problem. And I would go along with the 4 and 9 percenton the aggregates because they're in line with our longer-rangetargets. [For the funds range] 10 to 14 percent is fine. On theother hand, if the aggregates should come in stronger, a littleincrease in the rates, not a major one, would not bother me as awarning in terms of what lies ahead. So, I would not be upset, if theaggregates were strong, to see a little firming in rates as a warningto what the fall may hold for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the suggested targets and also stating a willingness to accept a slight increase in rates if the aggregates were strong.


Passage number 556.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a few precincts that haven't beenheard from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement about the status of precincts that have not reported yet.


Passage number 557.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I'll do it quickly. The $350 million andthe 10 to 14 percent I think are fine. I prefer 4 and 9 percent [forthe aggregates] because I don't believe we're going to have a greatdeal of problem with that. My feeling is that there's a risk in theeconomy that tends to be on the down side and I just don't understandthe OCDs. I don't know, but my gut feeling is that [the recession] isnot going to continue forever, so I don't feel that we are going tohave much of a problem. On the other hand, if we do have some-59-12/21-22/81problem, I wouldn't mind seeing us have a little leeway on the up sidethere. I am perfectly willing to tolerate a little stronger growthdepending upon what happens in the economy and what happens tointerest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is simply expressing his preferences and opinions about the projected numbers and their potential impact on the economy.


Passage number 558.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only mentions Mr. Boykin without providing any context or indicating any differing opinions or arguments.


Passage number 559.
MR. BOYKIN. I'm trying to remember the numbers Tony gaveoriginally. I don't think I got them down right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boykin is simply stating that he is trying to remember some numbers accurately.


Passage number 560.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You want all the decimals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply expresses a desire to have all the decimals. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 561.
MR. BOYKIN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 562.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [For M1 and M2] 4 and 9 percent and 10 to14 [for the funds range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating different percentages for M1 and M2 (4% and 9%) and a range (10 to 14) for the funds.


Passage number 563.
MR. BOYKIN. Okay. That's what I wanted to be sure of. Yes,I would find that acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses that they find something acceptable, indicating agreement.


Passage number 564.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is for November to March, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation about the time frame.


Passage number 565.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes, I would find that acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their agreement with something and does not argue or object to it.


Passage number 566.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris and Mr. Black haven't beenheard from. No, I have Mr. Morris and Mr. Black down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have not heard from Mr. Morris and Mr. Black.


Passage number 567.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Black," without providing any further information or indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 568.
 I've said something but apparently it didn't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm ahead of the Secretary. I guesseverybody has been heard from. We obviously don't have any very bigdifferences here. Where has borrowing been in the last three weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that everyone has been heard from and there are no big differences. The last sentence is a question about the location of borrowing in the past three weeks, which does not indicate disagreement.


Passage number 569.
MR. AXILROD. I'll give you the precise numbers in just asecond. It has been running about $340 million this week so far andthat would be about the average. For the week of the 16th it was $268million; for the 9th, $493 million; for the 2nd, $192 million; andbefore that, $214 million. [For that period] we were expectingborrowing of $400 million or higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing a breakdown of the amount of money that has been borrowed for different weeks and indicating the expected borrowing for a specific period.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 570.
MR. GRAMLEY. Wasn't this partly a consequence of very littledemand for excess reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "partly" implies that there are other factors contributing to the situation being discussed.


Passage number 571.
MR. AXILROD. Well, initially. But excess reserves wererevised upward successively as the weeks passed. They ran a littlelow in two out of the first three weeks and were very high in one ofthem, so they averaged [close to expectations] in the first threeweeks and then were very low last week. Last week [excess] wasnegative; I don't how it's coming out this week. It didn't turn outto be nearly as low as it looked at the beginning because we got "as-of" adjustments subsequently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not entail contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the fluctuation of excess reserves over a period of time.


Passage number 572.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I only have some very limited substantivecomments to add to what has been said. A premise of a lot of thecomments was that nobody's dying to see interest rates rise at thispoint. And there's a certain sense that people would feel a littlemore comfortable with a decline, I suppose, if I can summarize theatmosphere. In that connection a number of people commented that they-60-12/21-22/81are not going to be upset by a slightly higher growth rate in theaggregates. Nobody mentioned the opposite, which I would now mention.If interest rates really softened, I wouldn't be all that disturbedabout some shortfall from any of these numbers we are talking aboutif, and I emphasize this, interest rates were declining in any verypronounced way during this particular period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 573.
MS. TEETERS. What if the decline in the real economy in thefirst quarter continues at the rate in the fourth quarter. [Interestrates] undoubtedly would be softer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario and states that the interest rates would be softer in that case.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 574.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it didn't happen in the last part ofNovember and December. I just don't know. It depends upon that funnydemand for money that we can't fully explain in the very short run. Iwould agree with you that it is not likely [to continue] over a longerperiod of time, but I don't know what is going to happen in the veryshort run.I wonder whether [my summary] is consistent in substance withwhat everybody in varying degrees seems to be saying. Well, let meapproach the funds rate first, where there isn't much disagreement. Iwould think 10 to 14 percent makes a lot of sense just in terms of theform. We're about in the middle of that now range and it allows [adecline of] 2 percentage point or slightly more in the federal fundsrate. I don't say that with any feeling that 10 percent ought to bean absolute floor in any sense; it hasn't been in the past and thisseems a logical range to put down. Almost everybody has said thatwith some exceptions. I guess everybody on the Committee has saidthat. I have no problem with that. I wonder a little whether theborrowing level that people were talking about isn't a little high interms of the balance of risks and possibilities here. I'd be a littlemore comfortable with, let's say, a $300 million number than the $350or $350 to $400 million that people mentioned, considering where weare now and considering this average pattern in the past, in order toprovide a little more assurance that rates are not going to rise evenif these numbers come in more or less as projected. So, I would raisethat question.We have a clear majority for around 4 and 9 percent [for M1and M2] on a November-to-March basis. In any event, I think thatwould be interpreted, if that's where we alight, as our not beingunduly concerned by a somewhat higher number than that. If we putdown a higher number, I'd feel more strongly that if it came in lowerand interest rates were declining appreciably, we shouldn't push anyharder than necessary just to hit the 5 and 10 percent numbers. Butthe 4 and 9 percent numbers suit me all right with the understandingthat we're not going to be very upset by some overrun and startingwith a slightly lower borrowing number than the weight of opinion hassuggested here. I'm just a little worried about that borrowing numberbeing a bit too high. And I think we do [need to] interpret thesenumbers--I don't know how to put that in the directive--somehow in thelight of what is going on in NOW accounts, if we can make any sense ofit, as opposed to a general increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is unsure about what will happen in the short run and raises concerns about the borrowing level being too high. They also suggest a different borrowing number than what others have mentioned.


Passage number 575.
MR. PARTEE. We have been carrying 7 percent for months asour objective on Ml-B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that their objective on M1-B has been 7 percent for months.


Passage number 576.
MS. TEETERS. You feel so sure on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. MS. TEETERS expresses confidence or certainty about the subject being discussed.


Passage number 577.
-61-12/21-22/81MR. PARTEE. Yes, there's some room to bring it down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a series of mathematical calculations and does not involve any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 578.
MR. SCHULTZ. That [depends on] the initial borrowing number.What happens initially with that borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the outcome depends on the initial borrowing number and expresses the need for more information to provide a proper answer.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 579.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I don't think much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Axilrod expresses a differing opinion or disagreement by stating "Well, I don't think much." This implies that he disagrees with something previously mentioned or believes that the topic being discussed has little value.


Passage number 580.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anything much would happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a personal opinion.


Passage number 581.
MR. AXILROD. I think the funds rate would stay somewhatabove the discount rate at that level of borrowing. When borrowing inthe first two weeks of this intermeeting period was around $200million, the funds rate was a little below the then discount rate.And in the next week borrowing was $493 million, followed by $268million and thus far this week $330 million or so, and the funds ratehas been about 1/2 point above the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the funds rate and the discount rate without any explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 582.
 So, it's probably alittle above--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is obviously a fine judgment, but I'dworry a little about forcing the funds rate on the high side of whereit has been or maybe even a little higher than where it has been, asopposed to making sure it doesn't rise in the very short run. I'm noteven sure $300 million makes that [certain], but it's just a questionof where we want to take the risks. My feel for the situation is thatit is more consistent with the comments I hear around the table aboutnot wanting an increase in the funds rate right out of the box or noteven wanting it if money growth gets a little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about the appropriate amount to increase the funds rate but acknowledges that they are generally hearing comments about not wanting an increase right away.


Passage number 583.
MR. CORRIGAN. So 4 and 9 percent would be the numbers in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the numbers in the directive without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 584.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 585.
 Well, in that interpretation, I think we'dsay something in the directive--I haven't got any wording--MR. BOEHNE. Or somewhat higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Well, in that interpretation, I think we'd say something in the directive" shows that the speaker is considering a specific suggestion or idea, but not expressing disagreement. The following statement "I haven't got any wording" indicates that the speaker is unsure about the specific wording, further emphasizing their lack of disagreement. The response "Or somewhat higher" suggests the speaker is open to considering a different perspective or suggestion, rather than disagreeing.


Passage number 586.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think I want to bias it to thatextent but [I'd include] some language that this takes carefulinterpretation of the NOW account situation. Maybe that's hard to do;I haven't worked out any language. But whatever the directive says,that is what we mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and uncertainty about including certain language in a directive. They acknowledge that they have not yet determined the specific wording but emphasize that they want the directive to accurately reflect the need for careful interpretation of the NOW account situation.


Passage number 587.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without providing the actual content of the passage. Please provide the passage to give a proper analysis.


Passage number 588.
 We could do it by saying "around" 4 and 9percent and let that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, having "around" is fine with me andtaking account of or analyzing the figures in light of the fact thatthese are not shift-adjusted and have a big NOW account component.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement and acceptance of using the term "around" and acknowledges the limitations of the figures being discussed.


Passage number 589.
That's not good language, but that's--MR. BLACK. And praying a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "That's not good language" just expresses a commentary on the language used, while "but that's-- MR. BLACK" seems to introduce a different topic or identifier.


Passage number 590.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the other hand, if we went with aslightly higher number, I'd also put in the directive that this istaking account of the fact--and we can do it this way too--that we arenot using a shift-adjusted number and that the discrepancy has beenquite large recently and we assume it's going to continue to besizable. So, theoretically, we can do it either way. It will be hard-62-12/21-22/81to get that language in there but [we need] some allusion to theproblem that we're moving from a shift-adjusted number. We have had along [explanation in] parentheses in the directive that we weretalking about a shift-adjusted number; now I think we need a long [onein] parentheses that we're not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is discussing the possibility of using a slightly higher number and considering the fact that a shift-adjusted number is not being used. The speaker acknowledges that it may be difficult to include this information in the directive but suggests that some mention of the shift-adjusted number issue is needed. There is no opposition or conflict expressed.


Passage number 591.
MR. CORRIGAN. Is that an illusion or elusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 592.
MR. PARTEE. It made a three point difference in November.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement of fact made by Mr. Party. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 593.
MR. SCHULTZ. From a perception point of view, I think we'rea little better off with 4 and 9 percent and tolerating somewhathigher growth than with 5 and 10 percent, tolerating somewhat lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is made from the perspective of the speaker and does not mention any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 594.
MR. PARTEE. From the perception of whom. From the financialmarkets or the people who are unemployed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking for clarification regarding the perspective from which the perception is being discussed - whether it is from the financial markets or the people who are unemployed.


Passage number 595.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I don't want to get into that one. Ihave some rather strong feelings about the fact that the criticalthing we have to do is to find a way to get long-term interest ratesdown. So when we target on that sort of thing, the perception of whatwe do has considerable importance since expectations are so much [afactor] in those long-term rates. But I don't want to get off on adiatribe on that issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses strong feelings about the need to lower long-term interest rates but does not want to go into a detailed discussion on the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 596.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a little bothered by the 5 and 10--more by the 10 than the 5--which is above our long-range target and,unlike M1, coming off a high number not a low number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The author is expressing their concern or disagreement with the 10, as it is above their long-range target, unlike M1 which is coming off a low number.


Passage number 597.
MR. BLACK. True.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 598.
MS. TEETERS. What do we have for the long-term range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is simply asking a question about something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 599.
MR. PARTEE. But what is going to bring down M2 growth in theperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is contention or disagreement about what will cause a decrease in M2 growth in the mentioned period.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 600.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was just going to ask. What, ifanything, is your estimate of M2 based upon here, Mr. Axilrod. Whatis the estimate for December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing doubt or skepticism by saying "Well, I was just going to ask" and questioning the basis for Mr. Axilrod's estimate of M2.


Passage number 601.
MR. AXILROD. Well, for December, the M2 growth estimate israther high, given [the data] we now have. In the last week growth ofmoney market funds was a little slower. That's not much to base [yourdecision] upon. But [flows into money funds] have usually sloweddown, with a lag, following a period of declining market rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents information and observations but does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 602.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And there is a chance that money marketfunds will really slow down now, because the money market certificaterate is at--and in the next couple of weeks may even be above--themoney market fund rate for the first in a long time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a possibility regarding the potential slowdown of money market funds.


Passage number 603.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's not going to help M2, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the mentioned action will not be helpful to M2.


Passage number 604.
MR. PARTEE. Won't that shift into another component of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question being asked by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 605.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Well, maybe" is a phrase that suggests hesitation or uncertainty, but it does not express disagreement or contention.


Passage number 606.
-63-12/21-22/81MR. AXILROD. We really have not allowed for the savingsaccounts to show the same kind of strength, so to speak, that they'veshown. If they showed that kind of strength, it would spill over alsointo NOW accounts, I think. We haven't allowed for that continuing.Those are the two principal factors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be an observation or explanation about the strength of savings accounts and the potential impact it could have on NOW accounts.


Passage number 607.
MR. PARTEE. You have a December estimate of 12.6 percent inthe Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a December estimate of 12.6 percent without any conflicting opinions or differing views.


Passage number 608.
MR. AXILROD. That's right, and a very marked slowing inJanuary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 609.
MR. PARTEE. You have it dropping to 7.3 percent in January.I don't quite see what is going to bring about that slowing from 12 to7 percent, if we don't really care what the figures are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification on the reasons for the projected decrease in percentage.


Passage number 610.
MR. AXILROD. Well, those are the two factors, GovernorPartee. The only thing I could offer is to look at October, which was8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply stating two factors and offering an additional suggestion to look at October, without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 611.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't realize the December estimate wasquite that high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the person did not realize that the December estimate was as high as it actually was.


Passage number 612.
MR. PARTEE. That's the trouble, you see; that really pinchesit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his view or opinion without contradicting or opposing anyone else.


Passage number 613.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Assuming you go ahead with one ormore of these three conceptual changes in the definition of M2, thatwould be effective at the beginning of January or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing hypothetical changes to the definition of M2, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 614.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can make the two we're talkingabout effective right away, I guess, because we have the numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that they can make the two things effective immediately because they have the necessary numbers.


Passage number 615.
 Idon't think we have the numbers for--MR. AXILROD. Well, we were assuming that at the beginning ofJanuary we would switch over to M1 as is and do away with M1-A and M1-B. But we had hoped to make the other changes effective in Februarywhen we've [typically] done the seasonals and the benchmarking and doit all at once.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing their plans and hopes for making changes in January and February.


Passage number 616.
 Because there are other--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And making it retroactive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents one statement without contradicting or contradicting opinions.


Passage number 617.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can you even do the IRA/Keoghs inFebruary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 618.
MR. AXILROD. That I don't know. That depends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that they do not have the information to answer the question definitively.


Passage number 619.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You raised another question, now that Ithink of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is simply stating that they have remembered another question, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 620.
MR. AXILROD. No, I was thinking of the other ones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement indicating that the speaker was thinking of something else. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 621.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a period here, [November toMarch], which encompasses a period of time when we used M1 shift-adjusted, and there is quite a difference. What are we talking abouthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage is providing information about a specific period of time and its use of a certain measurement (M1 shift-adjusted). It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 622.
 A shift-adjusted figure for one month and a---64-12/21-22/81MR. AXILROD. Well, I was assuming you'd start in Januarywith regular M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any clear statements or ideas that would incite contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of random numerical and textual information without any context or subject matter that could generate disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 623.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what is this number we put down--the 4 or 5 percent or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "the 4 or 5 percent or whatever" suggests uncertainty and disagreement about the specific number or percentage being referred to.


Passage number 624.
MR. AXILROD. M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement, claim, or argument that can be considered contentious or argumentative. It simply mentions "Mr. Axilrod."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 625.
MR. BLACK. It's M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is stating that "It's M1," implying that there may be a disagreement or differing opinion regarding the subject being discussed.


Passage number 626.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For December too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 627.
MR. AXILROD. Well, you're comparing it with old M1-B, whichis in effect M1. That's right. M1-B not shift-adjusted is M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a clear statement comparing M1-B with old M1.


Passage number 628.
MR. FORD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford simply agrees with a statement or assertion.


Passage number 629.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the only difference is what mighthappen in December. How much difference is that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the only difference is what might happen in December and questioning the extent of that difference.


Passage number 630.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Axilrod, but it does not provide any information about his opinions, beliefs, or actions. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 631.
 Well, there's roughly a 12--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have to be consistent. If thebase is going to be M1-B unadjusted, then December has to be treatedthat way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 632.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 633.
MR. SCHULTZ.precision.You take off from the regular M1-B series.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear evidence of contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about taking off from the regular M1-B series, without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 634.
Isn't it wonderful to be able to deal in suchMR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a positive sentiment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 635.
 That's why we all--MR. AXILROD. Well, that number we know. It's the shift-adjusted number that's a little doubtful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. In the dialogue, Mr. Axilrod expresses doubt about the accuracy of the shift-adjusted number, suggesting disagreement or disagreement.


Passage number 636.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's really M1 that's 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that "M1" is 8 percent without any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 637.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 638.
MR. PARTEE. And then it has to drop to 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a numerical figure without any contradictory statements or arguments.


Passage number 639.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it rose from 3 percent to 11 percent inone month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage states a fact without any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents the increase in a percentage over a specific time period.


Passage number 640.
MR. PARTEE. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee's statement does not contradict or argue against any other statement.


Passage number 641.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 642.
 As long as we have this around 4 percent, I'd--MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, that may be the more critical point."Around" means anything from 0 to 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made by Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 643.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me take this in an orderly way.The funds rate range is 10 to 14 percent; it was at least among themembers of the Committee. I'm not sure there was any disagreementwith that. That is where we are on the funds rate, I think. Theborrowing really is the only operating decision we're making today. I-65-12/21-22/81gave you a little case for $300 million. The great majority was for$350 to $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the funds rate range and the decision they are making.


Passage number 644.
MS. TEETERS. I can buy $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 645.
MR. RICE. Me too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as Mr. Rice's response is supportive and agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 646.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If $300 million is going to producewhat Steve thinks it will produce--namely, [a fed funds rate] a shadeover the 12 percent discount rate--then I'd go with that. That'sbasically what I was targeting for when I said $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their agreement with Steve's prediction and stating their own target for the funds rate.


Passage number 647.
 So itdoesn't bother me if--MR. BOEHNE. That's the way I feel about it too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers express agreement with each other's statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 648.
MR. SCHULTZ. If it doesn't work out that way, we'll kill themessenger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "if it doesn't work out that way." It suggests that there is a possible disagreement or disagreement about the success or outcome of a situation. The phrase "we'll kill the messenger" further emphasizes a potential conflict or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 649.
 I was going to say put it in--MR. BOEHNE. If it doesn't work out that way, raise theborrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker suggests putting something in, while Mr. Boehne suggests raising the borrowings if the first option doesn't work out. This implies a disagreement or different approach to resolving a situation.


Passage number 650.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's the way it will workout. I wouldn't die if the federal funds rate was 11-7/8 percent oreven 11-3/4 percent. We're at $300 million on the borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion on the potential federal funds rate without any conflicting views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 651.
MR. WALLICH. Suits me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the situation suits them.


Passage number 652.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, Now we'll talk about thecosmetics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they will now discuss cosmetics without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 653.
MR. SCHULTZ. You're being a little too frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, is simply making a comment about the other person being too frank.


Passage number 654.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The range here is not huge. We can cutthrough it all if you want and say 4-1/2 and 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 655.
MR. SCHULTZ. Oh, I think that gives a feeling of greaterprecision [than is warranted]; really that's nitpicking it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz is expressing his belief that the feeling of greater precision given is not warranted, and he is downplaying it as nitpicking.


Passage number 656.
MR. WALLICH. Well, there were some who wanted to accept anovershoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that some people wanted to accept an overshoot.


Passage number 657.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 658.
 We've often used "1/2" and we're--MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about using "1/2" and there is no conflicting information or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 659.
 I know, but--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not that often, it seems to me, inthe time I've been on [the Committee]. It certainly makes us look alittle sillier when we miss by a big amount if we put our targets interms of halves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal observation and opinion about their experience on the committee. They are acknowledging a potential flaw or downside in the committee's performance.


Passage number 660.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER," which does not imply any disagreement.


Passage number 661.
 I think we have a long record of puttingthem in terms of halves, in my memory, but I--MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely stating their personal recollection or opinion.


Passage number 662.
 And missing them by a large amountMR. SCHULTZ. I'd rather go with either 4 or 5 with someappropriate language than with 4-1/2. I continue to prefer 4 and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz simply expresses his preference for either 4 or 5 with appropriate language rather than 4-1/2 and continues to prefer 4 and 9.


Passage number 663.
-66-12/21-22/81MR. PARTEE. How about both: "about 4 to 5 percent" and"about 9 to 10 percent".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides two separate statements about percentages, but there is no contradiction or conflict between them.


Passage number 664.
MR. AXILROD. I think the Committee once did have [somethinglike] that in the directive, too, for some reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a fact or previous occurrence without indicating any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 665.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't see how we can target over 9percent unless we more or less agree that we are going to raise [thelong-run target for] M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's opinion or lack of understanding regarding the feasibility of targeting over 9 percent.


Passage number 666.
MR. FORD. That is exactly what was going through my mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 667.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I am going to vote to raise [the targetfor] M2 at the next meeting. We are starting in 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their intention to vote in favor of raising the target for M2 at the next meeting.


Passage number 668.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your mind is supposed to be open for awhile. It is supposed to be open for [unintelligible] too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the mind is supposed to be open for a period of time, including for something that is unintelligible or unclear.


Passage number 669.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement in this passage as it only mentions "Mr. Schultz" without providing any context or further information to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 670.
 There are some who would feel strongly--MR. CORRIGAN. I like "about 4 and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "There are some who would feel strongly" suggests that there may be differing opinions or preferences, but it does not indicate any conflict or disagreement between specific parties. The interruption by Mr. Corrigan about his preference is more of a personal input rather than a disagreement with someone else's statement.


Passage number 671.
"MR. PARTEE. Get it down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward statement or instruction.


Passage number 672.
MR. SCHULTZ. Me too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in the given statement. "Me too" simply implies agreement or similarity of opinion.


Passage number 673.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's all right with me. But in any casewe have an understanding that if it goes a little higher than that, wewill not be too bothered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their acceptance and agreement with the situation and implies they won't be too bothered if certain conditions are met.


Passage number 674.
MR. WALLICH. I would prefer 5 and 10 percent with no suchunderstanding, even though it may produce what I don't want--a rise ininterest rates. I think it is just bad in principle that we havefallen into implicitly targeting the funds rate only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 675.
MR. PARTEE. That's a very bad principle but I thought we hadgotten away from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion about a principle without any opposition or conflict.


Passage number 676.
MR. WALLICH. We've done that repeatedly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that they have done something repeatedly, suggesting a sense of agreement or consensus.


Passage number 677.
MR. SCHULTZ. We're going to have to get Henry a red suit anda beard here. I sense a conversion in process here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker mentions getting someone a red suit and a beard, indicating a potential shift or change ("conversion") in their persona. However, without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement or contention involved.


Passage number 678.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 1982 brings a new Henry Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact about the year 1982 bringing a new Henry Wallich. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 679.
MR. WALLICH. I'm just being consistent. I didn't want tolet [rates] drop too far; I don't want them to rise too fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is explaining his stance on interest rates and stating that he wants to maintain a balance by not allowing them to drop too far or rise too fast.


Passage number 680.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 681.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how to interpret that commentbut.... The only reason I hesitate a little on the 5 and 10 percentis that the 10 looks a little high to me, just visually. I think thatis what we are talking about here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses hesitation and uncertainty about the accuracy of the 10 percent, indicating a disagreement or contention with the information being discussed.


Passage number 682.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, seems to be starting a conversation or making a statement.


Passage number 683.
 Chairman, you said it was cosmetic, so 4and 9 percent with the appropriate language would---67-12/21-22/81MR. GRAMLEY. An alternative is 5 and 9 percent with anunderstanding that we may get even more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage shows a discussion or conversation between two individuals, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 684.
MR. PARTEE. I would be happier with 5 and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's preference for the numbers 5 and 9 without any opposing views or conflicting ideas mentioned.


Passage number 685.
MS. TEETERS. They're not consistent.SPEAKER(.). We aren't compromising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. Ms. Teeters states that "they're not consistent," which could imply a lack of consistency in something, but it is not specified what she is referring to. The speaker then responds by stating "we aren't compromising," which could be unrelated to Ms. Teeters' statement or could suggest agreement with it. Without further context, it is not clear if there is contention or disagreement between the two individuals.


Passage number 686.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think Chuck's point is very well taken.We're looking at a growth rate of M1-B shift-adjusted in our thinkingwhereas we are now targeting on non shift-adjusted. The differencewas 3 percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging and agreeing with Chuck's point.


Passage number 687.
 That is quite--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention expressed in the passage. It simply states a statement without any conflicting opinions or contrasting views.


Passage number 688.
MR. GRAMLEY. It was 11.1 versus 8.8 percent in the month ofNovember, and that is a huge difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement provides a statistical comparison without any indication of conflicting opinions or conflicting information.


Passage number 689.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and [consider] the problem we've gotif that reverses itself. We don't know what is going on here.Suppose that suddenly reverses itself in January.We'll just try to arrive at the greatest consensus here. IfI get preferences, I'll know the answer. Who prefers 4 and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing a problem or situation that is not clearly understood and is seeking to find a consensus or agreement among the group. The mention of preferences and asking who prefers 4 and 9 does not indicate disagreement, but rather a desire to gather information or opinions.


Passage number 690.
MS. TEETERS. Wait a minute. What are our chances of hitting9 percent on M2 if we have 5 percent on M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification on the chances of hitting 9 percent on M2 given that they have 5 percent on M1.


Passage number 691.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I think these are very small differences,Governor Teeters, given our track record in predicting theserelationships. I don't think it is a matter of strong significancefor the Committee, actually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing his opinion about the significance of the differences, stating that he doesn't think they are of strong significance for the Committee.


Passage number 692.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These differences are small. What we'reassuming is that we're going to continue to have a pretty bigdiscrepancy if we shift adjust it, which we're not going to doanymore. I think what we're saying with the 5 percent is that it[involves] an assumption in substance that there is a lot of NOWaccount [growth] in this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation of the small differences and mentioning that there will no longer be a shift adjustment. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 693.
MR. BOEHNE. One possible way to break this is to say:"seeks behavior of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M1 andM2 in a range of about 4 to 5 percent and 9 to 10 percent." It givesboth numbers and has a range and has "about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply suggesting a possible way to break the behavior of reserve aggregates.


Passage number 694.
"MR. CORRIGAN. We still have to draw the path, which makes adifference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a factual statement about the process of drawing a path.


Passage number 695.
MR. BOEHNE. Draw the path somewhere in between [that rangefor M1].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is simply suggesting that the path for M1 should be drawn somewhere in between the given range.


Passage number 696.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, put it at 4-1/2. That is a way of doing4-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee agrees with putting it at 4-1/2 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 697.
MR. BOEHNE. Without being too precise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention in the passage because the speaker uses the phrase "without being too precise," indicating that there may be some disagreement or differing opinions on the level of specificity required in the statement.


Passage number 698.
-68-12/21-22/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do that. The only drawback I seeis that in some ways one could argue that it sounds more precise--thatsomehow we're willing to tolerate 4 to 5 percent but we'd get veryupset if it's outside. But I don't know that that's such a big deal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a potential drawback or concern, but there is no conflicting opinion or disagreement presented.


Passage number 699.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In New York the market participantsseeing "around 4 to 5 percent" will tend to assume that the "around"refers to the area between 4 and 5 percent. And it gets us a littleless precision if we just say "around 4" or "around 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents the assumption made by market participants in New York when they see the term "around 4 to 5 percent."


Passage number 700.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know; that really doesn'tsound too bad to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and states that the mentioned idea does not sound bad to them, indicating no conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 701.
 But I think a disadvantage of saying "around 4to 5 percent" is--MR. BLACK. Well, M1 for last year is estimated to come outat 4.7 percent, and some little downward movement looks a littlebetter cosmetically. I think the 4 percent is a little better than 5percent and I am forced to settle on it for that reason. But Iwouldn't be disturbed if it hit 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker initially expresses a disadvantage of using the phrase "around 4 to 5 percent," but Mr. Black disagrees and argues that 4 percent is better than 5 percent. This represents a disagreement or difference in opinion.


Passage number 702.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whatever we decide upon, we have tosay here someplace in the directive or elsewhere that we have thisproblem with the fact that we think December is coming in high. Sowhatever number we have here is in a sense not as high for January,February, and March as it appears on the face of it because we thinkwe're operating off a high December number. I think that ought to beclarified somehow in the record. Mr. Axilrod is trying to fiddlearound with this language and it is so obscure that I don't understandwhat it means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification about a specific language in a record or directive. They do not express disagreement with anyone's opinion or statement.


Passage number 703.
MR. SCHULTZ. That is the best kind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion, indicating that the mentioned thing is the best kind.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 704.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you like to read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Explanation: The passage mentioned in the question is not provided.


Passage number 705.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Taking account of the significance ofshifts as they may develop between NOW and similar accounts and otherassets...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that it is important to consider the significance of shifts in accounts and assets. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 706.
"MR. PARTEE. NOW and similar accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions. It simply states that there are "NOW and similar accounts."


Passage number 707.
MR. BLACK. And other unknown phenomena.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions "other unknown phenomena," without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 708.
MR. BALLES. UFOs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states "MR. BALLES. UFOs" without providing any further information or context. Therefore, it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 709.
MR. BOEHNE. No, UMOs: unidentified monetary objects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that there are no unidentified monetary objects.


Passage number 710.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement based solely on the phrase "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" given in the passage. More context is needed to make a judgment.


Passage number 711.
 That's not obscure, that's just--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My quick reaction is that we're not goingto be able to do it in a parenthetic sentence. We've got to writeanother sentence in there after the one that talks about "seeksbehavior" etc. Then we could say: "In reaching this decision theCommittee recognized that the target had to be evaluated in the lightof the fact that shift adjustment was no longer being made and thatthe performance of the aggregates would have to evaluated in the lightof NOW accounts, which have been exceptionally large recently," orsome such thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 712.
-69-12/21-22/81MR. AXILROD. I was trying, Mr. Chairman, to make that applyalso to M2 to allow for savings deposits which have been very strongas well. And we're not predicting any strength here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their attempt to include savings deposits in their analysis and clarifies that they are not predicting any strength in the future.


Passage number 713.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's decide upon what we want to sayfirst before we decide upon what, in effect, the footnote says. Howdoes the around 4 to 5 percent and around 9 to 10 percent strike you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no specific contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they should first decide what they want to say before considering the implications or details mentioned in the footnote. The phrase "How does the around 4 to 5 percent and around 9 to 10 percent strike you" is not directly related to a disagreement but rather seeking input or opinion on those numbers.


Passage number 714.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'm less happy with it than I am with a precisenumber.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is less happy with something.


Passage number 715.
MS. TEETERS. You want 4.7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is stating a fact or a request, without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 716.
MR. SCHULTZ. No, I want a [single] digit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Schultz wants a single digit.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 717.
MR. BALLES. Well, there is virtue in the Chairman'sproposal. We've missed every short-term path this year by aconsiderable margin and I don't know why we should insist on misplacedprecision when we will be lucky to come even close to the intermeetingpath, if the past record is any indication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles disagrees with the proposal and argues that insisting on precision is misplaced because they have a history of missing the short-term path.


Passage number 718.
MR. SCHULTZ. The problem with it is that I think Tony isright. The Fed watchers will misinterpret if given any opportunity todo so. And I think it gives them a greater opportunity tomisinterpret if we say "around 4 to 5 percent" in that they will infact look at that as a range in which we're trying to operate, with adegree of precision that we don't have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, agrees with Tony's statement and agrees that the statement "around 4 to 5 percent" can be misinterpreted by Fed watchers.


Passage number 719.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I thought in a way, too.But when I think about it more, I am not sure what your objection isto "around 4 to 5." Is it in substance that it is too high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification regarding the objection to the range of "around 4 to 5".


Passage number 720.
MR. SCHULTZ. No, my objection to it is that I prefer 4 and 9percent and a willingness to tolerate somewhat higher growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their objection to the mentioned numbers, expressing a preference for different percentages and a willingness to tolerate higher growth.


Passage number 721.
 It iseasier to draw the path and I just think it works better than your--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, clearly, we'd draw the path at 4-1/2percent if we had "around 4 to 5 percent" initially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their opinion on the best way to draw a path and expressing agreement with the statement made by another person.


Passage number 722.
MR. SCHULTZ. I still prefer 4 and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement made by Mr. Schultz is a personal preference and does not contradict any other statements or opinions.


Passage number 723.
MR. PARTEE. This would be published when, Murray, February5th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification regarding the publication date of something.


Passage number 724.
MR. ALTMANN. February 5th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a date.


Passage number 725.
MR. PARTEE. And when do you [testify], do you know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 726.
MS. TEETERS. Probably February 20th with Proxmire.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a date, mentioned by Ms. Teeters, likely for an event involving Proxmire.


Passage number 727.
MR. CORRIGAN. I have a preference for 4 and 9 percent, butnot on the cosmetics. It is a small distinction but I still think theeconomy will turn around, and I would like to have the leeway down theroad rather than now. But the initial borrowing of $300 million isfine with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan expresses his preference for 4 and 9 percent and explains his reasoning, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 728.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how do we reconcile this smalldifference. After listening to all of this, how many still prefer 4-70-12/21-22/81and 9. How many prefer around 4 to 5 and around 9 to 10. We haven'tseen all the hands up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a show of hands to determine the preferences of the audience.


Passage number 729.
MR. PARTEE. You haven't asked about who would prefer 5 and10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement made by Mr. Partee without any opposing opinions or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 730.
MR. ROOS. You wanted just voting members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a fact or request made by someone.


Passage number 731.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, just voting members at this point.That leaves two with a preference for 5 to 10, I assume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are two members who have a preference for 5 to 10.


Passage number 732.
MR. RICE. I have a preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: no

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a personal preference.


Passage number 733.
 I didn't know how you weregoing--MR. PARTEE. And I thought you were going to say "prefer" and"live with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement and then the mention of someone's assumption or expectation, but there is no clear disagreement or conflicting opinions presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 734.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, all right. [Our preferences] arealmost symmetrical. It sounds to me as if everybody ought to be ableto live with the "around 4 to 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrases "almost symmetrical" and "everybody ought to be able to live with" suggest that there is some level of disagreement or difference in preferences between the parties involved.


Passage number 735.
"MS. TEETERS. And the 9 to 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 736.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And 9 to 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This phrase is simply stating a range of numbers without any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 737.
MR. WALLICH. It is the principle of it that bothers me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, expresses that he is bothered by the principle of something, indicating a disagreement or disapproval.


Passage number 738.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the principle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not present any particular principle or statement, thus there is no contention or disagreement to evaluate.


Passage number 739.
MR. WALLICH. That we're now beginning to fudge thedifference between 4 and 5 by saying "around." The next time it willbe around 4 to 6 and then around 4 to 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply pointing out that the range is being broadened by using the word "around."


Passage number 740.
MR. FORD. Suddenly, it becomes our long-term forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states a fact about the sudden change in their long-term forecast.


Passage number 741.
MR. WALLICH. It becomes increasingly realistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply expressing his opinion or observation.


Passage number 742.
MR. BLACK. I think Henry has detected a trend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply stating his opinion about Henry's ability to detect a trend.


Passage number 743.
MR. ROOS. Anything that is a departure from customaryterminology leads market people to read things into it, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by a person, Mr. Roos, expressing his opinion on the potential effects of using unconventional terminology in the market industry.


Passage number 744.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we ever given a range before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 745.
MR. AXILROD. I know we did once before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement or acknowledgment rather than a conversation with conflicting views.


Passage number 746.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I am pretty sure we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Partee is confident about something. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 747.
MR. AXILROD. I am not sure if it was for both M1 and M2. Itcertainly was on M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply expresses uncertainty about whether something applies to both M1 and M2, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 748.
MR. CORRIGAN. In this particular case we can probably getaway with it a little more easily simply because of this problem ofgoing from shift-adjusted to non shift-adjusted. I hadn't thought ofthat. That really does make a difference in terms of our transition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement by Mr. Corrigan considering the potential ease in transitioning from shift-adjusted to non shift-adjusted.


Passage number 749.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I just expressed my preference, but I'mnot going to fall on my sword about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz is stating his preference but shows no intention to argue or create disagreement about it.


Passage number 750.
-71-12/21-22/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many can live with the 4 to 5 and 9 to10 [formulation].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a mathematical equation.


Passage number 751.
MS. TEETERS. Do you want a show of hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a question about whether or not someone wants a show of hands. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 752.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Again, I just want to say that if wedo 9 to 10 percent, then that does imply very strongly a case--and Ithink the markets will definitely read it that way--that we're goingto come out in February with a revised figure that is somewhat higherthan 9 percent on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be disagreement or contention regarding the projected figure for M2. The speaker believes that the actual figure will be higher than 9 percent, while the markets may have a different perspective or opinion.


Passage number 753.
MR. GRAMLEY. I don't think that interpretation is necessaryany more than it meant we were going to revise the targets on M1-Bwhen we put a number like 7 percent for M1-B shift-adjusted during thesummer or early fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley simply expresses his opinion that a certain interpretation is not necessary.


Passage number 754.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When I say this, somehow we are going toget in here that we think the December number is going to be higherthan either of these numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 755.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We don't want to say thatspecifically. Suppose we're wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and openness to the possibility of being wrong.


Passage number 756.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can be wrong. Well, wecould be wrong, but it would take a very sharp drop in both of them tocome in below 4 to 5 percent on M1. It's now estimated at 8.8percent, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the possibility of being wrong and providing an estimation of a certain percentage.


Passage number 757.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. The policy record in that light, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod agrees with something that has been said.


Passage number 758.
Chairman, with regard to M2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything is possible. I wouldn't promiseyou that it couldn't come in within that range but it would take avery sharp drop in the last two weeks of December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that it is possible for M2 to come within a certain range, but it would require a significant drop in the last two weeks of December.


Passage number 759.
MR. AXILROD. With regard to M2--and also M1, moretentatively--the policy record [for the November meeting] clearlyindicates that the Committee expected a slower growth rate in thecourse of the quarter. That is, the 9 to 10 is really consistent--itwouldn't be that specific with something like 7 to 8 percent [forM1-B].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply stating that the policy record indicates that the Committee expected a slower growth rate for M2 and M1 in the quarter.


Passage number 760.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This figure is between alternatives A andB; what does that imply for quarterly growth rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement asking for an implication based on the given information.


Passage number 761.
MR. AXILROD. For M1 it would be somewhere between 4-1/2 and5-3/4 percent on a quarterly average basis, and for M2 somewherebetween 9-3/4 and 10-1/2 percent. They are fairly high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the percentages for M1 and M2, and describing them as "fairly high."


Passage number 762.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just taking the midpoint, the growth ratesare a little over 5 percent and around 10 percent on a quarterlyaverage basis, which is the nearest thing to a long-term target.Whatever we put down will be high in relation to the long-term targetsinterpreted on a quarter-to-quarter basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is describing growth rates and acknowledging that whatever number is chosen will be considered high compared to long-term targets interpreted on a quarter-to-quarter basis.


Passage number 763.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, the monthly growth rates are slow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement only states a fact about the monthly growth rates being slow. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 764.
-72-12/21-22/81MR. BOYKIN. [If we say] 4 to 5 percent and 9 to 10 percent,I have a little problem with the understanding that we are not goingto be that concerned if it comes out higher. That is a bit of adifficult bridge for me to get across because I would find acceptablethe 4 and 9 percent with the understanding that you talked aboutearlier but I am a little uncomfortable with it. So, to go to 4 to 5and 9 to 10 makes me even more uncomfortable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 765.
MR. GUFFEY. Just to follow on that, Bob, I would prefer thatthe Desk, without regard to how it comes out in the directive, starttargeting with 4 percent rather than 4 to 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 766.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, we are now talking about verysmall differences here. I am inclined to think that we are best offwith the 4 to 5 and 9 to 10 [formulation]. Whether we set that pathat 4 or 4-1/2 percent is going to make what--a $50 million differenceby 3 or 4 weeks from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker indicates that there are small differences in perspective, suggesting that there is contention or disagreement between multiple parties.


Passage number 767.
MR. AXILROD. Something like that. [No], by March it is thatbig, so it is less [for the next few weeks].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 768.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My concern is not with the substance.We all know the difference is very small. My concern is that I thinkwe are loosing a certain sense of respect because of how outsidepeople see these things. They see an overrun in M2. They see ustargeting 9 to 10 percent, which is over our preliminary M2 target.It seems to me that there will be an immediate feeling in the market--I don't see how we could avoid that--that we probably will move the M2target up in February and there will be talk about some easing. If weare willing to do that, all right; but I don't see how we can avoidthat impression. If we had had a shortfall in M2, sure, we could getaway with 9 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the potential impact of the perceived overrun in M2 and the expectation of a possible change in the M2 target. They believe that this could lead to a negative market reaction and a sense of uncertainty. This disagreement is evident in the speaker's statement of not seeing how they can avoid the impression that the M2 target might be moved up and some easing might occur.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 769.
 I don't see how we can escape that marketreaction; if that market reaction doesn't bother you, all right, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But there will be an explanation in therethat we were high in December, which encompasses this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The phrase "if that market reaction doesn't bother you, all right, but" suggests that one person is expressing concern about the market reaction, while the other person seems unconcerned.


Passage number 770.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we could say that the growth ratesimplied for January and February, given the present estimates, wouldbe below 9 percent. I really think we can handle that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that a growth rate below 9 percent can be handled.


Passage number 771.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can find a handle on that, too,Lyle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement indicates that the speaker believes it is possible to understand or solve something (finding a handle on it), suggesting confidence or agreement.


Passage number 772.
MR. BALLES. Tony, the present directive calls for M2 at anannual rate of around 11 percent. So what is different about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information about the present directive. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 773.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You are talking about the short term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough context to determine the specific topic being discussed, but there is potential for contention or disagreement since the phrase "You are talking about the short term" implies that there may be differing opinions or perspectives on the short-term aspect being discussed.


Passage number 774.
MR. BALLES. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a person's name and a one-word answer, giving no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 775.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we are talking about the short term here.The M2 growth rate was 16 percent for the month of November. And howare we going to bring it down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply discussing the M2 growth rate and asking how they will bring it down.


Passage number 776.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's go ahead with the 4 to 5 and 9to 10 and see what comes up. Before we vote, there is this question[of the precise language to use]. I am afraid we are not going to be-73-12/21-22/81able to draft this very well sitting here. I may exceed the limits ofyour confidence and trust, but if you would delegate to me inconsultation with the staff the task of putting another sentence inthe directive, I would be pleased to undertake that responsibility.It would say we are moving from a shift-adjusted number to a nonshift-adjusted number and M1 growth running a little high in Decemberbecause of this NOW account bulge. We would get a little flavor ofthat in another sentence in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 777.
MR. SCHULTZ. I have great confidence that between you andMr. Axilrod you can make it properly obscure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses confidence in the ability of the individuals mentioned to make something obscure.


Passage number 778.
MR. BOEHNE. I second that vote of confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his agreement and support with the previous statement.


Passage number 779.
MR. GRAMLEY. You are full of Christmas spirit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 780.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the alternative is putting it inthe policy record, which the staff will do anyway in other language.This would be in the directive. Is that agreeable. With thatunderstanding, let us vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a possible alternative and seeking agreement from the others present.


Passage number 781.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 782.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon NoPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin NoPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 783.
MR. BALLES. Now that this has been decided, I wonder if Ican return for just a second to your comments a while ago that I foundvery interesting, to put it mildly, that once we had decided that theonly real operational decision this time was the borrowing assumption,we could now deal with the cosmetics. That brings to my mind thequestion: Why don't we in the Bluebook, Steve, have some moreanalysis on this borrowing assumption that goes with the variousalternatives and its implications. This is a very key part of what wedecide at a meeting. And I, for one, would like to see some text,analysis, and recommendations. Is there some reason that it is notdesirable or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing interest in having more analysis on the borrowing assumption in the Bluebook. They are simply asking for clarification on why it has not been included.


Passage number 784.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we could certainly expand on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply stating that they could expand on a certain topic without opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 785.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interpret my comment. I donot interpret my comment as meaning at all that these aggregatefigures are not important. The problem I talked about is that withina 1-month perspective what we do operationally to affect our reachingthose targets is to set the path. It doesn't mean that these othernumbers are not very important in a longer-term perspective. But theconnection in any 1-month or 6-week period between meetings is very-74-12/21-22/81loose. It does in an operational sense come down to setting thatreserve path--to state it more accurately--rather than the borrowingassumption. The borrowing assumption is part of it. It does not meanthat we are operating on the basis of ignoring these numbers. But thenumbers are cosmetic. They are not cosmetic at all in a longerperspective. I just want that clarification in the record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying their comment and explaining that while the aggregate figures may not be as important in a short-term perspective, they are still significant in a longer-term perspective.


Passage number 786.
MR. BALLES. Even if you had not made that comment, I wasstill going to bring this point up. There is a hidden variablerunning around loose here on these borrowing assumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the speaker, Mr. Balles, is going to discuss a point regarding a hidden variable.


Passage number 787.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it is simply stating the name of an individual. To determine if there is contention or disagreement, we would need more context or information about Chairman Volcker's actions or statements.


Passage number 788.
 No, the point is still--MR. BALLES. And I would very strongly urge that we getsomething on it in the text in the Bluebook, unless I am missing somereason why they don't do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a strong recommendation to include something in the Bluebook, and they are seeking clarification on why it may not have been done.


Passage number 789.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is in the Bluebook, isn't it. Ithought you were raising a question of whether it should be in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply references the presence of information in the Bluebook and expresses uncertainty about the question being addressed.


Passage number 790.
MR. AXILROD. Maybe I could explain, President Balles. Wecould develop it further, of course. But one of the things that cameout of that study we did last year was that in terms of analysis andachievement of targets, the best kind of borrowing assumption toassume at the beginning of our path is the borrowing assumption thatseemed to be consistent with the interest rates that come out of themoney supply target. So, generally what we try to put down is whatthe Committee in reaching its decision may wish to use as an initialborrowing figure. Heaven alone knows what the final borrowing will bebecause that depends on how the money supply actually behaves.Presumably what the Committee makes its decision on, in some sense, isfirst whether it believes those relationships, and second, how itmight wish to tilt, if it wishes to tilt, the initial starting point.But after the initial starting point, this borrowing is pretty welldominated by what happens to the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of the borrowing assumption and how it is determined based on the analysis of interest rates and money supply. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 791.
MR. WALLICH. But the borrowing assumption is generallyviewed by people who look at these things at all as a proxy for thefunds rate. So, if we put this into the directive, it will beinterpreted as having taken a step in the direction of at leastinitially targeting on the funds rate. Now, it is true that borrowingshifts thereafter; but quite often we take steps to prevent that, likeforgiving low volumes of borrowing or redistributing borrowing over aperiod of weeks. These are all ways of focusing more fully on thefunds rate than a pure money supply target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the borrowing assumption is often used as a proxy for the funds rate and that including it in the directive could be interpreted as a step towards targeting the funds rate. It also mentions various steps that are sometimes taken to prevent shifts in borrowing and focus more on the funds rate. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 792.
MR. BALLES. Henry, I was never suggesting that we ought toput the borrowing assumption in the published directive as part of thespecifications. I was urging that there be more analysis and sets ofassumptions about different borrowing levels as part of [the Bluebook]for the benefit of the decisionmakers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. Mr. Balles is clarifying his suggestion, stating that he was not suggesting to include the borrowing assumption in the published directive, but rather promoting more analysis and assumptions for the decisionmakers.


Passage number 793.
MR. WALLICH. Well, that would reassure me. The second thingthat would reassure me is if we left the borrowing more fully to findits own level during the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the speaker's preferences or desires.


Passage number 794.
MR. PARTEE. We have to start someplace, though, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee is expressing a need to begin from a certain point, implying a sense of agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 795.
-75-12/21-22/81MR. WALLICH. Oh yes, we need a starting point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that a starting point is needed.


Passage number 796.
MR. PARTEE. That is all we are talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that the discussion is focused on a specific topic without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 797.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand what you are saying--Idon't know what you have in mind in substance--in principle I thinkwhat you are saying is fine. Whatever analysis we need we should havein there. Maybe you should talk to Steve a bit more concretely aboutwhat you might have in mind. I thought he did put in what he thoughtwas consistent with these numbers. The Committee has modified it alittle today and on other days, on the basis of where we wanted totake the risk, so to speak. But why don't you talk to Steve aboutputting something in.The Secretary raises the question of whether we are going tohave a Monday afternoon session at the next meeting. Normally wewould in the light of the fact that we have to settle on the long-range targets. So, I think you ought to assume that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a willingness to consider the ideas of the other person and suggesting that they discuss it further with another individual. There is also a mention of a question raised by the Secretary, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 798.
MR. PARTEE. There will be a longer projection [horizon],too, won't there. You will have to give us some look at 1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker, MR. PARTEE, is expressing the need for a longer projection horizon, suggesting a disagreement or challenge to the current projection timeline.


Passage number 799.
MR. AXILROD. We also plan to have alternative strategies, ifthe Committee wishes, as we have put it at other times, onimplications for phasing down or staying the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply mentions the possibility of presenting alternative strategies if the Committee wishes, without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 800.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other item that we have is the releaseof the memoranda of discussion for early '76. Maybe you ought todescribe this situation, Mr. Altmann.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for Mr. Altmann to describe the situation regarding the release of the memoranda of discussion for early '76. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 801.
MR. ALTMANN. Well, as we said in the memo to you, thesememoranda for the first three meetings of 1976 are described asunofficial because they have never been presented to the Committee forreview or acceptance as we did in the old days. We were under a courtorder to accede to requests for the segregable factual portions of thememoranda and the Committee made the decision in May of 1976 todiscontinue the memoranda of discussion after the memorandum forMarch. Those three memoranda were not presented because the draftingof them was given a low priority and they were not completed untilsome years later and by then the composition of the Committee hadchanged. That is essentially the issue. They could be withheld asbeing unofficial documents. They could be withheld, I suppose, evenif they were regarded as official memoranda.There is one other issue that I brought to the attention ofthe Chairman because I thought he should be aware of it before we putthese out. At both the February and March meetings there was anexecutive session which concerned the Merrill case--that is, the suitunder the Freedom of Information Act. And at the February meetingthere was a report by the General Counsel on the oral decision thathad been handed down by the District Court at that time, which wasagainst the Committee, on release of the directive immediately and onrelease of the segregable facts in the memoranda of discussion. Atthe February meeting the Committee agreed to the appointment of asubcommittee to consider what to do with the memoranda of discussionin light of this court decision, which was obviously troublesome inmany ways. At the March meeting, which was after the written decisionof the court, the General Counsel again reviewed the options and the-76-12/21-22/81Committee agreed to appeal the decision on the directive, but not onthe memoranda of discussion. As you all probably know, that case wentto the Supreme Court and back to the District Court, and the DistrictCourt ruled in June of this year that the Committee or the Board didnot have to release the directive immediately. That was not appealed,so that is a dead issue at this point. But this would probably be thefirst time that the System has acknowledged the link between theMerrill case and the discontinuance of the memoranda of discussion. Ithink everyone connected with the case assumed that was the fact. Andin testimony before Congressional committees starting in 1977 withChairman Burns on new legislation to require some detailed minutes, itwas said that the Board would go along with that legislation providedthere was an explicit relief from the requirements of the Freedom ofInformation Act. Later testimony of Governor Coldwell and then ViceChairman Schultz made the same points. I think it was generallyassumed that there was a link between the Merrill case and thediscontinuation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and describing the background and history of the memoranda of discussion.


Passage number 802.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said something that confused me a bit,if I understood you. I thought we were releasing these minutes in thepast as entirely a voluntary act.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses confusion and a request for clarification.


Passage number 803.
MR. ALTMANN. Well, it began as a voluntary act and continuedto be so in the sense that the court order only required that weprovide the segregable portions of the memoranda that were factual.We would have had to provide that on request. But we continued topublish the entire memoranda with only those deletions made inaccordance with our guidelines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the process of providing the segregable portions of the memoranda that were factual, as well as the continuous publication of the entire memoranda with deletions based on guidelines.


Passage number 804.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but on this segregable facts issue,there was a case about that. The only reason we haven't released thesegregable facts is that nobody has asked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement about there being a case on the issue of segregable facts is not in disagreement with the fact that the information has not been released because nobody has asked for it.


Passage number 805.
MR. ALTMANN. I think that is the case. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 806.
 Mannion may haveanother--MR. PARTEE. Did you ever see that draft with the segregablefacts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the possibility of another draft without indicating any disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 807.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I remember that discussion, but Ithought the whole thing was dropped.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker remembers a discussion, but they thought that the whole thing was dropped. This implies that the speaker and at least one other person disagree on whether or not the discussion was dropped.


Passage number 808.
MS. TEETERS. But we have only released these with a 5-yeardelay, is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 809.
MR. ALTMANN. That is correct. I should have stated at theoutset that in releasing these memoranda for early 1976 we would befollowing the schedule that we had followed for a number of years.The only thing about them that is different is that they are"unofficial.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying a scheduling decision.


Passage number 810.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought the only issue here wasbasically that we are releasing them now, though it is questionablewhether we have to. But if we release them now, we have continued thepractice we had in the past. Nobody can raise any question of ourholding back something that we have. On the other hand, if we releasethem, it calls attention to the fact that we no longer [prepare] these-77-12/21-22/81documents. And it may engender some discussion instead of letting thesleeping dogs lie. What do you have to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the pros and cons of releasing certain documents, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 811.
MR. MANNION. Everyone realizes that we don't prepare thememoranda of discussion any longer. If you are ever challenged, youalways would have to release segregable facts; those are not subjectto any privilege under the Freedom of Information Act. What theCommittee has been doing on this 5-year delay basis is releasing theentire memorandum of discussion for each meeting except for certainitems that may relate to a foreign country or central bank or someconcern of the Treasury Department.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation of the Committee's practice of releasing memorandum of discussion, specifically mentioning the exceptions related to foreign countries, central banks, or concerns of the Treasury Department. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 812.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that has been entirely voluntary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something has been done voluntarily.


Passage number 813.
MR. MANNION. That is correct, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Mannion's statement is correct.


Passage number 814.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question before us is: Do we persistin our entirely voluntary policy, recognizing these three haven't beenchecked the way the others have been checked by individual members ofthe Committee. And we will just say that these three months are allwe have. Or do we forget about it on the basis that nobody has askedand who cares. I don't have a strong feeling one way or the other,but I don't think this will attract much attention. Is Mr. Coynehere. We put these out without an announcement as I recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different options and expressing their own lack of strong feelings about the issue.


Passage number 815.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not provide any information or statements that would suggest contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "Mr. Altman" without any further context.


Passage number 816.
 We have not put out an--MR. COYNE. I think they will go completely unnoticed. Iwould bet that you would not get one request.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The two statements are separate and do not contradict each other. The speaker is expressing their belief that something will go unnoticed, while Mr. Coyne expresses his opinion that no one will request it.


Passage number 817.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hoping that Mr. Coyne is correct, I haveno trouble myself in putting these out with a notice that they haven'tbeen checked the way the others have but this completes [the releaseof] what we have and is in accordance with [past practice].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Mr. Coyne's statement and assures that they have no trouble in releasing the items without double-checking them. Additionally, they mention that it aligns with past practice, indicating consistency rather than disagreement.


Passage number 818.
MR. COYNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide an analysis without the passage you are referring to. Could you please provide the passage?


Passage number 819.
 Even when we have announced--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is this discussion of the Merrillcase in them, but that doesn't bother me much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 820.
MR. BALLES. Can you possibly remember what you said back in1976. I couldn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if the person can remember something from 1976.


Passage number 821.
MR. MORRIS. I am the only one here who was at those meetingsand I couldn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Morris is the only person in the current group who attended those meetings. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 822.
MR. FORD. Nobody can spot something he wishes he never said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Ford is presented as a general observation about people's ability to forget or regret certain remarks.


Passage number 823.
MR. MORRIS. That is a long time to remember what we said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris simply states that it is a long time to remember what was said, without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 824.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response without the passage.


Passage number 825.
 Well, I was there, too, and--MR. GRAMLEY. It is better not to start down that routebecause if we do, then we do have to stamp them as official.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are simply expressing their views on a particular topic.


Passage number 826.
-78-12/21-22/81MR. GRAMLEY. Put them out now and if [no member of theCommittee] has looked at them, they are purely staff documents. Ithink we are safer that way than to start trying to hunt down thosepeople who might remember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion on a course of action.


Passage number 827.
MR. ALTMANN. We have a prefatory note which states thesituation in terms of their being called "unofficial" because theywere prepared after a time lag and had not gone through the [usualreview] procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the situation regarding the "unofficial" status of the prepared documents.


Passage number 828.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if there is no objection or nocontrary concern, we will just put them out as quietly as possible,which has been the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a plan of action if there are no objections or concerns.


Passage number 829.
MR. ALTMANN. We don't issue a press release on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not issue a press release on this matter without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 830.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. While we are making them available, we arenot announcing that they are available, if I understand thiscorrectly. That means if somebody asks, he gets it. If nobody asks,I guess nothing will ever happen. With that understanding we shallproceed. I believe that is all the business we have. Do we havelunch out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a plan or understanding about making something available without explicitly announcing it.


