
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

<START>We see strong upward movements in response to positive surprises, particularly those concerning unemployment.<END>
So I remain comfortable with the “extended period” language.
April 27–28, 2010145 of 206 On the issue of Treasury redemptions, Mr. Chairman, I support your suggestion.
I have an open mind on this issue, as I indicated yesterday, about what we ultimately do, but I’d like to wait and see further staff analysis.
On asset sales, I think the minutes will and should contain a complete treatment of our discussion on this, and I wouldn’t include anything in the statement on it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Kocherlakota.
MR.
KOCHERLAKOTA.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
When I wrote this, we faced three substantive questions.
I think one of them has been taken off the table to a certain extent.
The first is:
Should we weaken the extended period language?
The second is:
Should near-term expectations of inflation are also low;
we reinvest maturing Treasuries?
The third is:
Should we include any language about sales in the statement?
In addressing these questions, I focused on four elements of our current situation:
Unemployment is high;
inflation is low;
but longer-run expectations of inflation have drifted upwards.
These four elements led me to say, first, that I do not think we should weaken the “extended period” language.
Unemployment is high;
inflation and near-term expectations of inflation are both low;
the recovery is in its early stages.
<START>It is true that longer-run inflation expectations have drifted up, but what I was looking at is inflation 10 years hence.<END>
I think the best way to correct that problem is to offer forward guidance about the balance sheet and, as many of you have been doing, including the Chairman, to counsel the Congress to exhibit fiscal responsibility.
Should I guess we’re going to see more analysis of that.
we reinvest our maturing Treasuries?
My own presumption right now is that I would be inclined to do that, but I’ll wait to see further analysis by the staff.
April 27–28, 2010146 of 206 Finally, let me talk a little bit about sales.
I was very struck with what Governor Warsh said yesterday.
I think that we should be conveying to the public the degree of consensus around this table
—no more than that and no less than that.
I believe the way we should be communicating is through the statement, not through the minutes or through our speeches or through our testimony.
We have actual consensus around this table about what we’re going to be doing.
I think we owe it to the public to convey that.
And the right way to do it is through our direct statement to the public.
What would that look like?
Right up front, I would say it would not look like paragraph 4 of alternative C
—I’m not arguing for that.
But I think we should state clearly what we have agreed upon, as I understood from the conversation yesterday:
“The Committee’s long-run goal is to normalize the balance sheet in terms of both scale and composition.
In keeping with that objective, it expects to undertake a five-year program of gradual asset sales once the recovery is firmly established.
The initiation and exact timing of these transactions will depend on market conditions.” I think there is a fair amount of heterogeneity about when we’re going to start and how we’re going to pace the sales, but I believe these three sentences that I’ve described encapsulate the full range of opinion around the table.
And if we have reached that conclusion, I think we owe it, as I say, to the public to convey that to them and not to have it hidden away in the minutes somewhere and not hidden away in different ways in our speeches, where the press ends up focusing on the differences among us as opposed to the similarities.
I was going to say one last thing about asset sales, and it’s in response to President Rosengren’s statement about when we’re going to start.
<START>As I heard it, and others can correct me if I’m wrong, it seemed that a majority of people did want to wait to start sales, at least at this April 27–28, 2010147 of 206 moment, until after we start to tighten with other policies.<END>
<START>But I don’t think that was a consensus view around the table by any means, and I think it would be unwise for the minutes to show that that kind of consensus had been reached.<END>
That’s my own perspective.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
You were a bit ambiguous.
Did you say you favored redemptions or not?
MR.
KOCHERLAKOTA.
I am in favor of redemptions, but it’s always good to have more analysis, so I’m certainly happy to see more analysis.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
First Vice President Holcomb.
MS.
HOLCOMB.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In looking at policy options, it’s somewhat easier for me to speak on behalf of President Fisher because, as Governor Duke reminded me yesterday, his views are not unknown to this group.
[Laughter] Were he here, I believe he would speak strongly and advocate for a policy approach consistent with that expressed in policy alternative B. In addition, he would favor the approach represented in the second alternative for paragraph 4, which would stop reinvestment of maturing Treasuries.
The only caveat, however, and I’m advised that I may sound somewhat like a broken record, is that Richard would prefer removal of the “extended period” language and substitute “for some time” as is used in alternative C as a way to set up changes to come.
Finally, Richard would appreciate the opportunity to participate in the Committee’s further discussion on redemptions and asset sales.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I favor alternative B with the “extended period” language and the implication in the first paragraph that the economy is gradually April 27–28, 2010148 of 206 strengthening
—I think it’s well conveyed in that paragraph.
I guess that it has been eight years of meetings, and I’ve never done anything but alternative B. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
What are the odds?
[Laughter] MR. KOHN.
<START>I think alternative B is both doing the right thing and consistent with what the Vice Chairman and Governor Warsh noted, namely, that we shouldn’t be surprising markets at this current time.<END>
<START>I think it’s the right thing because, even with exceptionally low rates for an extended period, the economic recovery, in my view, is expected to be gradual, with very low resource utilization for quite some time and with very low inflation and stable inflation expectations.<END>
President Kocherlakota cited the ten-by-ten inflation outlook.
I’ve never actually looked at that, and if there is some longer-run inflation increase, it’s probably, as you noted, Narayana, related to some extent to fiscal policy.
The five-by-fives have been stable, and I would expect them to stay that way.
In fact, we miss both parts of our dual mandate through 2012 pretty much.
I think there is a possibility that economic growth is faster and that we’re on a much stronger path
—I think we can’t deny that, given the incoming information.
But the output gaps and the inflation gaps are so large that, even if growth does turn out to be faster, even if we’re on the cusp of something much stronger, we won’t lose anything by waiting.
The risk of being too late to tighten is exceedingly small, even allowing for time to change language and to evolve to warning markets, if that becomes necessary, and if we are a little too late we can always tighten more vigorously.
So I don’t see any risk to waiting at this point and to retaining the “extended period” language.
It is possible that low rates will create asset price distortions.
I’d like to make a couple of points on that.
I think, to a considerable extent, that’s what they’re supposed to do, right?
That’s April 27–28, 2010149 of 206 the channel through which monetary policy affects the economy
—we raise asset prices and lower bond yields.
<START>We’ve got these really low interest rates in order to stimulate the economy through loose financial conditions.<END>
Second, it’s not clear that asset prices are out of line with fundamentals.
I agreed with your analysis, Mr. Chairman, and with that of others around the table, as you talked about equity prices and bond yields.
Usually the difficult distortions in asset prices
—the ones where the movie ends very poorly
—are accompanied by rapid credit growth and increasing leverage.
We’ve got very sluggish credit growth and, as best we can determine, leverage that is, if anything, still contracting, both in the financial sector and in the nonfinancial sector.
It’s possible that at some point these asset prices could get so out of line that their correction would itself create an economic problem, and I suppose that raising rates before that happens is a form of insurance against it.
<START>But, given the size of the output gap and given the size of the inflation gap, this insurance would have a very, very high price and we would do better to aim our macro and micro prudential regulatory tools at any of these distortions rather than sacrifice macroeconomic stability.<END>
On the redemptions, I agree with your recommendation to get more staff analysis before making a final decision.
I agree with President Plosser
—this would be a first step in tightening.
Obviously, given my outlook, I’d prefer not to take that step, but I also agree with President Plosser that you need a fuller analysis of how this is going to fit into the whole portfolio.
On asset sales, I think we do agree that they will be part of the exit strategy at some point, but what the market is really interested in is when.
And, as President Kocherlakota noted, we haven’t agreed on whether it will be before or after tightening.
So I think we can get at the nuances of this discussion much better in the minutes than by trying to find two or three April 27–28, 2010150 of 206 sentences that define the center of gravity of the Committee in the announcement.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Bullard.
MR.
BULLARD.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I start, I want to say a few words on the comparison of Taylor rule prescriptions that was handed out.
I would just stress that the Taylor rule was estimated over a period where interest rate policy was the only policy on the table, and during this period we’ve had our quantitative easing policy in tandem with interest rate policy, so I’m not quite sure what to make of graphs like this.
Presumably, to some extent, our quantitative easing has been substituting for the fact that we couldn’t move our short-term interest rate below zero.
So it seems to me that would have implications for when you would move off zero as well
—you would try to use both instruments to do that.
I know you also warned that one probably shouldn’t take simple prescriptions like this as more than just a visual impression.
<START>I support alternative B, Mr. Chairman, with many changes, so it’s going to be, as it was last time, an unrecognizable alternative B. On Treasury redemptions, I agree with your judgment, Mr. Chairman, and with the Vice Chairman, that we should not make any announcement on Treasury redemption policy at this juncture.<END>
It could be disruptive, given what’s going on in markets.
We could do that in June.
I see no problem with that and with getting further analysis.
I look forward to seeing that analysis, but I do think the issues are clear and that it’s mostly up to us to decide how we want to weight various objectives.
<START>As I said yesterday, I think we should give substantial consideration to the idea of state-contingent MBS adjustments to manage macroeconomic shocks during the extended period of a near-zero policy rate.<END>
<START>We’ve had a lot of success in removing emergency measures April 27–28, 2010151 of 206 one by one.<END>
Surely the quantitative easing policy is a special action undertaken only because of the very large shocks sustained by the U.S.
economy.
We have two tools on the table.
As I was just mentioning, we should use both of them to engineer the best outcomes we can relative to our dual mandate.
Concerns about communication are overstated, in my view.
Markets will have little difficulty understanding what we are doing.
Temporary dustups in markets because of communications issues should not drive policy decisions.
<START>We are trying to do what’s best for the American people, not what is best for financial markets.<END>
<START>Now let me turn to the long list of changes I have to alternative B. In paragraph 2 on inflation, I would change that, as I’ve been advocating for several meetings, to a version of paragraph 2 from alternative C. The paragraph in alternative C has the Committee taking responsibility for inflation in the medium term, which I think is important.<END>
<START>Expectations of inflation are stable today but may not remain so, given high fiscal deficits and the super-easy monetary policy that we are pursuing.<END>
<START>The statement in alternative C asserts that we intend to take action to keep inflation near target, both if inflation is too low or if it is too high relative to the Committee’s views of the appropriate long-term level.<END>
I like this language because it gets rid of the idea that the Committee is a passive observer concerning medium-term inflation developments.
In paragraph 3, I propose that we take the conditionality from alternative A and omit the “extended period” language.
The language would go like this:
“…maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent until economic conditions, such as,” and then list the three conditions, “warrant a less accommodative policy.” I like that because it makes it even clearer to markets that this depends on how the data come in and on how the recovery proceeds.
April 27–28, 2010152 of 206 We do want the recovery to be on firmer footing than it is right now before we take a tightening action, and this would emphasize that and get us out of the “extended period” language.
Let me suggest some food for thought at this point.
Many members have expressed reservations about asset bubbles and what to do about asset bubbles in the future.
We may want to include some kind of language in this list of conditions that would at least vaguely refer to the possibility that we might take action because we thought that some type of bubble had developed that was posing a lot of risk to the macroeconomy.
I think there’s a lot more sentiment around the table than there once was that in some conceivable circumstances we might take an action like that.
So that’s just some food for thought about the possibility of putting that kind of language in the statement.
Next, replace paragraph 4 in alternative B with paragraph 4 from alternative C. This paragraph addresses asset sales and reinvestment of the proceeds from maturing Treasuries.
Of course, I’m not completely happy with that paragraph either, so I have some suggestions.
First, if we actually did this we would have to omit the second sentence which refers to Treasury redemptions.
The third sentence refers to asset sales.
I would replace the language “will soon begin” with “may soon begin.” It gives us a little more leeway to react to developments as they come in.
<START>I’d replace “gradual” with “very gradual” to help assuage concerns that are apparently popular in financial markets about whether we would do this slowly enough or whether we might somehow sell too much of the portfolio all at once.<END>
The state-contingency is appropriate in the next sentence on the timing and pace.
The last sentence would then be redundant, which is what I’ve suggested for paragraph 3.
That’s my unrecognizable alternative.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Hoenig.
April 27–28, 2010153 of 206 MR. HOENIG.
I’m not sure if I agree with Jim or not.
[Laughter] I prefer alternative C, and I think we need to get rid of the “extended period” language.
I acknowledge that we’ve tried to clarify that we can always change course, but that language is there for a purpose
—it does give a clear signal as to our intentions.
I also want to say, before I go into more detail, that I truly have the same goals that the Committee as a whole has in terms of the dual mandate.
My perspective is longer run.
I do feel that maintaining excessively low rates over an extended period of time
—we’re not going to be tight any time soon;
I can’t imagine it
—raises the question of the degree of accommodation that then builds the imbalances forward, the excess and the credit growth that you can’t catch up with at the other end.
That’s what I worry about, having experienced it.
<START>On the tail risks, I fully appreciate the concerns about the situation in Europe, and Bill’s comments this morning were very sobering.<END>
I think we need to be very proactive this time in monitoring and discussing these developments, with
—I don’t know what we’re calling them now
<START>—LFI briefings at our meetings going forward on where these institutions lie along the risk scale to help us engage on financial stability issues.<END>
Our power of lender of last resort and as liquidity provider could come into play, and I encourage thinking about that for the June meeting, if we can.
Hopefully, we don’t need to do it sooner than that.
Now I want to pick up from where we were yesterday and suggest to the Committee that we continue our efforts to chart a course of strategy where we normalize the stance of monetary policy within five years.
It’s my view that, by taking careful and deliberate steps, we can return the economy and the markets to a more normal environment with the best long-run benefits or consequences.
The achievement of this goal will be reflected in the realization of a nominal fed funds rate close to whatever we judge to be neutral
— probably a quarter above 2 percent and a April 27–28, 2010154 of 206 combined Federal Reserve balance sheet half its current size
<START>—and an economy growing steadily with less chance of creating a new set of imbalances and longer-run issues, either in terms of inflation or asset valuation.<END>
I realize these are outcomes we all want.
I propose that we describe this as an exit strategy of two fundamental steps.
<START>The first step would work off the fact that we are well down the road in terms of unwinding the extraordinary policy actions that we introduced in response to the intensification of the financial turmoil that began in the fall of 2008<END>
<START>—we have closed the special liquidity facilities and returned the discount window to more normal operations.<END>
To complete this step, we should let the public know
—if not at this meeting, then soon
<START>—that we intend to carefully raise the fed funds rate towards 1 percent as early as this September, or in the early fall of this year.<END>
In doing so, we also would make it known that, at that point, we would pause and take stock before we move rates further, that we would judge where we are and what conditions are;
of course, this is all subject to conditions changing.
<START>This process has risks, I realize, but risks are unavoidable.<END>
<START>Saying and doing nothing has risks also, because waiting until we are certain everything is right could be too late.<END>
<START>I think this course offers us the best likely outcome, since most people realize rates have to move, and these very low rates have serious risks.<END>
I think there are benefits to announcing the first step of our exit strategy as a movement towards 1 percent, after which we will pause.
It can legitimately be explained as a continuation of the unwinding.
The markets don’t have to be disrupted as much.
It can also be explained as a rational move to take the fed funds rate from an unsustainable level of between zero and a quarter percent.
Of course, that means getting rid of the “extended period” language now.
April 27–28, 2010155 of 206 The second step for normalizing policy would then begin only after a pause and an assessment of the outlook.
We would explain this to the public and the markets, giving them clear guidance.
And we would explain that further moves would depend on our views on conditions and would not necessarily proceed in a stairstep manner.
The policy rate would then increase from 1 percent toward 2 percent and then on to neutral, as conditions allowed.
Indeed, depending on economic and financial conditions, I can envision that the Committee would begin raising rates beyond 1 percent at some point in 2011.
Also, as part of normalizing the balance sheet, we would wait and then
—as we move the fed funds rate up and confidence in the economy builds
—we would begin selling the MBS portfolio.
As I noted in yesterday’s go-round, I recommend that we eliminate MBS from our balance sheet within that five-year period, depending on the circumstances, of course.
With this proposal, I urge the Committee to set out publicly its longer-run strategy for monetary policy soon, because the fact is that the economy is recovering.
Yes, it has a long climb, but it is recovering.
Real policy rates are exceptionally low.
In regard to the actions outlined here, policy will remain accommodative for years to come.
The strategy outlined here would reasonably parallel the likely decline in the unemployment rate, so, as it moves, we’re moving the rate up, and that will preclude the likely steady increase in imbalances and longer-run inflationary pressures that otherwise will occur over the quarters and years ahead.
I think this is a reasonable, balanced exit that reduces the longer-run event of pushing rates on the other side of the cycle
—which we tend to do
—too high.
It gives us a more level, systematic approach, once it is announced and clarified, that is subject to the shocks that we have to deal with as a Committee.
So I offer that up as the way to think ahead.
Thank you.
April 27–28, 2010156 of 206 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
That’s very thought-provoking.
President Lockhart.
MR.
LOCKHART.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support alternative B. My interpretation of Bill English’s very good summary and analysis of the market reaction to alternatives is that language changes today equal tightening itself, not preparation for tightening.
And I believe the economic recovery is too tentative to move away from the current accommodative position, so I continue to believe we’re well served by the “extended period” language.
I’m also satisfied with the description of economic conditions in alternative B. Regarding the Treasury reinvestment options in paragraph 4, I take it that the recommendation to postpone that for further study and analysis, in my mind, takes paragraph 4 off the table, which I agree with.
But for what it’s worth, I would have supported, and do support, the status quo of reinvesting maturing Treasury securities, and I’m not in favor of allowing Treasuries to roll off.
I think the impact would be modest, and the gains would not be substantial.
I would have also recommended that it’s better to communicate the reinvestment strategy in the minutes or the directive, than to elevate that discussion essentially to the policy levels reflected in the statement.
Having said that, I’m flexible about addressing redemptions or asset sales in the statement.
<START>But, considering my assessment of the current state of the economy and outlook and the sobering issues of financial stability risk that the Vice Chairman, among others example, discussed regarding the contagion risk from Greece, at this meeting, in this statement, I prefer a plain vanilla approach.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My main concern with our path for policy in the coming quarters is that we be prepared and well positioned to raise rates when the time April 27–28, 2010157 of 206 comes.
And I continue to believe, as I’ve said at previous meetings, that the time to raise rates is likely to come far sooner than the Greenbook assumes.
A time later this year seems quite likely, at least to me.
I’ve said I’m going to be looking for a time when economic growth is strong enough and well enough established.
<START>If the Greenbook forecast plays out without any unanticipated adverse shocks, I think that by the fourth quarter final demand is going to look as if it has been pretty strong for a pretty long time.<END>
I think the experience of 2003 and 2004 provides a cautionary tale.
I note the citation by Governor Kohn of the episode of the early 1980s in which strong economic growth accompanied declining inflation.
But I’ll note that the chief claim to fame of the early 1980s episode in the historical narrative of the Phillips curve relationship is the demonstration that the amount of inflation associated with a given amount of slack was larger than expected, so for me that example might cut the other way.
The other thing is that the evolution of inflation expectations were quite important.
I disagree with the notion that moving too soon is likely to be costlier than moving too late, an idea that came up at our last meeting.
I think some are concerned that, with the levels of slack we’re seeing, a tightening could produce disinflation or deflation or force us back to the zero bound.
But I think we’ve demonstrated our ability and our willingness to use quantitative easing tools to provide stimulus at the zero bound.
I don’t think people are likely to view us as reluctant to try to increase inflation, should that occur.
So overall, I just don’t think we would face outsize challenges if we experienced a little more disinflation.
On the other hand, I think the risks associated with delaying tightening
—moving too late, or moving in a way that turns out to be too late
—could be substantial.
I think the risks associated with that are that inflation expectations might ratchet up, and the process of getting those down is nonlinear, the way policy at the zero bound is.
I think there’s a danger that, if April 27–28, 2010158 of 206 inflation ratcheted up and inflation expectations ratcheted up, the public could come to the conclusion that we’re willing to let our inflation objective drift up.
The current environment, where prominent economists are talking about how we ought to have a 4 percent inflation objective, or whatever, just adds to that.
I’m comfortable holding rates steady at this meeting, although, as I’ve indicated, I think we’re going to need to raise likely rates later this year.
I think that we should, as I said, begin draining reserves, begin asset sales, over the summer.
I was persuaded by Governor Warsh’s suggestion that we provide a framework, some statement of our overall goals, when the time comes.
I think June would be a good time for that.
I find President Kocherlakota’s argument fairly compelling for telling people what we know when we know it, as it were, or what we have a workable consensus on when we have a workable consensus.
But I can be patient and let a little bit more economic growth establish itself and let a little bit of dust settle in the halls of the Congress.
Why do I think we should commence asset sales very rapidly and go pretty aggressively?
Well, I have three or four reasons.
The first is that our movements on the interest rate on excess reserves are likely to be more effective, and we’re likely to find their effects more predictable, both on market rates and on the economy, with much lower reserve balances
—substantially lower than we have now.
<START>So, if, as I believe is true, we’re likely to want to raise rates by the end of the year, I think that argues for getting those reserve balances down as soon as we can.<END>
Second, I think the job we were trying to do with our program of purchasing agency and mortgage-backed securities, has been done and is no longer needed, and we ought to pack up and go home.
The housing market has stabilized
—prices are moving up, moving down, but they’re no longer plummeting, as they were from 2006 to early 2009.
Price discovery, as a result, has April 27–28, 2010159 of 206 essentially reestablished itself
—individual buyers can now do a much better job of figuring out what a house is worth relative to the market, because they don’t have the huge trend in overall market prices to deal with and to disentangle from.
Sure, there’s an overhang of vacant homes and there are foreclosures and short sales coming down the pike, but current prices seem to be consistent with a broad awareness that there is this overhang.
I think most Americans are aware of a huge amount of foreclosures coming on the market, and, if not, their real estate agent is likely to help them understand that fact.
Still, prices seem to be moving sideways, even with that overhang.
So it seems to me that we’re likely to get the housing market moving sideways at a low level of construction and with some fluctuating level of sales of existing homes for some time.
Third, the effect of announcing a program of MBS sales on mortgage rates is highly uncertain.
The staff’s estimate is 10 or 15 basis points.
In the last few months, mortgage rates have gone up anyway and by more than that.
So I don’t think the effect is likely to be large.
But even if it were, whatever the size of the subsidy, I think it’s bad policy to continue it any further into the recovery than we need to, because it just results in an imbalance in investment flows further out into the recovery.
The argument is raised that, as soon as we announce asset sales, there’s going to be a tightening and markets are going to react, and so we should wait until we are ready to tighten policy.
I think there are many in financial markets who will naturally prick up their ears and who are eagerly awaiting that first shoe to drop, that is, for us to announce asset sales.
But I think a broad segment of the public views tightening as beginning when we raise interest rates, so they’re not going to notice when we announce asset sales.
We’ve wound down and closed a number of credit programs, and we’ve ended our credit purchases.
Admittedly, these events April 27–28, 2010160 of 206 were a gigantic preoccupation for the very important market professionals that the New York Fed contacts on a regular basis.
But for a lot of Americans, I think, tightening policy is raising rates, so while it will have some announcement effect, I don’t think it ought to make us shy about making some announcement like that.
The fourth set of reasons is uncomfortable to talk about, but it’s essentially political economy concerns.
I won’t go into a lot of detail, but I think we’re going to have a window of opportunity in the second half of this year, after regulatory reform gets done but before legislative disposition of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac is taken up, which, if it ever happens, be early next year.
would I think we should take that opportunity to set a rapid course for the exits.
I think not doing so risks perpetuating the political entanglements that are the very unfortunate fallout of this whole episode for us.
On redemptions, I’m okay leaving it out of the statement, obviously.
I’m personally favoring a more aggressive approach, as you’ll note, to reserve balance draining.
Aggressive sales and redemptions would be ideal from my point of view.
If we’re not going to do redemptions, or if we are going to consider selling MBS at a slower pace, I’d prefer a more rapid pace and no redemptions than a slower pace and redemptions, since the composition of our portfolio won’t shift as rapidly.
<START>So I’m happy with deleting paragraph 4.<END>
I continue to favor language in alternative C, paragraph 2 over that in alternative B, paragraph 2.
That concludes my remarks.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Evans.
MR.
EVANS.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I generally have no change in my policy recommendation.
I favor alternative B as written, which I take to be without paragraph 4 on the Treasury redemptions issue.
I support your proposal to continue to study the Treasury April 27–28, 2010161 of 206 redemptions
—a very important issue.
I take this position because my inflation outlook continues to envision underrunning my version of price stability for
—I’d say ”some time,” but that means ”less than six months”
—a very long period of time [laughter].
<START>In addition, the unemployment rate is high, and there’s a tremendous amount of slack out there.<END>
I think the U.S.
<START>economy is performing better today, so that’s a good sign, but I am growing increasingly concerned about the international risks.<END>
<START>It’s difficult to see how that ends well, so, on balance, I think this continues to be a good time to wait and monitor the situation.<END>
Because my comments were so brief, I wanted to take a moment to comment on what President Bullard said
—I thought he raised a number of very interesting issues.
I didn’t write down all your proposed language changes, but I did have two thoughts.
One is on the question about the Taylor rule and the fact that we’re at the zero bound.
The staff has done a lot of very innovative things in trying to assess the implications of our asset purchase programs.
It seems to me there’s a possibility to take our 80 basis point estimate of the quantitative easing effect on longer-term Treasuries and ask, “Well, if I wanted to create a synthetic funds rate, what would that mean?” You know, five to one is a pretty conservative estimate of the effect of the federal funds rate on longer-term rates, if it were based on a monetary policy shock, and that would translate into 400 basis points on the funds rate.
During the period when the funds rate is at zero, such a synthetic funds rate would look a little bit more like the Taylor rule, if that were a reasonable thing to do.
So I think that could be an interesting approach for puzzling through these things.
On the “extended period” language, I continue to think that it’s a guideline.
A lot of us have gone out and indicated the state-contingency of that language, and that message seems to be coming across
—for example, President Yellen commented that markets seem to be responding April 27–28, 2010162 of 206 to news beyond the six-month horizon
—so that indicates that they are thinking that there is that contingency.
President Bullard had suggested adding more state-contingency, along the lines of the language in alternative A. In principle, I like being more explicit, I like putting markers out there.
But I just worry
—I’m not optimistic that the Fed and market watchers would get that right if we tried to make that type of change.
I don’t think they’d get it right initially, and, over the longer term, it might get caught up in some of the confusion over the European situation.
So while I can be sympathetic to that, I like the “extended period” language.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support alternative B. In my view, policy needs to remain accommodative until we see clearer evidence that the recovery is self-sustaining and we see the abatement of any further deflationary pressures.
I also support your suggestion to postpone the decision on Treasury securities reinvestments until we see further staff analysis.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me start with a couple of substantive notes before turning to the statement.
The first I’ll mention is asset sales.
The way I think about our asset purchases is that we bought assets people didn’t want at prices they wouldn’t pay.
To the extent that markets are now interested in buying these assets at prices that are substantially similar to prices at which we’d be willing to sell, we should take them up on that rare opportunity.
So I’m an opportunistic seller of assets, just as a substantive matter.
I don’t think that the unwinding of our balance sheet would constitute a material tightening of monetary April 27–28, 2010163 of 206 policy so long as we followed the Bernanke adjectives:
gradual, well communicated, well understood, no fire sales, all the things we talked about yesterday.
Second is the “extended period” language.
I don’t feel constrained by what that does to our options going forward.
I think that, if conditions change, we can change policies as quickly as we need to.
<START>So the literalist in me is uncomfortable, and that might be true for others around this table, but I must say that I think markets have come, after a long period of deliberation, to understand what that means.<END>
<START>I do have sympathy with the view expressed by a few around this table that if we are too loose for too long, we could see bubbles.<END>
I would state it maybe even more simply, and it’s the hard question I think we’re going to need to analyze in the next few months:
Are we seeing misallocations of capital, even if they’re short of bubbles?
In particular, I would keep good track of what’s happening to funds that are racing out of money market mutual funds yielding nothing and where they’re going next.
I would say that, to the extent we see material misallocations of capital and we have not yet moved policy, it should concern us.
<START>At this point, those misallocations are hard to see, though it’s not impossible to come up with an anecdote about them.<END>
Let me turn now to the tactics and process and parlance of how we move forward.
<START>I can support alternative B, and I do think we are wise to await further resolution, as it were, of the European shock.<END>
I don’t think we’re really giving up much by waiting until June, but I think we should be using the period between now and June, principally in the minutes, to see whether we can’t describe what our policy alternatives might be in June and thereafter.
I think that I heard some kind of broad consensus consistent with what Narayana said about how we think about asset sales vis-à-vis the rest of our policy tools.
I hope that we are not conflating two policy tools into one.
I don’t think it’s prudent for us to say that we’ll only move one after we’ve April 27–28, 2010164 of 206 moved the other.
I think there are too many nonlinear events, too many changes in mortgage finance
—too many that might hit us.
It would be better to think about asset sales and communicate our plans for asset sales in the context of what’s going on in the real economy and financial markets.
As a result, I’m more agnostic about whether that will precede or follow changes in the policy rates.
I think that if markets understood that consensus, which is not focused on LIFO or FIFO or anything else, but which instead is focused on what we really see in the economy, then we would be doing ourselves and markets a good favor.
One of the few benefits of the extraordinary period we’ve been in is that we’ve created lots of products.
It turns out that they gave us lots of options on ways to unwind the liquidity measures we’ve put in place.
I think it’s giving us some greater room, some greater flexibility, in the conduct of monetary policy, and I wouldn’t want to conflate them.
I would tie them to real economic and financial conditions, and I think laying down a goal post of five years as a medium-term prospect sounds fine.
We don’t have to say, nor should we say, when that process begins.
Finally, on redemptions, again, I think we should be communicating the robustness of our discussion on redemptions, because what matters most about that is what it signals.
I think the minutes and our speeches can help us, but I would be presumptively in favor of Treasury redemptions pending further analysis and our June discussion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Duke.
MS.
DUKE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also favor alternative B. I have to say I am sad to note that this is the last time I can shorten my remarks by piggybacking onto the reasons that were cited by Governor Kohn, and I’ll have to come up with my own reasons in the future.
<START>April 27–28, 2010165 of 206 My banking experience has taught me that execution does matter and that strong execution of an okay plan is actually better than weak execution of a great plan.<END>
So I would reiterate rather than repeat my comments from the last meeting and join Governor Warsh in saying that the clarity and consistency of our communication is, in my mind, every bit as important as the ultimate policy path that we choose.
I would also agree with President Kocherlakota that once we’ve reached a consensus, we should put it in our statement very clearly.
But I don’t think we should put it in there until we’ve reached a consensus, so I don’t think we should do it now.
Finally, with the situation in Europe, markets have plenty to wonder about and speculate about, so this is certainly not a time for us to add something else for them to chew on.
Governor Tarullo has now taught me to count the red words on the page, so in order to get down to the appropriate number of red words, I would leave out paragraph 4.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I’ll double-cross you and put them in blue next time.
[Laughter] Governor Tarullo.
MR.
TARULLO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I favor alternative B with the language in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 5 precisely as they are.
I continue to be sympathetic to President Bullard’s desire both to do policy in a more state-contingent fashion and to say so, but I agree with President Evans that the interpretation of any such move in that direction now is likely to be wrongly interpreted by the markets.
I’m against inclusion of anything from alternatives A, B, or C in paragraph 4.
For reasons some of you have said, I think we’re not at a point where it is useful to communicate such consensus as there is in the Delphic tones that the FOMC statements take.
So, for the present, a rich description in the minutes plus, again, I hope, the opportunity for the Chairman to April 27–28, 2010166 of 206 speak to these issues with the assurance of being backed up by the Committee is probably the best way to go until June.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
<START>Vice Chairman.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Thank you.
I just want to give you an update on the Greece situation as it continues to unfold.
There was a press conference in Berlin today that went pretty well
—the market reacted favorably.
It’s because they basically reinforced the idea that they are going to do this thing for Greece without restructuring.
There was an unconfirmed press report that the size would be scaled up
<START>—there were numbers as high as €120 billion, but subsequent to that Spain was downgraded a notch by S&P to AA from AA+, and the enthusiasm then evaporated completely.<END>
This just tells you that this is a very fluid situation.
Even though there are some upticks in the mood occasionally, it’s still getting worse, generally, and I think we’re going to have to keep our eye on this very, very closely over the near term.
As I said before, I think it really reinforces the notion of not doing much at this meeting.
I think the outlook is also broadly consistent with that.
The near-term economic growth outlook is a little bit better.
Inflation is a little bit lower than what we want.
The medium-term outlook hasn’t changed appreciably since the last meeting.
In the Bluebook, most of the unconstrained federal funds rates are below the current rate, and most of them haven’t changed much, either, since the last meeting.
So it seems to me that, given that the Greek situation is creating a huge amount of uncertainty, and given that we don’t want to create any drama, and considering everything that has happened since the last meeting, it all points to alternative B and keeping the “extended period” language in.
My sense is that the Committee’s view is that, if we’re not going to do anything about Treasury redemptions, then we don’t need paragraph 4 at this meeting, and I would concur with that.
April 27–28, 2010167 of 206 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you very much.
I would like to recommend alternative B, which I think most people were comfortable with.
We would exclude entirely paragraph 4.
There’s no reason to make reference to it if we’re not undertaking redemptions at this time.
I’d like to make a few comments and a general observation, and then I’ll come back to a language question.
First of all, on the “extended period” language, I do really feel, as was mentioned by Governor Warsh, that this is not much of a constraint at this point.
We have done a good job of expressing the conditionality associated with our policy.
In addition, I think that at this point the language has kind of flipped
—at one point it was pushing out our ease further than the data might otherwise imply, but at this point, I think we’re in a situation where the removal of the language will bring the expected tightening up even more than the data would imply.
So, to some extent, it’s an historical accident that we’re at this point.
Now that we are at this point, I’d say that we need to think very carefully about the steps that we take as we come to the point where we change the language, because, when we do change the language, it will be de facto a tightening of policy.
There is a piece of evidence in favor of what I’m saying.
If you look at dealers’ expectations, on the one hand they do not expect any change in this language at this meeting;
on the other hand, a very substantial number of them expect a tightening before the end of the year.
So those two things are not inconsistent, and, again, we need to think carefully before we take that step since, it will have a lot of information in it.
Second, on communications about sales, let me say to President Kocherlakota that I appreciated your comments, and you’ve been very constructive on this whole topic.
I do think that, although we have a broad consensus, we have not yet identified a specific plan, so we will be better off putting this in the minutes and allowing some socialization in the markets and in the April 27–28, 2010168 of 206 public.
Then, when the time comes for us to lay out a specific plan, this will not be a total shock
—we will have done our job of communicating and warning the public in advance.
I remind you that, when we began the purchases, the first reference we made to it was when we stated how much we were going to buy and over what time period.
So I would advocate that strategy, while agreeing that there was a substantial consensus around the table that sales are needed in order both to normalize policy and to normalize our balance sheet.
Now let me make a general comment.
<START>I recognize that it might appear to some of you that I’m someone who has a weight of zero on inflation and a weight of one on employment.<END>
That’s certainly not the case.
I believe I have a balanced view of both sides of our dual mandate.
But I think there’s kind of a psychological problem.
We have eight meetings a year, and therefore we have to do eight things every year
—it’s very hard psychologically to be patient.
But right now I do believe that we are in a situation where we have real threats of weakness and of failure of the recovery and disinflation.
While there are certainly real concerns on the other side of this
—and I understand the concerns that those of you who would like to move more quickly have raised
—they’re still more prospective than real.
<START>Financial imbalances and inflation are risks, and we need to pay attention to them, but I don’t think that at this point they quite outweigh the real and present danger that we face in the economy.<END>
So that’s why I would like to maintain the low policy rate for now.
When the appropriate time comes, of course, we will move.
<START>I’d also like to point out that, as President Hoenig mentioned, we have been in a gradual process of normalization and tightening.<END>
This goes back to last year, and I think it has been very successful.
I would just encourage everyone to think of it in those terms, namely, that we will continue to move forward as economic conditions warrant, conditionally, in a process of April 27–28, 2010169 of 206 normalization.
If there is no large, discrete jump in market prices
— I think that will be a sign of good communication, good preparation, and good management.
So I’m very much in agreement that we need to normalize.
<START>I think that we need to be patient in terms of looking at the relative risks that we face, but, of course, we will move at the appropriate time and will continue to move toward a more normal level of the policy rate.<END>
So, again, my recommendation is to hold off on any significant change in the policy statement.
We will have two job reports between now and June, and it’s entirely possible that we’re going to have a different perspective at that time, but right now I think, again, we are still very early in the recovery process.
With respect to language, the most creativity was exhibited by President Bullard.
<START>Again, I’m not in favor of dropping “extended period.” However, President Bullard did suggest replacing the second paragraph of alternative B with the inflation paragraph from alternative C. I believe we actually discussed this last time and decided not to make the change.<END>
<START>But I personally do not have any credible objection to the second paragraph of C. If anyone else wants to speak in favor or against, I’d be happy to put that on the table.<END>
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
Surprise, I would think that would be a good move.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Anyone else interested?
MR.
KOHN.
I think we already make that point in the last sentence of paragraph 3.
I don’t see how someone could interpret this as purely passive when we say the Committee will “monitor the outlook” and “employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic recovery and price stability.” If we’re going to add something to paragraph 2, I would add something to paragraph 1 and symmetrically take responsibility for employment.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Vice Chair.
April 27–28, 2010170 of 206 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
I favor doing as little as possible.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
Anyone else?
MR.
TARULLO.
I’m with Vice Chairman Dudley.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
Well, again, the basic point of alternative C paragraph 2 is entirely valid, and I don’t object to our making that point frequently, but, once again, there’s a little hysteresis, I think, in this process.
Any comments?
<START>[No response] All right, let me then propose that we adopt alternative B, excluding paragraph 4.<END>
Matt.
MR.
LUECKE.
This vote will encompass the language in alternative B on page 3 of the monetary policy alternatives without the language in the brackets, as well as the language on page 8 in the directive, also without the language within brackets.
Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes President Bullard Yes Governor Duke Yes President Hoenig No Governor Kohn Yes President Pianalto Yes President Rosengren Yes Governor Tarullo Yes Governor Warsh Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you very much.
The next meeting is June 22 and 23
—a two-day meeting.
It will be another opportunity to discuss important topics.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
To follow up on what I said earlier, could we think about a more organized discussion around our systemic issues?
Would that be possible?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Do people agree that we will be ready at least to discuss plans on that issue?
<START>Although there is some constraint in terms of the amount of time that the staff has, I think that’s a very, very useful suggestion.<END>
Anyone else?
April 27–28, 2010171 of 206 MR. TARULLO.
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
MR.
TARULLO.
Is it possible that Governor Kohn would say a few words for posterity?
MR.
KOHN.
I think he said 221 meetings’ worth.
[Laughter] MR. TARULLO.
Just a few more.
MR.
KOHN.
Good luck!
<START>[Laughter and extended applause.] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.<END>
We should ask for a little more than those two words [laughter].
“You’ll need it!” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you for your extraordinary service.
Everyone is going to miss you very much, and you played a very important role in this Committee for many, many years, and we’re all very grateful.
Again, lunch will be available, and Linda Robertson, I believe, is prepared to talk about current legislative developments.
Thank you.
END OF MEETING April 27–28, 2010172 of 206
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 48
