Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 24, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 24, 1982, at 9:45 a.m.Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members of the FederalOpen Market CommitteeMessrs. Boykin and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of Dallas and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, 1/ General CounselMr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Parthemos, Prell, Truman,and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting following the action to ratify System open markettransactions in foreign currencies.PRESENT:8/24/82Messrs. Czerwinski and Smoot, First Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City and Philadelphia,respectivelyMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Secretary, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Eisenmenger, Fousek, Scheld, and Stern,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Boston, New York, Chicago, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMessrs. Burger, Cacy, and Soss, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City,and New York, respectivelyMr. Pearce, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of DallasMr. Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofPhiladelphiaMs. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, Federal ReserveBank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 24, 1982CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would someone like to propose approval ofthe minutes?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Foreign currencyoperations, Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's ratify the exchange markettransactions first and then we will discuss Mexico.SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's ratified. I didn't mean to shutoff any questions, but let's discuss Mexico. Who is going to presenta proposal here--Mr. Cross or Mr. Truman or me?MR. CROSS. We defer to you on the assumption that you wouldwant to make a proposal, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we discussed this late last week.What has happened since then is first of all the bank rollover and thebank discussions about putting up additional money, which I'm surewill be continuing [for] some time. The calculations are a littleslippery at this point, but the presumption is that our present swap[loan to Mexico] of $700 million has a priority claim on any Funddrawing, assuming there is a Fund drawing in the next couple ofmonths. And, therefore, Mexico would get no net money--or verylittle, depending upon how that worked out--from the Fund during thisperiod. And without any net money from the Fund, even with someadditional official assistance during the course of the next two orthree months, they're going to need more money. That proposition--that the banks would have to put up some additional net new money inaddition to the rollover--was put to the banks and they have studiedit. That was presented to a degree as a--well, "requirement" may betoo strong a word--but an expectation of what would lie behindofficial assistance, so that to some degree these things work inparallel. In fact, I don't think the banks will make up their mindsabout this for some days or maybe a week or two, and some additionalofficial assistance will be needed before then. I might mention thatat a meeting in New York where there were maybe 200 people and about90 banks or whatever represented--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 115 banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It got up to 115 banks? Mr. Solomon madea little introductory statement describing the nature of the officialprogram and indicating that there was some expectation of some privatebank new money as part of this. I don't remember anything else that8/24/82was of particular significance, Tony, but my memory may fail me andyou might want to comment.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I just outlined the package, whichyou're probably all familiar with from the press. And basically theMexican presentation boiled down to their saying that the Fed would berepaid first on the $700 million swap; they told the banks that theonly net new money between August and December would be approximately$1.4 to $1.5 billion--basically the extent of the BIS package tocomplete an extra additional [unintelligible]. They said they hadneed of $1.9 billion, assuming everybody rolled over [their existingloans] and they had to build some reserves. Therefore, this justifiedsomething close to a billion dollars in new money as being essential.About 25 bankers spoke up. Quite a few of them said they wouldcooperate, implying they'd cooperate on the rollover; some impliedthey would cooperate as well in sharing in the new money. Nobody gotup and said no. Based on that, the Mexicans felt justified, and Ithink correctly so--though they put it a little more strongly than Ithink we would have said it--in stating that there was an agreement inprinciple on the rollover. We might have said instead that there wasa consensus in principle on the rollover; they said there was"agreement." But then they followed that up with telexes on Fridaynight and Saturday morning to the individual banks to get a legal,formal agreement on the 90-day rollover. The advisory group said theyhad put together fourteen banks. The two co-chairmen, from the Bankof America and Citibank, are working on the question of new money andwhether they can get part of that from the other banks, not just fromthe fourteen. As Paul said earlier, one of their conditions on thenew money is basically to see the Fund program. That doesn't meanthey would want to wait until it is written up and every "i" is dottedand every "t" is crossed, but they have to have a basic understandingof the Fund program before they will come up with any money. I thinkthat's it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to clarify, we're looking at this inseveral stages. When we talk about the Fund program, that in itselfwill be in two stages, hopefully. There was talk that sometime inearly September--how soon it actually will take place, I don't know,but I suspect it will be later than they were indicating a couple ofweeks ago--agreement in principle on a Fund program could be reportedto the public and the outline of the program would be known, but itwould take another month beyond that to go through the process ofactually getting the Fund agreement locked up, executive boardapproval [obtained], and the money ready to be disbursed. So, we'retalking about Fund money not being disbursed before the middle ofOctober at the earliest. But the hope is that there would be anunderstanding on the terms as early in September as possible. Andthis bank money that is being talked about presumably would wait forthat first phase of the Fund program, not the second phase. Butthat's temporary money; I don't know what the terms would be. It'sclear that Mexico is going to need more money next year--not just theFund money, which will largely go to repay the short-term officialassistance, but money on which to survive for a period of time nextyear. And that will take another negotiation after this initial $1billion that is being mentioned here or whatever it is. Thatpresumably would be a negotiation that would proceed during Octoberand November and maybe December.8/24/82MR. MARTIN. The $1 billion assumes all the banks hold still?No small banks have to be paid off?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you say no small banks. I thinkthat's an obscurity. The banks don't want many [current bank lenders]to be paid off, that's for sure. When there are a thousand plus banksout there, the problem is: How do you control them all? But if verymany of them wanted to get out, the whole [deal] might blow up.That brings me back to the swap line. I forget just where wewere when we talked on the telephone but there was an agreement inprinciple in Basle early last week for [official loans totalling] $1.5billion, meaning $750 million from the United States and $750 millionfrom the other countries. Those countries are insistent upon abasically equal sharing that does not take account of the $700 millionof new money we already have in there. The $750 million consisted ofamounts as high as million for Canada and Japan, million forthe United Kingdom and million for Germany. Then the amountpretty quickly drops down to million for essentially allthe rest of the G-10 countries. I think they're all in, aren't they?Well, with an exception of one or so, that was tentatively agreed on.The reason it was $1.5 billion was that that was all the Mexicansasked for, even though they think they need more. Mr. Silva Herzog,the Finance Minister, sort of clinched that by saying in histelevision address in Mexico that he was discussing $1.5 billionbecause he wanted to put a figure in his speech and he didn't want toask for more than he knew he could get. That was the explanation, Iguess. But once the Europeans heard that, they said no more than $1.5billion but with some understanding, at least among some of them thatI've talked to, that the Mexicans might have to come back for more.Now, subsequent to that and subsequent to our conversation,the Bank of Spain, or the Spanish authorities anyway, who did notattend this meeting in Basle have volunteered million as agesture of good will to their Spanish-speaking brethren in the NewWorld. That is the biggest single amount that any country has come upwith. They have had a swap agreement with Mexico, and apparently thatswap is more meaningful than I might have thought, or so they haveinterpreted it. So that would bring the European amount up to $925million and they want us to match it. I have, of course, discussedthis with the Treasury and they have agreed to put up $600 million.That leaves us with $325 million if we fully match [the othercountries]. The idea here is that we will all go in together. TheEuropean side will be done through the BIS, and the BIS is technicallyputting up the money with various kinds of support from the centralbanks or the governments. We will not be in that technicalarrangement, but the understanding is that we will provide the moneyin parallel to their providing the money. They don't have the samedegree of flexibility that we do in timing because they have to raisethe money in the market, and they like to go by a schedule and havesome warning as to when they're going to put up the money. They justcan't sit there and say "How much do you need this morning?" and putit up the way we can. But the understanding at this stage is thatthey will put it up in three tranches, and this is deliberate so thatat no time are we providing much more money than the Mexicans need.And we will put it up with a mutual understanding, which will bewritten into our swap agreement and into the Treasury's swap agreementand reflected in some way in their agreement, that this money will be8/24/82provided over the coming weeks as they need it but with an option onour part to evaluate the wisdom of putting up any amount of money inthe light of progress on negotiations with the Fund, with languageabout looking toward an agreement with the Fund by the middle ofSeptember. You may have some exact language there that you canprovide, Ted, but that's the general concept. We may not put up ourmoney dollar for dollar with theirs, because theirs will come inlumps. We will put it up as it is needed from day to day and theEuropeans won't come in with a second tranche until we catch up withthem on the first tranche or maybe exceed them by a few milliondollars. And then they will come in with a second tranche and we'llcatch up with that and proceed in that manner so that Mexico at notime will have any very great amount of money in the bank while we areobserving progress with the Fund. What is that language you have orthe nearest approximation you've arrived at now, anyway, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. It says: "It is understood that the Governmentof Mexico is seeking to reach agreement on the program from the IMF bySeptember 15 and it is further understood that it is the mutualexpectation of the Bank of Mexico and the System that the last one-third of the funds available on the swap arrangement would not bedrawn until the Bank and the management of the Fund have reachedagreement on Mexico's economic stabilization program." So, the lastone-third of the whole package and the timing of the BIS third trancheis linked to their essentially having reached agreement in principlewith the Fund.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the date mentioned is September 15.Also, we do look forward to some private money here but, in myjudgment, that's probably not going to be before the middle ofSeptember. It likely will be triggered by the same agreement with theFund. That's probably desirable at this stage because it's nice toget private money in there in one sense; on the other hand, I thinkthey need all the encouragement they can get to reach agreementexpeditiously with the Fund, and that is one way of putting morepressure in that direction. Any questions or comments?MR. PARTEE. Paul, I just want to raise a difficult issue andthat is the question of quality of credit. The Federal Reserve istraditionally concerned about the quality of the credit that itextends. At the discount window we require collateral and we takehaircuts on bonds and that kind of thing to be sure that we havecollateral. We have sometimes said that we would not lend to aninstitution that was no longer solvent, although that's a very iffymatter and I'm not sure that that has much point. But I do make thepoint that we have been very careful in the administration of thediscount window as a traditional matter to see that we were wellsecured. In cases where we were approached for lending in specialcircumstances, such as in the case of Lockheed or New York City, we'vebeen reluctant and we have said that it had to be bridge financing.In the case of New York City in particular, I recall that we said wecouldn't see the other end of the bridge, but it was bridge financingwithout much, really, in the way of meaningful collateral that NewYork City could ever put up. In the case of the other swaps in whichwe were engaging, I guess we have always felt--although we neverreally tested it--that the countries were solvent. In the case ofMexico, one of the things that disturbed the Committee when itconsidered [establishing] the Mexican swap was the question of whether8/24/82at some time or other Mexico would get to be in financial difficultyand there would be some question about the quality of the swap. Weseem to be in exactly the same--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are precisely there. They're infinancial difficulty; there's no question about that.MR. PARTEE. That's right. We are precisely in the situationthe Committee was somewhat concerned we might be in when that swap wasfirst approved some 15 years ago. So, from my point of view in tryingto sort through all this, the parallel becomes the bridge. I wouldfeel as strongly as a private banker that I'd want to be convincedthat something would be worked out to make the country okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I forgot to describe the collateralside. I think the fundamental point is the one you just made: Noneof this is going to work unless there is a good [economic] adjustmentprogram. And it's going to have to be a very draconian adjustmentprogram. I think we have to recognize the full extent of thelimitations on that program, which I'm not in a position to judge,certainly at this stage. I'm not sure that anybody can judge how muchthe country can take. A country can have a fine-looking draconianadjustment program but if the country goes up in revolution, it willbe unsuccessful. And I'm not sure the Mexican citizenry is fullyaware yet of what has hit them, to say the least. But that has to bethe fundamental backstop of any credit. We have labored long over thecollateral issue and there aren't any terribly satisfactory answersbecause Mexico doesn't have that much collateral. But there areanswers, satisfactory or not. The idea of this is that our presentswap will remain secured, if that's the word, by a Fund agreement thatdoesn't exist yet. But if it does come into existence, our swap willhave first claim on it. This second loan--and the proposal is thatthis would be a separate swap--will be secured along side the BISarrangement with the remainder of the Fund drawings as they areavailable over time. I guess we have the gold [collateral] byimplication. They are willing to pledge $250 million in gold, whichdoesn't go very far, but there it is. And by some assignment yet tobe worked out, oil revenues are an ultimate backstop if nothing elseworks. Ted, maybe you're more up-to-date on that negotiation than Iam. The BIS people are in Mexico City discussing that now.MR. TRUMAN. Mike was just on the phone with them.MR. BRADFIELD. The arrangement that has now been worked outbetween the Bank of Mexico and the BIS as far as a direct assignmentby debtors, that is to say oil companies, is that Exxon and other oilcompanies in the G-10 countries [will assign] to the BIS an amount inexcess of what would now be $1825 million of the total amount of thecredit extended. The assignment would be substantially in excess ofthat amount, somewhere around $2.5 billion in total.MR. PARTEE. This is on future oil deliveries?MR. BRADFIELD. These are future oil deliveries. Theassignments would be made now and would begin to flow into the BISsometime, maturing one year from now.8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Does this reflect the oil that waspreviously in hock to the private banks?MR. BRADFIELD. No, the arrangements will clearly providethat they would have to assign oil that has not been previouslyassigned. It would be oil revenues under contracts that exist now andthat would be free from other encumbrances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's assigned to the BIS but we get ashare of that to the extent that our--MR. BRADFIELD. The BIS is our agent for the collection ofthese revenues.MR. PARTEE. We are fully covered?MR. ROOS. If their picture became more dismal and there werea political reaction down there, obviously these types of agreementswould be rather meaningless, wouldn't they? There is no way--unlesswe build oil tanks in all of our new Fed buildings--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any way of gettingabsolute protection against that kind of eventuality. Let me alsorecognize another bit of reality. Whatever arrangements we make forcollateral, including our own swap, we may get to the point whereMexico has no money to pay, in effect. They may have some oilrevenues, let's say, but whether we demand the oil revenues underthose circumstances is going to have to be a decision made at thetime. If we're going to bankrupt them by demanding the oil revenues,we may want to roll over the swap and make a new oil revenue deallater. That's not the intention, but I think that's inherent in thesituation. When a country or a borrower doesn't have any money, hedoesn't have any money no matter what kind of--MR. BRADFIELD. I would agree with the Chairman that thelatter problem is the more serious one. There are problems with thetechnical aspects of the assignment, but I would like you tounderstand that the assignment is an assignment of revenues bycompanies that operate outside of Mexico. So, there would be no waythat those companies could get out of the assignment, theoretically.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the oil showed up.MR. PARTEE. If the oil was delivered.MR. BRADFIELD. But I assume that Mexico has to deliver theoil; they have to sell oil.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's a lot of oil that is alreadyassigned. I don't know if you have the numbers, Michael, on what isalready assigned to private banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure anybody does.MR. BRADFIELD. We are trying. Mr. Patrikis [of the New YorkFederal Reserve Bank] is in Mexico City, and one of the things we haveasked him to do is to collect all of the appendices and agreements forassignment.8/24/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have done a lot of these deals--increasingly in recent months--but they told us that a relativelysmall fraction has been placed. Now, whether that's true or not, Idon't know; but that's the story they gave.MS. TEETERS. What is the annual or monthly flow?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They get $15 billion dollars a year,roughly, from oil at current levels of production and current prices.So there's quite a lot of flow there. The monthly flow is--MR. TRUMAN. A billion and a quarter dollars.MR. RICE. Is that total production or exports?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's exports.MR. WALLICH. We want to bear in mind that Mexico a few yearsago was a reasonably viable country without oil. At the same timethere is a basic economy that can function; the oil is an addition.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm not clear on one thing. Is itanticipated that we would use the funds from the IMF to settle that$700 million drawing?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's anticipated now, but I can alsoanticipate a problem. If that money comes through on November 1 orOctober 15, say, and they have no other source of money and don't havethe money to pay us, we may be faced with a decision on a rollover.MR. BLACK. But in setting our share, they made thatassumption I gather, didn't they?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody understands that we have a priorclaim on IMF money from the earlier swap. Whether we can cash in onthat claim or not remains to be seen. But legally that's theposition. I also want to mention the rate. I don't know whether wefinally settled on this, but ordinarily we lend essentially at theTreasury bill rate on these things; the BIS is going to lend at LIBORplus which raises the question of whether they should begetting more than we would be getting; right in today's market it'sseveral percentage points. More normally it would be a significantmargin but not quite as big as it is at the moment. So, we havediscussed a possibility--this is the BIS agreement and I presume ourswould be parallel--that the second swap would have a 3-month maturityand could be rolled over 3 times, which makes it a 1-year loanpotentially. And thus there might be some logic in using the one-yearbill rate and marking it up point or something, which comes muchcloser on average to where LIBOR has been in the past. Nobody knowswhat it will be in the future. But it is natural to do the same thingas the Treasury: I don't know whether we've resolved this with theTreasury yet or not.MR. TRUMAN. They accepted that proposition--using the one-year Treasury bill rate on the yield basis off the constant maturityseries that we publish.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Plus8/24/82MR. TRUMAN. PlusCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It probably will come out cheaper thanLIBOR, but that depends upon the shape of the yield curve. If we hada steeply rising yield curve, it would not; if we had a relativelyflat yield curve, it would be less than LIBOR. But it's someplace inthe ballpark. So, that's the interest rate that we are talking about.Let me ask whether there are any other questions or commentsabout this in general. If there aren't, we're only left with thedecision of whether to do $300 million, which makes [the total] a niceround billion dollars, which is what I was thinking of when I talkedwith you before. I guess the Europeans will live with that. So, theU.S. share would be $900 million and the European share would be $925million. Or we may want to make a grand gesture and throw in another$25 million and make our share equal.MR. PARTEE. Would this be classified just as an addition tothe swap or is it a special--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it's a new swap.MR. PARTEE. It's a special thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a different swap as we have itstructured now so that it can be parallel with the BIS lending and the[original] $700 million swap will be held where it is.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not so much worried about theMexicans, but the Europeans will not really understand why we were sochintzy if we come in $25 million short of the 50-50 match. Ipersonally would put in for it.MR. FORD. Are we going to offend the French, Tony?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only consideration I can see on theother side is that we will be discussing this with the Europeans inToronto, I'm sure, and I can see how things go. If they have reallyshut off the principal payments on their loans, this should be enough,particularly if we want private banks to come in. But there's alwaysa possibility that there will be a need for a few hundred million morealong the line here someplace, so I want to warn you about that. Butthis should be enough as I now see it. Well, I'll put itconservatively: The calculations now assume that they get a prettyfull rollover from the private banks; assuming that the private banksdo come in once there is a Fund agreement, this should last themthrough the Fund agreement if that's successful. And after the Fundagreement in principle, at that point if the banks come in for somemore, I do not see that we're going to have to put up any more.That's my judgment at the moment, but I would not promise you that theMexicans are not going to run out [of dollars] during the next two tothree months.MR. ROOS. Are there other problem situations in that part ofthe world that conceivably are likely to follow or fall into the same[difficulties]?MR. MARTIN. Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela for example?8/24/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Argentina is the most imminent of those, Ithink. It's a different situation in many respects, but just in termsof our own posture--and it's worth discussing briefly--we have no swapagreement with Argentina. We have always refused to extend [the swapnetwork]; this [swap line] with Mexico is somewhat of a special dealwith a neighbor. The Mexican currency was convertible. That is nottrue generally of Latin America in the same sense. I think we havereason to hold the line as the Federal Reserve. What the U.S.government would want to do in the case of Argentina is something elseagain. I imagine that if Argentina gets into this kind of jam, thequestion is going to be raised. But we do have a distinction in whatwe have done in the past and in our general attitude between Mexicoand Argentina, just to take the next most imminent [problem economy].Brazil, Venezuela, and others could be involved, too, but I thinkArgentina is the most imminent. Now, their debt is a lot smaller, ofcourse. It's very sizable, but it is less than half the size ofMexico's. It's not all that much less than half, I guess. What isit--about $30-odd billion?MR. TRUMAN. $35 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $35 billion; it has gotten big, too.MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our banks are heavily involved, but not asheavily as in the case of Mexico; I presume about half as much. The$325 million proposition is on the table; it may even have beenseconded. To make it a little more formal than was expressed, itmakes some sense to me, so long as we have these understandings, thatwe don't appear to be chintzy for $25 million.MR. PARTEE. Is the $600 million from the Treasury solid?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean by solid? They've agreedto it right now. I don't know if the paper is signed yet, but I--MR. PARTEE. It just occurs to me that they have not donethis; they have not had the benefit of a Congressional appropriationand they must be trying to get the money in some other place.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They don't do it. It's the ESF.MR. PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. They have some money?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. PARTEE. I didn't think they had any money left.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have put up $1 billion for this for aweek or so to bridge the Department of Energy's payment. So, theyhave a billion dollar swap right today. Now, that will be repaidtoday or tomorrow. Did they reach agreement on that oil thing?MR. TRUMAN. No, not yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are still negotiating the details ofthis oil thing. But presumably that will be settled in a day or two.8/24/82Their billion dollar swap will be repaid and then they will come backin proportionately.MR. PARTEE. That August 24 date that Sam mentioned--Ibelieve that's today.MR. CROSS. That's right.MR. PARTEE. August 24 is today, isn't it?MR. TRUMAN. Yes. We just confirmed that [date].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was supposed to be agreed to yesterday,but I know it was put over until today. It sounds as if it's beingput over until tomorrow.MR. CROSS. It matured today but it may be extended a day ortwo if they don't work out that problem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The ESF is in a much healthiercondition than when I was there.MR. PARTEE. Are they really? I just have not kept track ofit, Tony.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's the combination of all thosedrawings that we did from the IMF when we did the November 1 package,which we don't have to repay, so it only appears on the asset side ofthe ESF. But all these high interest rates that the Federal Reserveis giving these countries has put the ESF in a very healthy condition.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, under the law under which the ESFcurrently operates, if [the loan] is outstanding for more than sixmonths, they have to get a Presidential determination that this is aspecial situation that justifies lending for more than six months. Ithink they intend to get that Presidential determination right now.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, they do intend to do that. As a matter offact we saw the draft last night. They would have it as part of thepackage.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would say that there would be verystrong support from the Congress. The thought of economic chaos inMexico, with all those millions of people trying to pour in over theborder, is just so upsetting to members of the Congress that I thinkthere would be widespread support.MR. MARTIN. The month after they pass the first big changein the immigration statute in 30 years or whatever it is!MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, there's likely to be enougheconomic hardship in Mexico that there will be flight across theborder anyhow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we're going to get it anyway.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there is a perceptible differencebetween austerity programs and actual collapse.-10-8/24/82MR. MARTIN. For 70 million people, you know!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a motion for $325 million.The exact [terms] I'm going to say are available to you; I'm not surethe language is all worked out to the last comma. The main elementshave been touched upon: the rate, the collateral, the term of 3months, and the rollovers for a year. The implication is that wewould be repaid during the course of the year, as the Fund moneybecomes available, but that's not promised.MS. TEETERS. Do we get paid back equally with the BIS? Isthat the idea?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, out of the same pool equally.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we can all get out in ayear because they can only draw a maximum of about $1-1/4 billion fromthe Fund in the first year, or maybe $1-1/2 billion if they frontload. So, if you take--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be a little more than that ifthey front load.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have our $700 million and we willget a part of the BIS--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't know; it depends uponwhether they get a compensatory financing facility [drawing from theIMF] and how much is front loaded. But with $1.8 billion and $700million you have $2.5 billion. That is more than front loading alonewould provide out of the Fund agreement.MR. PARTEE. And their own circumstances could improve.There could be an increase in oil prices, for example.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if it really worked out well, wewould get paid out of private financing. The banks would put up moreloans and Mexico would repay us; but we may be dreaming, too.MR. PARTEE. Of course, if oil prices decline--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have gotten 9 different stories in thecourse of this negotiation about whether they can, among other things,increase their oil production or not. Two weeks ago they were goingto increase it way up; this week, no. It's going to be a difficultnegotiation. Do I take silence as assent?MS. TEETERS. Do you want a formal vote?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have a formal vote if anybodywants to object. Not hearing any objections I think the Secretary canrecord it as unanimous.MR. PARTEE. Yes, we do want it recorded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think we need it recorded. Okay,we will turn to domestic open market operations.-11-8/24/82MR. TRUMAN. You might just want to confirm that the payoutdoesn't require a formal vote; the payout would be under this scheduleand over a period of time in parallel with the others. You don't wantto have to act every time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm assuming we won't have any otheraction and that it's understood that this will be paid out over thenext few weeks if all goes well--if, in the combined judgment of theBIS, the Treasury, and ourselves there is suitable good faith in theFund negotiations. Now, if we reach the point of mid-September andthose things have not been completed, then we will have a realdecision to make; we'll have a decision before that but a morecertain--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We'll have a decision with nooptions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A more precise checkpoint--that's all onecan say. Okay. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think you mentioned the tax bill.How did you think that--?MR. STERNLIGHT. I did [refer to it] as a plus factor,although I said that when it finally came it was somewhat overshadowedby other events.MR. BLACK. Peter, what is the borrowing level so far thisweek through Tuesday in relation to our target?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it has been undergoing some day-to-daychanges. Through the end of the week, just taking Thursday andFriday, it was running on the low side and averaging about $175million. Yesterday there was a considerable increase because of onelarge bank borrowing a sizable amount, and that brought the weeklyaverage to $350 million. And it's fairly possible that that bank willbe in again today; we don't know if they are or for how much. I wasjust gauging that if they were in for a similar amount today and thennot in on Wednesday, and the other banks stayed in to the extent theyhad been in the early part of the week, we could wind up withborrowing averaging around $400 to $420 million or something on thatorder for this week.MS. TEETERS. But the pattern has been continuing, hasn't it,Peter, of very low borrowing until Wednesday and then a very largeincrease on Wednesday?MR. STERNLIGHT. That had been the pattern for a number ofweeks, although there could be a change this week because of an effortby some banks particularly to avoid a Wednesday borrowing. If theysensed a need to be in, they tried to get in before Wednesday.MR. RICE. Are all the borrowings coming from banks that arehaving trouble borrowing in the funds market?-12-8/24/82MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't say all, Governor Rice. Some ofit has been the seasonal borrowing, of course, and that is partly ratesensitive. But even with the seasonal borrowers there is apparentlysome desire to stay within the line and not disrupt that even though10-1/2 percent is above the funds rate of 9 percent. There was aconference call of the discount officers yesterday and it looked asthough in some areas some of the borrowings were being done by banksthat, while not in the severe problem category, did apparently havesome limitations on their access to the funds market. And that seemedto be a factor in their turning to the discount window rather than tothe funds market.MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, where does the market think the fundsrate should be? Or does it have any idea?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there has been some surprise,just as we have been surprised, at funds trading below the discountrate. Also in the market thinking, I believe they have factored in anexpectation of a further discount rate cut of 1/2 point anyway in thenear term. And with that factored in, they tend to think of fundsprobably settling in around the 9 or 9-1/2 percent area.MR. CORRIGAN. Assuming a further--?MR. STERNLIGHT. Assuming a further discount rate cut,frankly.MR. PARTEE. Peter, the classification of borrowings gets alittle tricky when it's a large bank.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. PARTEE. The way we do it by convention is that weconsider it borrowings if it's adjustment and we consider it theequivalent of nonborrowed reserves if it's extended. I presumeborrowing by a big bank would be adjustment borrowing for a long timeeven if it were borrowing a billion dollars or two. [Total]borrowings would shoot up. Would [the large bank portion in thattotal] be classified as adjustment borrowings?MR. STERNLIGHT. If it were there for a day or two, thatwould be the tendency. I think if it were there in some size for evenas long as a week, that would probably call for some revamping of howwe looked at that level of borrowing.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's the question I was raising, becauseI inferred that while there was a [large] bank that was borrowing--Idon't know whether it was strictly technical overnight financingproblems--it was something that could be of longer duration.MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Partee, when Continentalborrowed a couple of weeks ago on Wednesday, that was well within theaverage that we were expecting.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's right; it was only for one day.MR. AXILROD. And as Peter was mentioning, if they borrowtoday as well as yesterday, it might raise the average for the week-13-8/24/82some. But it would be in the context of having to borrow; they wereat the tail of the queue and got caught. It isn't as if they haverushed in to borrow because they didn't have real access. They haveaccess but they are at the tail of the cue.MR. PARTEE. I guess I was asking the question of how youwould regard your path for nonborrowed reserves if you were to have asignificantly higher average borrowing level than you expected becauseof identified problem cases.MR. STERNLIGHT. If it were significantly higher, I thinkwe'd have to make allowance for it. If it's for just a couple of daysin this week, I think it will--MR. PARTEE. Significant is, say, several hundred milliondollars on a weekly average basis?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Correct me if I'm wrong, but if youmade allowance for it, then wouldn't you have to categorize thatborrowing by that big bank formally as emergency borrowing because themarket would see a discrepancy between adjustment borrowing--MR. PARTEE. That's right.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know. There is nothing publishedabout our reserve paths that would call for necessarily classifying itas emergency borrowings.MS. TEETERS. Well, but we publish the borrowings, right?MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, yes.MR. PARTEE. But market people looking at this rise inborrowings--MR. STERNLIGHT. It's seen as adjustment borrowing in thepublic figures; but I think we could still regard it more likenonborrowed reserves if that looked appropriate to us.MR. BLACK. Well, Peter, your handling of the $61 millionthat you transferred over [to extended credit and hence treated likenonborrowed reserves and] took out of [adjustment] borrowing is asituation like the one Chuck is describing.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. Well, that was a smaller scalesituation where the adjustment borrowing had built up and then after amerger situation that borrowing was considered extended credit and wasformally moved out into the nonborrowed category.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Chicago Fed publishes its weeklyborrowings.MR. KEEHN. Wednesday [levels] only.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Only what takes place on Wednesdays?MR. KEEHN. Yes, [the level] at the end of that day.8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You don't publish what takes placeduring the rest of the week?MR. KEEHN. So, if they are [not borrowing] on Wednesday,there will be no way in which one could--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They won't catch on so quickly?MR. PARTEE. But the average would be up, of course, for theSystem. Well, there is some ambiguity.MR. RICE. The question is whether we would want to tell themarket why there was a big bulge in such borrowings.MR. CORRIGAN. We'd get a bigger bulge!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This will have to be handled with acertain degree of flexibility.MR. MARTIN. Long live ambiguity!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions ifthere are no further questions. Do I hear a motion?MR. MARTIN. Moved.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We'll have the staffreport on the economic situation.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. ROOS. Jim, this follows the gist of your comments on[output]. I noticed that in the Greenbook you have reduced yourestimate for real output growth in the third quarter from about 2-1/2percent to 1 percent. In your analysis, was the slow rate of M1growth over the past months--I think this has an effect on thedecision we make later--a factor that led to your conclusion?MR. KICHLINE. Not directly. Indirectly, yes, in the sensethat we think it has been a factor in the interest rate outlook.Obviously, rates of growth of money, interest rate levels, and GNP areall related. I think in the short run, though, in terms of looking atwhat we had forecast for the last meeting of the Committee on June30th-July 1st and the information available in the six or seven weekssince then, the forecast for the third quarter really reflects twomajor things. One is a different look at the inventory side;inventories just have not been declining as rapidly as we hadexpected. And, frankly, the key element is that final sales have beenweaker. We reduced expected personal consumption expenditures in thethird quarter by more than a percentage point, and that's a keyelement. So, in the very short run, I wouldn't associate [the changein our forecast] with M1 behavior. I would do that over a longer-runcontext. But in the very short run it's really that consumer spendinghas turned out weaker than we had anticipated.-15-8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We wouldn't have any difficulty withthe direction of your analysis, but we are assuming an essentiallyflat third quarter, not as strong as 1 percent. We also are assuminga lower average federal funds rate in the fourth quarter. You'reassuming 10-1/2 percent; we're assuming 8-1/2 to 9 percent. If wedon't get something in that 8-1/2 to 9 percent region--if there is asignificant back-up in rates in the fourth quarter--then we think thefourth quarter, instead of showing 2 to 3 percent real growth, mayvery well be negative. So, I think the difference is possibly in theassumptions. With your assumption [of the funds rate] at 10-1/2percent, you still assume roughly 2 percent real growth in the fourthquarter, whereas our analysis would be that if rates back up to 10-1/2percent, that is likely to result in a negative fourth quarter.MR. KICHLINE. The only comment I would make is that I wouldagree implicitly with the view you've expressed in that the underlyingdeterminants of economic activity in the short run, and rate behaviorin particular, suggest that the economy is on the edge of a weakerperformance than implied in the staff forecast. I would not bicker atall with a forecast that puts down a zero for the third quarter orminus 1 or plus 1 percent. The important point is that the way thingsare shaping up now, it is a small number around zero or a slightpositive. It isn't a 4 or 5 percent rate of real growth; it's aweaker situation.MS. TEETERS. Jim, did you really factor in the sharp drop inrates that has occurred in the last six weeks?.MR. KICHLINE. Well, we tried to and we have put down ourassumptions. The interest rate assumptions appear in the Bluebookand, as you know, they are trending up later this year and into 1983.One of the questions one has to ask is: To what extent does part ofthe rate behavior reflect concerns that wouldn't track into spendingin the economy but rather a flight-to-quality, looking at bill yields,for example. That seems to me almost a sign of weakness, notsomething that says those low rates are going to translate intosignificant gains in spending later on. The one area where it israther important--and it's an open question--is in the mortgage area.That FHA rate, as of today, is down to the 14 percent level. I thinkthat's encouraging. But in our forecast we don't have privatemortgage rates coming down that low; in fact we have them stuck in the14-1/2 to 15 percent area, which we think is still an area that wouldnot generate substantial levels of housing activity. So, the outcomein the staff forecast is one in which we don't believe the currentlevels of rates would likely be sustained, given our assumptions onmonetary policy and our outlook for the economy.MR. RICE. Could I just ask, Tony, if your forecast wouldn'texpect an increase in consumption expenditures in the fourth quartereven in the face of a higher funds rate in the range of 10 to 10-1/2percent?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think it's likely to beoffset. First of all, we have seen that we didn't get the increase inconsumer spending that we all expected.MR. RICE. That's right. It might be lagged.8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That was partially because there wasa higher increase in savings than we expected and partially because itwas offset by greater weakness in the rest of the economy than weexpected. I personally feel that the more pessimistic scenario--inother words, continued weakness--is quite likely if there's a back-upin rates. And even though there will be some modest increase inconsumer spending, I don't think it will be enough. Whereas if theaverage federal funds rate stays in the 8-1/2 to 9 percent area, Ithink we're likely to get the kind of real growth of 2 or 3 percentthat we're talking about.MR. PARTEE. One terribly important question is how weak iscapital spending. The staff has reduced its estimates quite a bit,but the forecast is for equipment spending still to be rising by themiddle of next year I believe and for the decline in nonresidentialconstruction to be moderating by the second half of next year. Thequestion is, if there's a major cycle there, whether it will go deeperor whether it will turn around that rapidly. And the Redbook seemsvery pessimistic on capital spending to me. I don't know if thatrepresents your views or not. In Atlanta you are looking at one setof exceptions; you saw a little strength recently.MR. FORD. Yes, just in a few industries. But in real terms,taking out price changes, our regional economy is flat, which isbetter than in the rest of the nation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Anecdotally, what I hear in New Yorkis very pessimistic on capital spending. Just last week a fewbusinessmen told me they had made further cutbacks in their plannedcapital spending, and those plans had already been quite low.MS. HORN. In the Fourth District, where we have a lot ofcapital goods industries, the outlook for capital spending has gottenworse in the last couple of months, I would say. A couple of monthsago when you asked inventory questions of these people, they would saythat they had really reduced inventories to bare bones and were notsure how they could continue operating with these inventory levels.Now they are evaluating those same inventory levels differently,saying that they can do business for the foreseeable future with thoseinventories.MR. BLACK. I wonder if a lot of the difference we see isn'tthat the businessmen we're talking to are not assuming as low a rateof inflation as Jim and his associates have assumed here. If theywere assuming that, I think we'd see a much stronger capital picture.And if we do obtain that, I would think long-term rates would have tocome down some, and that ought to have a salutary effect on capitalspending. My guess would be that next year might be a littlestronger, but heaven knows it could be a lot weaker.MR. KEEHN. Chuck, in the Midwest, most of the companies areoperating at such a low level of capacity that there is just verylittle enthusiasm for any capital expenditures. Until that begins topick up in some material way, we will not see an improvement on thecapital expenditure side.MR. PARTEE. I get the impression that orders are falling inChicago. I don't know.8/24/82MR. KEEHN. Yes. Many of the industries are continuing toexperience a decline. I think, certainly, the rate of decline hasslowed but there is still for some industries a perceptible continuingdecline.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, why don't you give us yourblessing and we'll go not to lunch but to a donut break.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we'll go for a little recess.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what I can add to Mr.Axilrod's astute dancing around the issues. We're in a very sensitiveperiod, not just economically, but in terms of the markets andinterpretations and in fact concern--and I'm afraid to some degreejustified concern--about the stability of the banking system. I amsure that this is a time to be delicate and sensitive. How we expressthat and how we approach it is what is at issue. Very technically, asSteve mentioned, we're in one of these phases when it's hard to set areserve path with great certainty because we're on the margin oflosing touch with rates in the market. This problem occurs if we getextraordinary borrowing from some particular banks that have their ownproblems, and that can't be considered borrowing in the ordinary waywe usually consider it. Just how it should be considered is a littlehard to tell in advance, I think, before we see it and before we seethe timing and the amounts. But it's another complication in [the wayof our] being mechanical in this process at the moment. I don't thinkwe can afford to be overly mechanical.I would just make one further comment with regard to thegrowth in the money supply in particular. Considering that we're inthe middle-of-the-quarter meeting, my own bias, which I've expressedbefore, is not to change these numbers unless there's a strong reasonfor changing them. If there's a clear-cut reason for changing them,we should change them, but fiddling around with a half percent or soon the growth rates is hardly worthwhile. With that muchintroduction, who would like to make some astute comments as opposedto ordinary comments?MR. PARTEE. That's going to create total silence!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to make a straightforwardcomment; it's not very astute. I think we ought to go for alternativeA, with maybe a $300 million initial borrowing assumption instead ofthe $250 million. And we ought to be quite sensitive to the fed fundsrate in the next few months. I don't think I have to go into myreasons why. We're in a very delicate stage not simply because offinancial fragility, but with regard to the question of whether therewill be some recovery at all. I think we ought to take advantage ofyour Humphrey-Hawkins testimony where you said we want to M1 growth tocome in around the 5-1/2 percent [upper end of the range] and willeven tolerate something over that under certain conditions.Alternative A still puts M1 around the top of the range. And eventhough I realize that, obviously, if the money supply bulges in thefourth quarter, we will then have less room than if we adopted-18-8/24/82alternative B now, I still think the next couple of months are quitecritical. And maybe we'll be lucky on the money supply in the fourthquarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of technicalcomments, so we don't have to keep repeating it or raising questionsabout it. The present [short-run] targets are about 5 percent [forM1] and about 9 percent [for M2]. Steve, under alternative A, had putin 10 percent for M2. At this moment in time [M1] is running belowthe 5 percent, but that target is for the quarter as a whole and it'snot clear it is going to run below 5 percent for the quarter as awhole. That depends upon what we think is going to happen. IfSeptember continued more or less the way August is going so far, Isuspect growth would be up to 5 percent. But we are clearly above the9 percent so far on M2. It's a matter of choice here. We have adirective now that says immediately in the next sentence that somewhatmore rapid growth would be acceptable [depending upon certaindevelopments]. So, I think one could interpret this M2 running a bithigh as basically being in line with the existing directive given thatsecond sentence.MR. MORRIS. I think M2 is being distorted by the fact thatwhen interest rates go down, it pays the wealthy investor to move outof market instruments into money market funds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be, to some extent; and nobodyknows just how much. But that may just be some special case of a moregeneral interest in liquidity and for locking in some of these rateswhile they last. All I'm saying is that I'm not sure we have to raisethe 9 percent to 10 percent in the light of that next sentence that isalready in the directive. I'm just making a technical point.MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with Frank that there probably issome money moving from the market into M2 forms, although it may ceasebecause, after all, these stocks that have been bought recently haveto be paid for. But in addition, of course, the staff makes the pointthat consumption is weak relative to income. And that is going toshow up somewhere. Is it more likely to show up in M2 forms thananywhere else, given the fact that we're talking about a broad base ofthe consuming public and so forth? I agree with Tony that the factthat we hold to 5 percent as the M1 target doesn't mean we are goingto get it. Indeed, we really thought last time that it would be hardto keep M1 growth down to 5 percent. Now we think it might be hard tohave it up to 5 percent. We don't know what is going to happen.Let's face it. But it would seem very strange, given the economiccircumstances in the past six or seven weeks since the last meeting,to cut our target growth rate for the third quarter because theeconomy appears weaker than it was perceived as having been sevenweeks ago. I think that was said by everyone who spoke and certainlywas the thrust of the Redbook and also the Greenbook and your comment,Tony, on the New York projection. Why in the world would we cut thegrowth rate in those circumstances? So, I agree with you. I thinkit's best to hold [to our current targets].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The additional point I'd like tomake, which I've touched on briefly, is that I'm really concernedabout a lot of movement in the fed funds rate. We don't want to seetoo much, if any, back-up. Also, on the other side, it would be quite8/24/82damaging psychologically if we let the rate go too low and then had tobe forced to see some back-up in the fourth quarter. I don't know howto handle that. All I'm saying is that we ought to be very sensitivethis time.MS. TEETERS. Well, there is a way of handling it, and Ithink Steve mentioned it. And that is to keep our eye on the excessreserves. If excess reserves begin to pile up, we could deviate fromthe path even though [that would mean] not putting all the reservesthat we intended into [the banking system]. We would operate fairlyflexibly to keep the rate either from backing up or from droppingprecipitously. That's really the key to this, Tony.MR. PARTEE. You're not proposing that we narrow this [fedfunds rate] band?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know what I'm proposing. I'mjust saying that--MR. RICE. No, he's just saying these [unintelligible] words.MR. PARTEE. We used the whole 5 point range last time, bythe way.MR. MORRIS. I'd like to suggest that we have a consultationif it appears that in following this directive the Manager would haveto move the funds rate above 10 percent. I'd preserve the form andkeep [a fed funds band], but as we have done in the past when weplanned to utilize the band or if there was such a possibility, wewould have a consultation. I think to move the rate above 10 percentin the near term could be very destabilizing.MS. TEETERS. But we don't want it to drop out of bed either.MR. MORRIS. No, that's right.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I find myself in the pleasant posture of agreeingwith Tony and the others in terms of the ultimate objective. I thinkwe should avoid a continuation of slow money growth. But I'm a littleconcerned about the thought of our attempting to lean against afurther drop in interest rates because I think that would imply afurther slowing of money growth. Money has grown exceptionally slowlyover the last five months and, at the risk of analyzing something in alittle different manner than some of you do, our experience prior toevery recession that we've had since World War II is that when moneyhas grown below its trend rate for two or more quarters it inevitablyleads to a softening in the economy and to a recession. Even a ratherunsophisticated set of eyes such as mine can see that this has beenthe experience. And although none of us knows what the future holds,I have a great fear that if money is permitted to grow slowly forseveral more months, we could have a serious weakening in the economyat the end of this year and into the early part of next year. If thatwere to happen, we could have a revitalization of the criticism thatwe have been too tight. So, I would certainly favor alternative A,-20-8/24/82but I would not be quite as concerned as one or two others haveindicated about acting to prevent a further drop in the fed fundsrate. I think doing so would exacerbate the undershoot of growth inthe narrow aggregate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to risk disagreeingwith anything that has been said up to now. I certainly want to seeinterest rates low, and for that reason I'm inclined towardalternative A. But at the same time I want interest rates to staylow. And I worry that if we follow alternative A in the face of theGNP forecast that we have, the implication is that interest rates areprobably going to go back up in the very near future. There are goingto be upward pressures. In order to keep interest rates down, we'rereally going to have to increase money growth substantially above thetarget range. Now, I wonder if we want to do that. If we increasemoney growth for the year to above, say, 6 percent, I just wonder ifwe are willing to accept such an outcome. If we are, then fine,alternative A is a good way to go. If not, then it seems to me thatwe're going to have a fairly strong back-up in rates. And the effectof this I do not welcome. Since the difference between "A" and "B"seems to me to be unusually narrow this time, I could go just aseasily for alternative B. But I am prepared to go along withalternative A. It's rare that I'm in such a happy position as tochoices. But, I really want--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Emmett, alternative B gives you theback-up immediately.MR. RICE. Well, I'm not so sure about that at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon how we play it.Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, on this interest rate matter, I guess it'stime for a little school of contrary thinking. I don't look on it astrying to explain why interest rates have come down so precipitouslyand dramatically since early July. I think the mystery is why theydidn't come down a heck of a lot earlier. If one looks back overdecades at the relationship in this country between the inflation rateand interest rates, particularly short-term rates, there has alwaysbeen a close correlation with only a short lag up until this recentepisode. So, I look on this recent decline as being a long overduedecline because we have had dramatic success in getting the inflationrate down and interest rates, particularly short rates, just didn'tcome down along with it. The relief that we are now getting on theinterest rate front is desperately needed from the standpoint of allkinds of businesses and depository institutions. I guess I wouldworry later on if, as, and when interest rates begin to go up again.And I would certainly want to take advantage of opportunities to nudgethem down and to keep them down right now because of what I considerto be the growing cumulative damage being done to all kinds ofbusinesses and depository institutions by this high level of rates.But I'm not at all convinced personally that interest rates arenecessarily going to go up just because business may strengthen a bit.That would be a normal cyclical pattern. But we've had such anunusual relationship between the depressed level of economic activity8/24/82on one hand and a very high level of real rates on the other that Idon't think a rise in interest rates is foreordained by any means.That may be wrong, but that's the way I feel about it right now.We do have in the short run a perplexing problem of monetarycontrol with the discount rate clearly out of touch with open marketrates. Often in the past when that has happened, we've had somewhatof a loss of monetary control; it can lead either to overshoots orundershoots, depending on which historic episode one looks at. If wetried arbitrarily to peg the federal funds rate in some narrow band,there would be a couple of alternatives for dealing with this. Onewould be just to lower the discount rate dramatically, but that hasannouncement effects that might be quite unfortunate if the publicfelt that was a signal that the Fed was caving in and that we weregoing to start monetizing these big government deficits and have asustained period of monetary acceleration. Another alternative,instead of bringing the discount rate down too sharply, is to bring itdown in a series of gentle 1/2 point moves; I'd be inclined to do itthat way myself. But I would also accompany that by a widening of thefederal funds band. This is where I guess I'm going to be ratherradical now: As long as we have the problem that we have right now, Iwould like to see the funds range widened from the present 5 points toabout 8 points. Specifically, in this current situation, while I'm infavor of the monetary specs of alternative A, I would like to proposethat we consider widening the funds rate band to 4 to 12 percentinstead of the 7 to 12 percent proposed in the Bluebook. That wouldadmittedly get us into a situation where the funds rate moves over amuch wider area than the market is used to. We'd have to try toeducate the market and explain to them why we're letting that happen.But by bringing down the discount rate gradually as well as wideningthe funds rate band, we can keep money under control and preventeither sustained overshoots or sustained undershoots.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. I think the arguments for alternative A arecompelling. I note that the staff in its discussion of itsprojections, particularly for the third quarter, indicated that thereis some uneasiness attached to the 7-1/2 percent nominal GNP number.We have question marks on the domestic investment projection, on theresidential structures projection, and on auto sales on the down side.That has implications as to which of the two alternatives [to choose].I would agree that the two alternatives are rather narrow in theirband. The weaknesses that we have been noting both in the Redbook andin our own discussions here today affect expectations and, therefore,I believe the actions taken by us and noted in the markets will have adifferent interpretation from what they would have had a short timeago. I think market participants are, as we are, much more aware ofthe illiquidity of major corporations and of the question marks overthe banking system, as well as the general weakness structurally ofthe world economy for that matter. Therefore, I believe we have alittle more action space, perhaps, than we've had before. Plus, Iwill reiterate the comment I made at the last FOMC meeting. It isthat we have a responsibility for the stability of the banking system,which we are meeting. Admittedly, there has been a comment or twofrom the political side with regard to the way to do that. But giventhis narrow set of alternatives, I would go toward "A" rather than"B," in part to preserve the climate in the markets that has provided-22-8/24/82a little more action space. Therefore, for the borrowings I wouldlean toward a $350 million number, a rather larger number with apretty large standard deviation around that. We need flexibility inthis particular six-week or eight-week period as we seldom need it.And I think it's important to have the ability to alter many of thesevariables in our targeting over this period. So, I would stronglyurge "A" with a $350 million borrowing number, plus or minus.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I certainly agree that we need to do allwe can to help the economy and to help the markets. At the same time,we have to look ahead. What we do now will affect the economy with alag anyway. I don't think we've seen the end of the effects of thetax cut. I don't see any reason to change the basic projection eventhough things are coming in more slowly than one would have thought.I think we are in some danger of doing what we have done very often atthe depth of a recession, at the trough, which is to stimulate morestrongly than turns out in the course of time to have been wise. Now,we ought to avoid a rise in short-term rates or reversing the presentlow level. To me that suggests not pushing for a lower level at thistime. I'm not too concerned about lowering the M1 path for the three-month period that we're in from 5 percent to 4 percent because eventhat still leaves us almost exactly at the upper end of the 5-1/2percent M1 range [for the year]. And M2 and M3 are very high [intheir ranges] anyway, although they have particular reasons for beingthat way. I also want to remind you that, historically, a period ofrelatively low interest rates leads to an increase in money growthsome months later, which is the last thing we need to have happen atthe end of this year or early next year.I am troubled by the gap between the funds rate and thediscount rate. A funds rate below the discount rate is always takenas a signal that there ought to be a cut in the discount rate. Butall that happens is that the funds rate falls some more and the signalremains in existence. I would, therefore, prefer a higher borrowinglevel to reduce that gap or eliminate it. One could offset theconsequences of that, in order not to get tightening effects, bylowering the discount rate. There must be some drop in the discountrate that would offset a moderately higher borrowing level. I'm notthinking of anything sensational, say, $400 million perhaps.Finally, as to the longer-term rate of money growth, I wouldlike to point out that if you look at the projections in the Greenbookthroughout 1983 there is hardly a quarter over 8 percent for nominalGNP; it runs from 6 to about 8 percent. In other words, with [growth]at the upper end of our existing targets and really very moderateincreases in velocity, we'll be able to accommodate that rate of [GNP]growth. Now, this may be optimistic with regard to the inflationforecast implicit in these very low nominal GNP growth projections,but that seems to be at least a possibility. So, I would vote forsomething like "B" and particularly a $400 million borrowing level.But I would predicate that on the possibility of reducing the discountrate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.-23-8/24/82MR. CORRIGAN. I'd start off with the point that if we findthat some of these financial things we're worrying about begin to comea little more unglued, obviously, a lot of this somewhat technicaldiscussion about borrowing levels and all the rest will have to go bythe boards. But abstracting from that, it seems to me that one of thekey questions implicit in what has been said already is whether or notinterest rates are at sustainable levels for, say, a few months orquarters. I have some concern that they may not be. And it seems tome, in view of all the financial strains and concerns, that one of thethings we have to be particularly sensitive to is the possibility ofanother whipsaw effect in the markets where, despite our actions, wefind interest rates rising again. I'm not sure how to do that. Myown view on the economy, which I think is relevant, is that with thegeneral range of rates that we're talking about I would still look toa modest recovery in the fourth quarter out into 1983, and maybe evena recovery that is a bit stronger than what the staff has in theGreenbook. But, certainly, I'm a little more cautious in thatstatement than I would have been even a month ago.As to the money supply numbers. I must say, like GovernorRice, I don't have a strong preference one way or another between "A"and "B." And, Steve, if I'm reading that table on page 13 in theBluebook right, I think it suggests that building off eitheralternative we're looking at a growth rate of, say, 5 or 6 percent inthe fourth quarter, which still would get us to around the top of therange for this year. Is that correct?MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that just reinforces my view. I don'thave a strong view; I could go with "A" just as easily as "B." I dothink that a critical question in the short run is where the fundsrate is and where the borrowings are. Again, just because I amperhaps a little more sensitive to the sustainability of the currentgeneral pattern of interest rates, I would probably lean toward aborrowings level in the $350 million area. I don't want to sound tooprecise here, but I'd probably be more comfortable with the funds ratein the 9-1/2 percent area right now than I would seeing it below 9percent. But, unless we're very lucky and the money supply behavesexactly the way the Bluebook suggests so that the nonborrowed reservepath behaves exactly the way it suggests--neither of which willhappen--we have a Catch-22. If money is stronger, interest ratepressures will build; and if it's weaker, the tendency will be for usto adjust the nonborrowed path at some point, and that would aggravatethe problem that Governor Wallich spoke about in terms of the discountrate and the funds rate. The only way I can see out of that is tolower the discount rate and try to nudge up the federal funds rate atthe same time. I'm not sure how to produce that result, but it seemsto me that that's the result we want.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, then, would you go to $400million on the initial borrowing?MR. CORRIGAN. I might shade it up.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But then what happens if you get abulge in the money supply in the next couple of weeks and the Boardfeels inhibited about doing a discount rate cut?8/24/82MR. CORRIGAN. That's my Catch-22. At the moment, I amsuggesting that I think the probabilities are that we are going to beon the other side of the Catch-22.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, I would go for alternative A. I'm reallyvery reluctant to see rates go back up because I think people need therelief all of us have been talking about. I'm basically moreconcerned about the technical operation of the Desk. It seems to me,as I mentioned earlier, that we have to be extremely flexible and lookat all of our indicators to make sure that we don't bounce the fundsrate down to zero or accidentally bounce it back up to 15 percent.So, I would pay much more attention to where the rate is rather thanmechanically supplying nonborrowed reserves or trying to hit a targetof money supply growth. That doesn't mean that I would suggest eitherincreasing or decreasing the band on the federal funds range, but itseems to me our focus should be on that rate. Obviously, I would liketo have a somewhat lower rate, but I don't want to see rates drop asprecipitously as they have in the past six weeks. So, a little changein our focus from reserve provision and money supply growth [to a]smooth constant rate on federal funds seems to me more important atthe present time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Well, Mr. Chairman, now that we're back insidethe target range for M1, I think we ought to concentrate a little ontrying to keep it there. I recognize, as everyone does around thetable, that there are severe risks inherent in the situation and thatwe need to reverse the declines that we have had in the money supplyin May, June, and July. You can go back even further than that infact to February when we had pretty weak performance. But we alsoought to take account of the possibility that this very rapid declinethat we have had in the federal funds rate in recent weeks could wellgive us more growth in M1 than we would like to see. Alternatives Aand B don't differ a lot numerically, as several have pointed out, butI would much prefer "B" simply because it states that we have in mindstaying within the target range, and I would hate for the record toshow that we were aiming at something above the range. I'd muchrather go above the range than for us to say that we are trying to dothat. I'm as anxious as anyone here to see a permanent decline ininterest rates, but I have to confess that the sharp drop in thefederal funds rate in the last six weeks does cause me some concern.If you look back at the post-October '79 period, there have been threedistinct periods where we had a pretty rapid drop. One was inconnection with the credit control program and is probably an invalid[comparison]. But in the other cases we had a pretty rapidacceleration in money growth after that. So, I think it's possiblethat we have set in motion forces that may be adequate to give us "B."or for that matter "A," and maybe even something more than that. So,on these grounds, I'd feel a little better if the federal funds rateheld or maybe even backed up a bit until we get a better idea of howthe impact of what we have done will show itself. So, like EmmettRice and Steve Axilrod, I would say that a small back-up now probablywould be preferable to risking the possibility of a larger back-uplater on. I think $350 to $400 million might be the proper borrowingrange on the assumption that the discount rate remains unchanged. But-25-8/24/82if there is a strong likelihood that the discount rate will be reducedin the immediate future, then I think we ought to have a little higherborrowed reserve target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee, you already have had onebite at the apple.MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't say anything much about rates andI do think this rate question is very fundamental and important.Certainly, one could be sympathetic with the view that Bob justexpressed, or Tony, in light of the fact that the staff projection isthat rates are going to be quite high over the next year. Therefore,if one really believes that the funds rate is going to be well above10 percent throughout 1983, the farther it drops now, the more it isgoing to have to snap back later. But the question is: Is thatright? I don't know if it is or not. The fact of the matter is thatlong rates are still plenty high in terms of having a restraint on theeconomy and, indeed, if they dropped another point or two, they wouldstill be high relative to projected rates of inflation. And shortrates are behaving very unusually because liquidity preference is sostrong. Now, if we try to keep those short rates from declining byholding the funds rate up and liquidity preference is there, we canonly do it by destroying reserves and having a larger reduction in themoney supply than would otherwise occur. And it seems to me thatthat's the wrong policy to follow. I also don't know about thesimilarities with past experiences, Bob. I sense right now that therehas been one really big change in the behavioral characteristics ofthe economy, namely, that banks aren't lending. They are veryreluctant to lend at any rate to a great many customers. And ifthat's so, I'm not so sure that we'll get a surge in loans and thereliquification that would occur with the surge in loans, givenbankers' attitudes and concern about their own balance sheetpositions. So, I wouldn't go--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not so sure about that observation.I'm not sure about that change.MR. PARTEE. I feel that way. I feel that the banks arepretty scared.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they're scared, but whether thatis translated into not making loans, I'm not so sure.SPEAKER(?). I've heard that too, Chuck, from businessmen inour area.MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't go as far as John Balles hassuggested to a really major shift. I have some sympathy with hisview, but I wouldn't go that far. I do believe that we ought to beprepared to see rates go lower because we can't see what the future isgoing to hold. And we ought to see to it that we continue to havesome money supply growth; in that respect I agree totally with LarryRoos. To have very weak money supply growth or a decline at this timewould risk a second decline in the economy and we wouldn't survivethat as an institution.MR. BLACK. I'm very much opposed to that happening, Chuck.I just was suggesting to Paul [that we wait] to see what was going to-26-8/24/82happen. If what you think will happen [does occur], I think we oughtto let rates come down.MR. PARTEE. So, I think we ought to have a range and weought to be sensitive to changes, but we ought to use the range if weneed it.MR. BLACK. Well, I don't really disagree with that. I justthink we ought to wait a while to see what is really coming.MS. TEETERS. Are you talking about the interest rate range?MR. PARTEE. Yes, the 7 to 12 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Between the two alternatives, I certainly amemotionally pushed toward alternative A because, given thecircumstances in the Midwest, I think we want to do everythingpossible to encourage and sustain lower interest rates and to try toimprove the outlook for the recovery. I have to admit that I am fargloomier than the staff forecast with regard to the outlook for boththis year and on into next year. Having said that, I find the shiftin the implied growth rate for M1 between now and the end of Septemberunder alternative A just a little abrupt. And if we run into a periodduring which M1 begins to grow, I wonder whether we won't have toreact in a way that would cause rates to back up. So, though [thedifference between] the two alternatives is fairly narrow, I mightcome down about in the middle between the two, just to split a finehair even finer. I'd suggest that M1 growth of maybe 6-1/2 to 6-3/4percent would be appropriate so that we can see how it goes betweennow and the end of September. With that a fed funds range of 7 to 12percent and a borrowing range of $300 to $350 million would beappropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I come out somewhere toward alternative B myself.It seems to me that the basic underlying economic problems ofinflation and the budget and crowding out and so forth are still withus, though some of them perhaps have moderated a bit. We do face aweak economy--and those of us from the Midwest face a particularlyweak one--for which lower interest rates are necessary. But we haveto have low interest rates for the right reason if we're going to stayin the range and stay in it for the length of time that would behelpful to our economy. I am also concerned that we as an institutionneed to have a steady measured response to the weak economic growth,and I am concerned about leaving ourselves enough room that we don'thave to take extreme actions in the future in response to a surpriseor an unpredictable increase in the money supply. So, I would comedown on the side of those who are for alternative B or something moretoward it, although at this moment the difference between "A" and "B,"as a number of people have said, is not so significant that I wouldhave to go as far as alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anybody else who wants to sayanything? Mr. Ford.8/24/82MR. FORD. Yes, I come out leaning toward "B," too. While Isympathize with the notion that we have had three months of weak M1growth and that we certainly don't want to let it fall out of bed foranother whole quarter, the trend seems to be toward its moving backup. And just for the pure cosmetics of it, as one other speakermentioned, since there is so little difference between the twoalternatives why not let the market know when they get the news onthis--whenever that is--that we're shooting to come in within our[monetary growth] target at the end of the year? There is so littledifference between these that I think our credibility is worth goingfor the "B" alternative because it does show us allowing money to growby a reasonably respectable rate over the rest of the year should wemaintain this policy, which is a point Larry and others have expressedconcern about. It would still leave room for interest rates tomoderate, I think; I certainly wouldn't expect voting for "B" toresult in a huge jump in rates from their present levels because in mymind, as John Balles mentioned, this great decline is long overdue.And I'm always for widening the [fed funds rate] band so that we dofocus on trying to steady our performance and make ourselves morebelievable and predictable. So, I come out for "B" with a borrowingrange around $350 to $400 million. I'd like to see the fed fundsrange widened and I'd like to see the [Board of] Governors vote tolower the discount rate before we leave the room.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's unlikely.MR. RICE. I was going to ask you how you reconcile this--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else want to say anything? It'sup to me?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some people haven't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have a problem that is not veryamenable to a Committee decision that lasts for six weeks. I'll saythat first of all. On these monetary growth targets, in substance, Idon't care. I think either of these two sets of numbers will make nodifference, virtually, in what we actually do. On balance I'd justprefer to leave the directive as it is, which I guess is a compromisebetween "A" and "B," with the next sentence which allows us to goabove [the target] on M2. If we were publishing this tomorrow, Iwould be a little hard pressed to explain why we put in a lower moneysupply target this month than we had last month. We are notpublishing it tomorrow, so maybe that's not totally persuasive, but weare within the limits of the growth targets anyway. I don't thinkthis argument depends upon how much we're in, but a 5 percent M1leaves us within the target in this quarter, doesn't it, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, by September M1 growth would be maybe atenth above, at 5.6 percent.MR. RICE. The chart shows it a little above.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't even look at the chart. I justthought we set it last time so that we would be within by September.It's 0.1 over?MR. AXILROD. No, it has always been---28-8/24/82MR. MARTIN. It's 0.1 above. What's wrong with that?MR. PARTEE. And we said, of course, the top of the range inthe testimony.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy, that's pretty close figuring!SPEAKER(?). That's what we are doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I don't care a lot about that. Ithink how we manage ourselves is quite important in these comingweeks. Let me state my position very simply. I would be totallyunable to defend a policy on our part that brought the federal fundsrate up to 11 or 12 percent in the coming period. I would be veryhard pressed to justify in my mind a pronounced downward shift in thefederal funds rate in the near term from where it is. I think we'dhave the gold price rising--it's already rising--and an awful lot ofcommentary about what the heck the Federal Reserve was doing in termsof doing a real somersault. We already get that commentary. I thinkit's unavoidable and it would damage us.What we are saying in substance, I hope, is that if we don'tget a continuing growth in the money supply in coming weeks, interestrates probably should go down some. I should take out the "probably."If we literally didn't get any growth in the money supply in comingweeks, we'd presumably continue to take some combination of measureson reserve paths and discount rates that would produce somewhat lowerinterest rates. If the money supply came up rapidly enough to reach 5percent so that we get a pretty big increase in September, whichraises some of these problems that people have been talking about asto where we go then, I don't think we would get any further decline ininterest rates and we might get a little increase in market rates fromtheir present level. I think basically that's the way we ought toplay it. If money growth came in distinctly weak, we would ease up bysome combination of measures, which would produce a little lowerinterest rates. If it came in as strong or stronger than 5 percent, Iwould suggest that we probably would get some backing up of short-termrates through some combination of higher borrowing figures and notreducing the discount rate, or maybe just reducing it once instead oftwice as we might do in other circumstances. I think that is what thedecision ought to be in substance; we can look at it again in a fewweeks.I, frankly, cannot live in these circumstances, given what isgoing on in the money markets, with violent moves in short-term ratesin either direction. It would just be so disturbing in terms ofexpectations, market psychology, and fragility that it's just thewrong policy, period, during this particular period. Again, that isnot inconsistent with more moderate movements in either directiondepending upon what happens to the aggregates. But I just think we'dend up in sheer confusion--more than confusion; we'd end up with anatmosphere in markets that deteriorates rather than improves things.I don't know how to word all this, frankly, but what I would beinclined to do--let me experiment here a bit--is to take out that lastsentence entirely and replace it with something like this: "TheChairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears thatpursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths duringthe period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with-29-8/24/82unusually volatile conditions in credit markets." That covers amultitude of sins. The reason I'm reluctant to put a federal fundsrate range in there is that I don't think it's realistic--I just speakfor myself--on either end of the range, particularly the upper end.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The realistic range would be 7 to 10.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And if we don't want to show thatnarrow a range--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could put a narrow range in there, butI'm not sure that people want to do that. But, in substance, I thinkfor the weeks immediately ahead that is about where we are.MR. BLACK. What you're really saying is that on the oldprocedures you would favor a money market directive. I think that'sessentially what I said, really.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. But how we lean would beguided by the money supply, assuming that something drastic isn'tgoing on in the rest of the market.MR. ROOS. The sort of wording we had in the directive inthis previous period would have meant much more active reaction towhat has happened. In other words, what happened in the last weekinvolved rather volatile interest rates, even though they werevolatile in a pretty good direction.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not very happy about the speedwith which they went down, frankly, because I think it raised somequestions. But it was at least in the direction that was acceptable.I'd be more disturbed if they suddenly went bouncing up again. Now,when I say suddenly bouncing up again, I'm not talking about thefederal funds rate going up [a little]. Where is it now? It is below9 percent now. If it went up 1/2 or even 1 point, particularly if themoney supply were rising, that wouldn't bother me.MR. ROOS. Would the changed wording cause eyebrows to risewithin the--?MR. FORD. Yes, how is it going to be read when this--?MR. ROOS. That's what bothers me, whether it would be readas a signal of a return to stabilizing interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's going to be read--MR. PARTEE. It's giving the Chairman all the authority; thatis what it amounts to. It gives the Chairman all the authority; Ithink the Committee renounces its responsibility if it accepts such athing. Given the two choices, I would much prefer 7 to 10 percent [onthe funds rate range].MR. MORRIS. Yes, I don't see anything wrong with setting a 7to 10 percent range specifically. It's still 300 basis points. It'snot cast in stone that we have to have a 400 or 500 basis point-30-8/24/82spread, and it seems to me foolish to have one that we don't plan touse.MR. FORD. Well, what would you have done if we had set a 3percentage point range six weeks ago when it actually moved more thanthat?MR. PARTEE. We would have gone through it.MS. TEETERS. We would have gone through it, which we did.We went through the range.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We would have had a consultation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have had a consultation and gonethrough it. That's right.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. WALLICH. I think we're giving altogether too muchemphasis to the range. It's the intention that lies behind the rangethat matters. I understand perfectly well what the intention is and Ithink it's the right intention at this time. Maybe Chuck's problemcould be met by the Chairman declaring his intention to call on theCommittee if these conditions arise.MR. PARTEE. Well, the wording you have there, Paul, justsuggests that we have in mind these monetary aggregates but that whatwe will do is run the market according to what you think creditconditions ought to be like. That's what it says, I think, or it'svery close to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't.MR. PARTEE. I just don't think the Committee ought to dothat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't understand your point, butI'm in a somewhat different position than you are in understandingperhaps. What it is meant to say is that we're going to conductoperations so that there isn't undue volatility in the federal fundsrate but that the direction in which the funds rate will go in thefirst instance is determined by developments in the aggregates. Ithink in substance it means something like 7 to 10 percent probably.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we have three choices: Wecan say 7 to 10 percent; we can say 7 to 12 percent with anunderstanding that when the rate is outside 7 or 10 percent theChairman will call a consultation; or we can take his language aboutunusual volatility.MS. TEETERS. Or we could take both because I think some ofthe volatility is going to come, say, from extra borrowing byContinental Illinois or Chase or something of that sort. And it wouldsignal to the market that we're going to be there as the lender oflast resort.-31-8/24/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That, I think, is a little differentquestion. That goes to how we establish the borrowing level moreimmediately than the federal funds rate. On the borrowing level, I'dbe a little reluctant to move it up very much unless and until wereduce the discount rate. Then I think we might do it and try a verymodest snugging to offset the downward impact of a discount ratechange. I would not want to do it tomorrow, have the rates go up, andthen reduce the discount rate--MR. ROOS. Isn't it desirable, with things at least presentlygoing our way, in effect, to word this directive much like previousdirectives? In other words, isn't it desirable to avoid anything thatmight imply any [move away from such a directive]? I think the worldtoday thinks that you have done a great job since '79 in getting uswhere we are right now and I just--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A small part of the world?MR. ROOS. My side of the world.MR. BLACK. People in St. Louis!SPEAKER(?). If not 100 percent of the businesses.MR. MARTIN. Not the Democrats, that's right.MR. BALLES. Did you see Lindsey Clark's article in The WallStreet Journal this morning?SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. CORRIGAN. That should really make you worry!MR. BALLES. It leaves the Fed alone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did it say?MR. BALLES. It says, in effect, "Leave the Fed alone anddon't mess around with them. They're doing a great job."MR. MARTIN. Clark said that?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Specifically, what I would do is to leavethe first two sentences in the present directive as they are. Infact. I'd put a few words in there like "continues to seek" and "asindicated" or something.MR. MARTIN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I'd leave out the next sentence, whichis crossed out in the draft. Then my proposal was to replace the lastsentence with something like what I had suggested. Now, the nearestequivalent to that, I think, is just leaving the same sentence butputting in 7 to 10 percent, which conveys the same flavor. I thinkeither way of doing that---32-8/24/82MS. TEETERS. Wouldn't narrowing the range give somestability to the markets, indicating that we weren't just going to letthe rate fluctuate all over the place? I think there's a distinctadvantage to doing that.MR. WALLICH. They will only know that [in October].MS. TEETERS. Yes, in October. That's true.MR. RICE. Of course, they will say we have starting watchinginterest rates again.MS. TEETERS. That's all right.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, there has been some speculation,incorrectly, in the papers that we have moved away from aggregatetargets to interest rate targets. So, I would feel a bit like Chuckdoes on that, although I agree with what you want to do. So, maybe 7to 12 percent with consultation at 10 percent or something like that[is the way to go].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't like this idea of 7 to 12 percent,which gives a public impression that is different than the privateone. I'd have a little difficulty defending it. I don't know as ithas become a big issue of why we said 12 percent in the first place onthe credit conditions.SPEAKERS(?). Yes.MR. PARTEE. This says consultation. These [ranges provide]test points for consultation, as indicated in the very first part [ofthe sentence]: "The Chairman may call for Committee consultation...."MR. MARTIN. Well, that [implies] 10 percent, not 12 percent.MR. PARTEE. Yes. So, I don't see quite how we can say 7 to12 percent except that if it's over 10 percent there should be extraconsultation.MR. BLACK. That does present a problem. In view of thesearticles that have been appearing--I'm just picking up on Larry'spoint, I guess--I'd rather hate to change the wording right now.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we'd get a lot of comment on it.MR. BLACK. I know. That's my feeling, although I agree withwhat Paul suggested we do.MR. BALLES. Well, I think the market would read more intothe narrowing of the range than most of us would want read into it.And I think we'd be going the wrong way in any event.MR. BLACK. Yes. I always favor no range--no limits really.MR. BALLES. Yes. I'm in favor of a broader, not a narrower,range.-33-8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if we choose [the wording]"unusual volatility," we haven't any range. Some of you are--MR. PARTEE. It's just a question of the definition of"unusual volatility."MR. MARTIN. We have a very [unintelligible] word in here.MR. BLACK. Yes, all volatility is unusual but some is moreunusual than others.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has to be pretty darn unusual to beunusual compared to what we've had!MR. WALLICH. Well, they probably will think when they readthis seven weeks from now that we thought the banking system was evenmore delicate than it had appeared to the market. I'm not sure thatthat is a good signal to give them ex post.MR. PARTEE. It might be a self-fulfilling forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they already think that. I'velooked at this from that point of view. I'm not sure that that willaggravate what they already think.MR. MARTIN. What they think is that we provide reserves.They are not focusing on the interest rate movements, are they?Because this rate says something else.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it sounds more exceptional the wayI suggested, in a temporary sense, than narrowing the range. Bothways substantively are pretty much the same thing. I think what themarket is going to say is that we had had a sharp decrease in ratesand we were a little concerned about the volatility in rates. That'sgiven against the background of the markets and everything else. Ithink that's a correct reading.MR. BLACK. I suppose it's conceivable that they could thinkthis "unusual volatility" wording was a widening of the range or anelimination of the range if we haven't specified any range. Theycould come out that way. I don't know.MR. BALLES. Could you clarify please, Paul, how you phrasedthat? It was "unusual volatility" in what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In credit markets" is what I have.MR. FORD. Could you read that again please, Paul, so we canstudy it a bit?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Chairman may call for consultation ifit appears that pursuit of the monetary objectives and relatedreserves paths during the period before the next meeting is likely tobe associated with unusually volatile conditions in credit markets."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So you're leaving out the Manager forDomestic Operations?8/24/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm leaving that out, yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In other words, the judgment is theChairman's without any advice.MR. PARTEE. It's "is likely to be associated" too, not"because of unusually volatile conditions."MR. ROOS. Well, is there anyone in the markets who doesn'tthink that if there were an unexpectedly volatile occurrence in creditmarkets that we would not consult? They assume that, don't they? Inother words, do we have to tell them that exactly? Obviously, we'llaccept your phone call, Mr. Chairman, any time. But do we have to sayit? I just don't like to rock the boat.MR. MARTIN. If the phone system works!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, if we had better technical apparatus,I assume.MR. MARTIN. We may not be able to reach you, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the most important thing is agreeingon the substance. My sense is that there is a considerable area ofagreement on the substance anyway. I'm not sure it's unanimous, butis that a correct reading? Are we reducing our focus to how to wordthis?MR. FORD. I don't know that there is. I think we have asizable minority who are concerned about sending out a signal thatwe're going back to managing interest rates.MR. PARTEE. You meant the substance of what you thought thepolicy ought to be rather than what is stated here, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I'm now talking about the substance,before we get to how we state it.MR. PARTEE. If we have a shortfall in money growth, interestrates go down.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or maybe Bill Ford is talking aboutthe substance also.MR. PARTEE. If we don't [have a shortfall in money growth].maybe they won't.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If he thinks that the substance of 7to 10 percent, roughly, is going to be a constraint, maybe he'sconcerned about the substance too. I don't know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me resolve the substantiveissue. As I say, I'm not all that concerned about the precise numberswe put down here. But just for lack of anything better, I'm assumingwe will keep them the same as before with the modifying sentence thatcomes afterwards, which says that at the moment we're not tooconcerned about M2 at the very least running high. And if theaggregates appear to be running low, we will lean on the somewhat-35-8/24/82easier side, which presumably would be accompanied in the firstinstance by some continuation of the decline in money market rates,some easing pressure in reserve positions, a decline in the discountrate or some combination thereof. If money growth seems to beexceeding those numbers and getting a certain amount of momentum, wewould snug up a bit. But we are not going to react very drasticallyone way or the other in these coming weeks. That's the substance ofit.MR. FORD. Yes, except--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we keep an eye toward the market.Now, you may or may not accept that. I wonder how many people findthat substance generally acceptable.MR. MARTIN. I certainly do.MR. FORD. What I'd like to know is this. Right now the fedfunds rate is 9 percent and we're talking about a period of six weeksbetween August 24th and October 5th. Are you really saying that youwould define market conditions as volatile if in six weeks the fedfunds rate went up by 2 percentage points from 9 to 11 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I might not if--MR. FORD. How can that be volatile? If you look at ahundred years of history of short-term money rates, that has happenedlots of times.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't define every possiblehypothesis that one can put forward. This is operational. I wouldnot necessarily find it volatile if it happened at the end of sixweeks; I'd find it pretty volatile if it happened in the next twoweeks.MR. FORD. Well, obviously, the shorter the time horizon themore [it might be considered volatile]. I think if it happened in twominutes we'd all agree it's volatile. But we're talking about threeto six weeks. And it really does bother me to think that every timewe walk out of here we are setting--or it could be conceived that weare setting--a cap on the fed funds rate for six or eight weeks fromnow at either right where the rate is or a point above.SPEAKER(?). Or four.MR. MARTIN. But that's why we have the ability to consult.MR. FORD. Yes, but then we're managing interest rates; thatis the image given. I'm very worried as to how the market would takethis.MR. PARTEE. Bill, I think you're still talking about thewording in that suggested alternative. The trouble with "volatile" isthat it means different things to different people.MR. FORD. Yes.-36-8/24/82MR. PARTEE. But the substance of the idea is that ratesprobably will go on down if we have weakness in money supply growthbut they probably wouldn't go down, and they might even go up some, ifM1 growth is at or right close to the 5 percent growth rate for thequarter. That's the substance, as I understand it. And I don'treally see what we disagree about. But "volatile" is a funny word.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Much as it may surprise some of you,I also feel it would be a little disturbing to put in the phraseology"unusual volatility." We will get more stories, anyway, about ourputting monetary policy on the back burner because of our concernabout fragility. And even though we are doing that, in a certainsense we are not; we are luckily enough consistent with our monetarypolicy [targets] at the moment. It seems to me that it's morestraightforward to say 7 to 10 percent with consultation. The factthat we narrowed the fed funds range to 3 points during a particularlydifficult period doesn't mean we're going to continue it at 3 points.The following meeting we may go up to a 5-point range again.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. MORRIS. And 300 basis points is not managing interestrates. When we managed interest rates we had a 50 basis point range.MR. RICE. As for the wording, why couldn't we say both? Whycouldn't we have your language and then after "credit markets" say "orconsistently outside a range of 7 to 10 percent." Either way theChairman calls a consultation.SPEAKER(?). Use both?MR. RICE. Yes, he would call a consultation when marketsare, in his judgment, volatile. But he also would call a consultationif the rate falls below 7 percent or goes over 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Express your view, Mr. Axilrod. Mr.Axilrod has a concern; I'm not sure if he will share it or not. I'mnot sure I do, but--MR. AXILROD. Well, I was just thinking of the image, sincethe Committee was discussing images. The image of a narrow range forthe fed funds rate strikes me more as an effort to manage interestrates in this sensitive period as we go toward the elections than doesworrying about the volatility of credit markets. The latter does notimply to me volatility in the funds rate, as it did to President Ford,but volatility in bond markets and other markets; a little funds rateincrease might have very severe repercussions on those markets. So,that's the context in which I would have thought about volatility, notjust the funds rate movement per se.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, what about using both?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do we use both?MR. RICE. Just put "or outside a range of 7 to 10 percent"after "credit markets."MR. PARTEE. I don't know about that.8/24/82MR. BLACK. A kind of footnote, which means a certain--MR. RICE. No, it's not over [unintelligible]. These are twodifferent circumstances. One is a matter of the Chairman's judgmentas to volatility and the second is objective--if the market producesrates at a certain level, that automatically triggers a consultation.And that takes care of everybody's concerns.MR. PARTEE. If we're going to do that, I would rather havethe funds rate limitation and then add another proviso saying thatthis is for consultation. Remember, Emmett, what we are talking aboutis consulting with the Committee. If unusual instability develops inthe credit markets, which is an obvious reference to bank problems--Iprefer "instability" to "volatility," I think--MR. RICE. That's fine.MR. CORRIGAN. I'm getting more and more nervous about this[wording]. Again, I have no problems with any of this, but thislanguage or prospective language about unusual volatility orinstability or whatever we put in there runs at least some risk, itseems to me, of a self-fulfilling prophecy down the road.MR. FORD. The market will wonder why [we said that].MR. CORRIGAN. I started out liking it, but I'm getting moreand more gun-shy about it. I'm not sure it's the right way to go.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I understand the point.MR. RICE. Why is it self-fulfilling?MR. CORRIGAN. What I'm suggesting is that when that languageis published, even though it will be some time from now, it entailssome risk--and I didn't think it was much until I listened to thisdiscussion--that we are telling the world that things are a lot worsethan the world thinks they are.MS. TEETERS. I think they're pretty bad.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, boy.MR. CORRIGAN. That's precisely what worries me. As I listento the discussion, I'm beginning to think it's a bit too much of a redflag.MR. ROOS. Haven't we had a 500 basis point fed funds rangefor a long time?SPEAKER(?). Four or five [months].MR. ROOS. Four or five. We're leaving the aggregate targetsabout where they are. Why don't we set a broader range and,certainly, if something unforeseen happens, the Chairman will call aconsultation. Why do we have to spell it all out? I think theimportant thing is not to deviate from what we've done, because wedon't want to cause anyone to misconstrue that we've made a majorchange in our policy prescription.-38-8/24/82MR. BALLES. I think there's a lot to be said for that. Wehave lived with this 5-point range now for some time. Has it been aproblem in the last six weeks? If it was, it has not been notable tome. I still wonder why you want to narrow it.MS. TEETERS. If our concern is mainly on the upper side andwe want to maintain the 5-point range, then it ought to be 5 to 10percent. That signals very clearly that we don't want to go above 10percent on the funds rate. I don't particularly want to go down to 5percent at this point, but our overwhelming concerns are upward, notdownward.MR. FORD. Well, if I heard correctly Paul's response to whatI asked, he said that if the funds rate were 11 percent six weeks fromnow it would worry him a lot less than if it were 11 percent tomorrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what else is happeningduring that period.MR. FORD. Depending on what else is happening. When I lookat what has been happening at the Desk in New York in terms of theManager making adjustments in the reserve paths for various reasons atvarious times, it seems to me that we still have the latitude to takeinto account what is happening, how fast it is happening, and so on,without giving this overt signal in the directive. That's why I saystick with a range of 5 points. If we don't want to center it onwhere the funds rate is, center it a little below where it is if ourbias is in favor of seeing rates come down, and certainly mine is.Then use discretion at the Desk to see that it doesn't happen in twodays rather than two months. Then we'd have a much stronger consensuson the Committee and the market would be less likely to misread thestrong change in language.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not very impressed by puttingdown language we don't believe.MR. CORRIGAN. Why don't we put some language in there thatdoesn't have those sensational sounding adjectives. Use a range of 7to 10 percent, say, but add a phrase such as "giving due regard toevolving financial and credit market conditions." That gives somegreater flexibility without--MR. ROOS. Isn't that implied, Jerry? We have always givenregard to these things.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, no. I think what Paul is looking for issomething a little more than that.MR. PARTEE. For a change we are going to look at creditconditions. "Giving due regard to unusual credit conditions" orsomething like that.MR. BALLES. The trouble is "credit conditions" is anundefined term. The market will want to know what we mean. I'm noteven sure we can agree around the table what we mean.MR. FORD. Isn't that less information? The market issupposed to have good information from us, not something more vague.8/24/82MR. PARTEE. Well, we could make it more neutral and have "orif such consultation is indicated by credit market conditions."That's very neutral. But, then, why would we put it in?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that's worse from thatstandpoint.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think what does the least damage interms of market perception, if we're going to be honest about it, Mr.Chairman, is the narrower range of 7 to 10 percent. Otherwise, therewill be a lot of speculation as to what "unusual volatility in creditmarkets" means and some further stimulation to the belief that we areputting monetary policy on the back burner. Whereas if we say 7 to 10percent, they will know that we just don't want too much movement inthe period ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can use this phrase about a distinctionbetween monetary policy and something else. I know what you mean, butI don't think the distinction exists in reality. It's all monetarypolicy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I know, but it's a way ofputting it.MR. MARTIN. [The distinction is] monetary targeting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The alternative, basically, would beBill Ford's suggestion of 7 to 12 percent with a private understandingthat it's really 7 to 10 percent. And that has disadvantages, too.MR. PARTEE. The rate is around 9 percent now, isn't it? Howabout 7 to 11 percent? It's neutral.MR. FORD. At least that's within the range of ranges we havebeen using.MR. PARTEE. And we had a 400 basis point range not too long[ago].MR. MORRIS. That's a Las Vegas range!MR. BALLES. It may be a good compromise.MR. FORD. And at least that's as narrow as we've had it inthe last year.MR. PARTEE. For a couple of years we had a 400 basis pointrange, as I recall. Do you remember, Normand? Do you have a record?We had 400 basis points quite a lot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we've had it many times.MR. FORD. That wouldn't be as unusual as the other stuff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not unusual at all. We've had it asmuch as not.-40-8/24/82MR. FORD. I'd rather go along with that 7 to 11 percent ideathan what we've had.MR. BLACK. 6-1/2 to 11 percent?MR. FORD. We've had 10 to 14 percent and we've had 11 to 15percent; we've been as narrow as 4 points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what do you want to do?MS. TEETERS. Let's make it 4 points.MR. MARTIN. 7 to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't like it much, but if that'swhat you want to do, let's do it. Let's have a vote.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Borrowing is what--$300 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 million or a little above.MR. CORRIGAN. Why don't you have a show of hands on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 to $350 million. Vote.MR. BALLES. Excuse me, what are the Ms we are voting on?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The same as it was, 5 and 9 percent [forM1 and M2 respectively]. The second sentence has "continuing;" thethird sentence is out; we put in 7 to 11 percent down at the bottom;and initial borrowing is $300 to $350 million with appropriateadjustments for exceptional borrowing.MR. BALLES. Okay.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Ford YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoThe vote is 10 to 1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I guess we will eat in here, right?Do we have anything else?MR. BERNARD. The next meeting is October 5.END OF MEETING