Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 18, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 18, 1982, at 9:15 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, 1/ ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. Timlen, Alternate for Mr. SolomonMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, and Boykin, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of Philadelphia, and Dallas, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, Ettin, Keran, Koch, Prell,Siegman, and Ziesel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, 2/ Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Left the meeting prior to the approval of the minutes of actions and returnedprior to the action to ratify System Open Market transactions in Governmentsecurities, agency obligations, and bankers acceptances.2/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System open markettransactions in Government securities, agency obligations, and bankersacceptances.5/18/82Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Robinson,3/ Assistant Director, Division of FederalReserve Bank Operations, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Fousek,Mullineaux, Scheld, and Stern, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Dallas, Kansas City, Boston, New York, Philadelphia,Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Broaddus, Ms. Greene, and Mr. Soss, 4/ Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York,and New York, respectivelyMs. Meulendyke, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York3/ Left the meeting following the acceptance of the report of examinationof the System open market account.4/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domestic policydirective.-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 18, 1982CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to start off with a couple ofspecial items. The first item is welcoming Mrs. Horn to our littlegroup. This is going to be a slightly abnormal meeting for you, asyou will see in a minute. I may be leaving intermittently most orsome of the morning. But we welcome you anyway. We have the femalesgracing the right side of the table except that we have Ms. Greene onthe left side of the table to balance it off. The reason the meetingis going to be a little abnormal is that we have a rather abnormaldevelopment in the market to say the least. I know very few factsabout this, unfortunately, but there is a firm--I guess we'd call it afirm--[involved in] highly speculative [transactions] that apparentlyhas a large and highly leveraged position and can't meet its bills.MR. PARTEE. It was bound to happen one day or another.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand it all. They have abig long position.MS. TEETERS. Is this a dealer?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not a recognized dealer. It is afringe operator who apparently operated in very large size. Thevarying estimates of his long position are between $2-1/2 and $4-1/2billion. He has been financing himself, or raising capital, with somekind of rinky-dink [scheme], taking advantage of conventions in themarket where he borrows securities on the face value of the security;he turns around and sells them and gets the coupon and has pocketedthe difference, apparently to finance his other operations.Everything was fine except that the coupons came due yesterday and hedidn't have any money to pay the coupons. So, we have a potentiallylarge amount of securities overhanging in the market in a distressedsituation, and we're trying to figure out what to do about it. ChaseManhattan is in the middle of this as the middleman in the shortedsecurities. The people they borrowed the securities from claim thatChase is liable and Chase claims it is not, so we have a [mess] there.Losses are well in excess of $100 million just on that set oftransactions, and we don't know what else is involved; we're trying tofind out. I'm told that the bond market was off a little last nightand off a little more this morning. I don't know whether it's due tothis situation, but if we get a depressed market, I'm afraid we'regoing to have to support it. At this point, and I assume it'sconsistent with our Committee rules, I took some steps to get order inthe market anyway if it goes off much more. And that's all we've doneso far.MR. RICE. Is this public knowledge yet?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, not public in general. I don't knowwhen it's going to come out and when the rumors are going to start.I'm sure there already are some [rumors], but I don't know how many.We'll see that in the market. This [situation] came to our knowledgeat four o'clock or so yesterday afternoon. Chase and others held ameeting this morning; they tried to make a pro bono publicocontribution [by providing] money to meet this payment yesterday.Nobody else volunteered because they all think it is Chase's5/18/82liability. And Chase hasn't come up with [any money] yet. I don'tknow whether they will.MR. PARTEE. This is the interest payment?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the coupon due. Now, whetherthere are other financing problems, we just do not know. It justsmells as if there may be in this situation, and that's what we'retrying to find out. This was pretty much a fly-by-night concern byall indications. They were obviously operating in very large volume.MR. PARTEE. A fly-by-night concern with $4-1/2 billion in[longs]!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The latest report is that they "only" have$2-1/2 billion, so we'll see. But they may be put into bankruptcy forthat, in which case everybody who is financing that position is goingto be frozen. And it will ricochet back into other financingarrangements, I'm sure, in the government securities markets. So, itcould be a very large problem. Ultimately, if there's no othersolution, we might just have to stabilize this market for a period oftime. At least I can see that as a possible scenario. So, I justtook this very preliminary step of keeping in touch with the market ifit really goes off. I think the next step, if the market comes undermore pressure, is that we'll just have to go in openly and buy somebonds. That is very insufficient knowledge, but it about summarizeswhat I know, frankly. The other lenders involved in this particularshort-selling operation are apparently major security houses in NewYork. There is a group of 7 or 8 of them; they're all well-knownfirms. They should be able to withstand the loss if things eversettle, so far as we know about the loss. But that doesn't mean itwon't send ripples of very deep concern all through the market. Anycomments or questions that I won't be able to answer?MR. ROOS. Paul, as the Federal Reserve, what is ourresponsibility in a situation like this--just to keep order? Is thatour concern, rather than letting it take its normal course? I'masking that naively, I really am.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my concern is just a very--MR. PARTEE. We have a disorderly market clause, don't we?MR. TIMLEN. We do in the foreign [currency authorization]and I thought we had it on the domestic side, too.MR. PARTEE. We used to have one fairly customarily: I didn'trealize it had dropped away.MR. BALLES. Maybe we better [adopt] one fast!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we may want to adopt one; I wouldn'tsuggest that we do so right at the moment. Let's see what happens andwe can adopt one if we have to. Our general responsibility is to theeconomy most broadly. Larry. [That calls for] some judgment aboutwhat is good in terms of the economy. The problem in this case, as inall cases, is that the guy who is responsible is only the smallest5/18/82part of the problem. If all of the financing arrangements in thegovernment securities market are disrupted, we have a major problem.MR. BOEHNE. Do you have any idea at this point what otherbanks are involved or how long the list of banks is other than Chase?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Chase is the only bank involved inthis particular operation. But we don't know what else is involved.I suspect there are perhaps many billions of uncleared transactionssitting out there where other banks would be involved.MR. PARTEE. And the threat, as you see it, is that they mayhave to dump the government [securities]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are two threats. One is thatnot only they, but everybody else who anticipates the side effect willbe dumping; they will sell their own. That's the market effect, whichI think can be withstood in and of itself. The more dangerous thingis that nobody will want to finance anybody anymore.MR. PARTEE. Well, a little caution in financing is not anunhappy development.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "A little" I agree with.MR. PARTEE. We've known of these fly-by-night operators; Idon't think this one fits your description. I don't think it's theone we've been tracking but another one. But, you know, it's one ofthose things. There are very bad practices in the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This one apparently took advantage of themarket convention. What I don't know is the [nature of the] financingof the rest of the position--the long position--and whether that's astandard financing operation in which there would be a reasonablemargin or whether they cut corners there. The margins [in the market]are all low, but there is some distinct margin. If there is a normalmargin on the RPs, there's a little margin of protection. If there isnot a normal margin on those RPs, bigger losses are staring us in theface out there from a variety of people we don't know about. There'ssome indication, and it's subject to confirmation, that the majorlenders are New York banks. We may have to get the banks together atsome point along the line.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, although we obviously could make agood case for preventing disorderly conditions in my opinion, justlooking at the other side: Is there any risk of our being accused ofa bail-out of private dealers or whatever?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. FORD. I was thinking the same thing, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no way to avoid that.MR. BOEHNE. They're in the bucket [because of] a skinnypremium or cushion: obviously, the cushion has to be a function ofwhat happens in the market. If we go in and protect the cushion, wecould be accused of bailing out the banks and the security houses.5/18/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the nature of being a lender oflast resort.MR. PARTEE. We did very little for Brown.MR. MORRIS. But the U.S. Treasury has an interest inpreserving the market for its securities when it's running a deficitof a hundred billion dollars plus. I think that's the public interestin this market.MR. MARTIN. And, of course, if we only support the market asit drops, we don't bail out a small margin operator that way. Wesimply prevent the market from discontinuity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As near as I can figure out, the shortsellers, the lenders of the securities, will benefit from a marketdrop. But lenders on the long side will be hurt by the market drop.MR. FORD. Has the Treasury asked us to do anythingspecifically?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are aware of the situation. There'sno question in my mind that this is a matter of judgment. If it getsbad enough, we can't stay on the side or we'd have a major liquiditycrisis. It's a matter of judgment as to when and how strongly toreact. We are not here to see the economy destroyed in the interestof not bailing somebody out. The market was still going off the lastyou heard, Mr. Sternlight?MR. STERNLIGHT. It was down, but not snowballing. It seemedto be steady at that opening mark of down 1/4 to 1/2 or 5/8 of apoint. It was not snowballing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And there weren't any rumors of this orgossip in the market yet that you were aware of?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm sure that a lot of firms aretalking about it. I'm sure this is getting around. We were nothearing about it at our Desk, though. I don't know that it wasgetting out to the extent that it would be on the news ticker.MR. MARTIN. When you have six principal dealers and severalcommercial banks and they're all talking back and forth with theirlawyers and their accountants, it's out. The question is: How muchof it is out and what is the reaction of the market? There are nosecrets in this business.MR. WALLICH. Well, if we have to support the long end of themarket, I assume we can undo that at the short end so that we don'tchange the volume of reserves?MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm sure that any reserve impact of whateverthe Committee decided it was necessary to do in the way of cushioninga decline could be quickly offset.MR. GRAMLEY. But I'm not at all sure that the objectiveshould be to offset the reserve impact. We're talking about what maywell be a marked increase in liquidity preference. And if so, we've5/18/82just got to accommodate it. We are looking at an economy that thelatest Redbook suggests is teetering on the brink of going over theedge. Attitudes are very, very pessimistic. There are lots of veryworried people out there. Add to this atmosphere a financial crisis,and there's just no question in my mind that that is the factor thatwill push us over the edge. We can't afford to [allow] that. Wecannot let devotion to a predetermined path of reserve growth or moneygrowth permit us to commit a major crime against the U.S. economy. Itjust can't be done.MR. WALLICH. Well, before we depart massively from ourtargets, I think we ought to be very clear that that is the situation.We can't start off with that assumption without evidence.MR. GRAMLEY. But I think the Chairman's approach to this, ifI understand it, is to be ready in case the market is not functioning.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the approach for now. I justwonder how bad this is going to get and I don't think we can answeryour question for the reason that Lyle suggested. If this is a minorthing, and we buy some bonds and the situation calms down, of course,we'll offset it. If it turns into a major liquidity problem--just toput it at the other extreme--we not only want to offset it, we willliquify the market. That's the judgment that has to be made at somepoint along the line.MR. PARTEE. [Prices in] the long market have been inching upover the last six weeks. These people must have been pretty deepunder water.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's one of the mysteries of this.MR. FORD. Are the positions you're talking about mainly inlonger maturities?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wish I knew.MR. FORD. You don't know?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're not in bills; they are not largelyin bills.MR. STERNLIGHT. A small part is in bills and a long positionof around $2-1/2 billion is in notes and bonds. We don't have adetailed maturity breakdown at this point.MR. MARTIN. When Peter says small, he means relative to$2-1/2 billion!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are operating in considerableignorance. But the heart of this problem is not the immediate impacton the bond market; it's a loss to lenders who are not used to takinglosses on financing U.S. government securities, to say the least.MR. MORRIS. And who may overreact to that situation.5/18/82MS. TEETERS. When you say bailing out the market andliquifying it, do you mean stabilizing it at some interest rate orletting it move a certain amount? Or have you no idea at this point?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we can tell; we don'tknow what the problem is. In the extreme, I think we have tostabilize the bond market. In stabilizing the bond market we mighthave to liquify the money market in the process; it's at the oppositeextreme. We'd pull out every tool we have if we got an extreme enoughsituation.MR. FORD. I'm just trying to think through, Paul, how itcould foul up our operations in New York. One obvious channel wouldbe if the losses hit the reputable dealers to the point where itimperils their capital position. That would obviously be of greatconcern to us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that concern is not foremost in mymind. I don't say it's impossible, if things got bad enough, but themost immediate risk is a freezing up of the whole market.MR. PARTEE. Do you mean because people won't lend ongovernments? But they would lend at some margin, wouldn't they?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, yes. In a rational world they'dincrease the margins a little. We'll see what happens. I don't know.MR. MARTIN. But if there are bankruptcy proceedings, ofcourse, that begins to freeze assets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would remind you that there may be agood many money market funds that are making RPs in the market and itmay have been far from their imagination that they or their customerswere ever going to take a loss.MR. PARTEE. It's the risk of the game.MR. BLACK. I told you all not to trust those M2 figures!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All we've done at the moment is to take aprecautionary step. I don't even know whether we've contacted adealer yet, but we are prepared to contact a dealer if the marketseems to show some--MR. STERNLIGHT. I thought we ought to get more evidence of areally moving situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Meanwhile, I will have to pursue whetherwe should talk to the New York banks or what we should do in thissituation. Considering that point, and in the absence of Mr. Solomonwho is ill, I will leave this meeting to Mr. Martin for the timebeing. Are there any other questions or comments that anyone wouldlike to offer at this stage? When I know more facts, I will tell you.We literally don't know whether this is limited in terms of actuallosses to Chase or whether the Chase operation is one example of fourother messy situations involving this guy.MR. MARTIN. Where you have one, you have four.5/18/82MR. BLACK. It would be my guess that he hit every sort offinancing he could get.MR. PARTEE. They usually do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One possibility is that somebody is goingto put the guy in bankruptcy within a matter of hours and, if he isput into bankruptcy, all those creditors are frozen. And there are alot of them. Nobody quite knows what will happen. As near as I canunderstand, nobody has ever tested legally what happens to arepurchase agreement in bankruptcy.MR. BALLES. If it did go that route, Paul--Chapter 11 orwhatever--is there anything that we can really do?MR. PARTEE. Well, if some positions are frozen, we may haveto do some lending at the window, depending on what happens. But Iagree with you that we ought to be prepared to cushion the decline andthat we should pay not a whit of attention to the position of the guywho is in trouble. And we shouldn't be in a position of seeming toassist the banks in avoiding losses in this case.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we can't avoid that implication[unintelligible]; if we do anything, somebody can accuse us of a bail-out.MR. GUFFEY. What form of [liquification] are you thinkingabout? Is this an RP merely to help the major dealers carry theirinventories? Is it potentially a direct loan or do we just go in andbuy--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I'm talking about now is thepossibility of buying some bonds. But, yes, we may well have to helppeople with their financing problems. But the market [people]generally are the people directly affected.MR. GUFFEY. Is that the form of the loan--just RPs?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Using the discount window or an RP,depending upon whether it's a bank or a dealer.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I assume we could do it with a dealer alsothrough the window if we had to.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we have to, it could be throughthe window; but I think we can just do an RP quickly with the dealers.But it's clearly a situation where we may not wish to be constrainedby an operating directive on precisely how many reserves to put in onWednesday afternoon. We may end up putting in one heck of a lot. Onecan visualize the situation where prices are falling and rates arerising, with the federal funds rate very high and a lot of reservesout there.MR. MORRIS. We do have the precedent of the Penn Centralcrisis where we did have to put in a lot of reserves through thewindow. But a few weeks later that had washed out. I think if wedeal with a liquidity crisis early, we can--5/18/82MR. TIMLEN. It had reversed itself in about a month to amonth and a half.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't deal with it too late; and wedon't want to deal with it too early.MR. TIMLEN. But there was also, if I remember, a calm beforethe storm. Penn Central went bankrupt on a Sunday and nothing reallyhappened until a week later. And then all of the commercial paperissuers had to come in with their credit lines. We put a big bulge[of reserves out through] the discount window and that [crisis] wasover by early August, as I remember.MR. AXILROD. I think that [crisis] was mainly handled,President Morris, by our removing the Regulation Q ceilings on veryshort [maturities], and the banks ended up financing the [maturing]CDs [with] very little [difficulty] in the end.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we may have overdone it in thatcase. But that's the judgment one has to make.MR. MORRIS. In terms of the impact on reserves over a six-month period, there's very little impact left after three months, Ithink.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There wouldn't be in ordinarycircumstances. If we determined that this [situation] gave rise to achange in liquidity preference, for which there is already someevidence, we would want to change the amount of reserves we put inmore or less permanently.MR. MORRIS. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we're suffering from asituation where the economy is verging on too much ease.MR. WALLICH. This [problem] isn't happening because of highinterest rates; he's having losses because he was short and rates havefallen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This guy was apparently a real believer inthe fact that rates were going to fall.MR. PARTEE. He's not the first.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me go find out what is going on.Why don't you return to the regular agenda if you have no morequestions. [Mr. Sternlight and I] will be back.MR. MARTIN. He was short; he was long. You know how theseoperations are; they are all over the market. These things are alwaysas complicated as the ingenuity of man and woman can make them.MR. PARTEE. And lawyers!MR. MARTIN. Let's proceed with the regular agenda. Thefirst item is the approval of the minutes of actions taken at themeeting on March 29, 1930--I mean March 29-30, 1982 meeting.5/18/82MR. PARTEE. So moved.MR. MORRIS. Was that a Freudian slip, that 1930?MR. MARTIN. I have to remind you that Freud is out offashion now. You have to use somebody else! It has been moved andseconded and all are in favor. All right. The second item is thereport on the examination of the System Open Market Account. AreClyde [Farnsworth] and the others here? Just Dave Robinson? Allright. Is there any discussion or are there any questions of theoperations staff?MR. PARTEE. I read the report as indicating you had noreservations whatsoever, Dave. Is that right?MR. ROBINSON. That is correct.MR. PARTEE. Fine, thanks.MR. MARTIN. Further discussion? Do we need a formal action?MR. ALTMANN. Just ask if there are no objections.MR. MARTIN. All right, if there are no objections, we'llproceed to item three. Gretchen [Greene] is here to report on foreigncurrency operations since the March meeting. Gretchen.MS. GREENE. Thank you. Governor Martin. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. MARTIN. Thank you, Gretchen. Discussion?MR. WALLICH. Gretchen, when you described the reaction offoreign central banks to the decline in the dollar, would thatreaction be indicative that their concerns over high interest ratesreally are less based on U.S. interest rates and more on conditions intheir own countries?MS. GREENE. Well, to the extent that some countries are nowfinding it possible to lower interest rates in their own countries asthey feel it is appropriate--Germany is one case in point andSwitzerland is another--their immediate concern about the impact forthem is not quite so great. However, they recognize that not allcountries are in quite as fortunate a situation as they are. Andthere is concern about the difficulties some countries are continuingto face in servicing their debts and the credit implications of agenerally high level of interest rates. So, I think there is stillconcern, but it's concern of a different type.MR. WALLICH. Thank you.MR. PARTEE. The Mexican borrowing was a window-dressingthing until the end of April, as I recall. That is, they had to havea certain amount of cover as of the last day of April. We are morethan halfway through May. Does it repeat at the end of May or do theyhave something that they are doing that will improve their situation?5/18/82MS. GREENE. Well, it may still be premature to make ajudgment on that. I must say that the Chairman made it quite clearthat he did not feel the credit that was extended at the end of Aprilshould be viewed as a precedent for subsequent month-end assistance.And the Mexicans are proceeding with their negotiations on a fairlylarge--I think $2 billion--jumbo credit. Whether all of this willfall into place in time for the end of May is one of the questionsthat remains to be answered.MS. TEETERS. Are they negotiating with banks or with theIMF? With whom are they negotiating for the credit?MR. PARTEE. Two weeks to go.MS. GREENE. They're negotiating with banks for this credit.MS. TEETERS. They have not gone to the IMF yet?MS. GREENE. They would prefer to be able to handle theirproblems themselves and to have a program that is sufficientlycredible in the market that they can avoid going to the IMF.MR. MARTIN. Governor Partee, did you have further comments?MR. PARTEE. No.MR. MARTIN. Gretchen, a $2 billion credit would take care ofthe Mexicans for how long? How many weeks?MR. PARTEE. What did they need? Was it $600 million that we[extended]?MS. GREENE. It was $600 million that they drew [on the swaparrangement with us].MR. PARTEE. So, they are $600 million under water already.MS. GREENE. They have sizable debt service requirements inthe next couple of months. They also, up until the end of April, havebeen experiencing regular capital outflows, which have had a negativeimpact on their reserves. I guess one of the questions still beforethe court is whether they have taken sufficient action to stem thosecapital outflows.MR. MARTIN. That's very politely put.MR. SIEGMAN. Governor Martin, I might just supplement that:Half of the jumbo credit they are negotiating is to consolidate short-term debts, so it doesn't add to their reserve position. And theother half--if it's a $2-1/2 billion credit or so--would last themroughly one month on their own external payments schedules.MR. PARTEE. One month!MR. SIEGMAN. And their latest reserve figures show that theyare somewhat worse off than they were at the end of April on theirreserve position with regard to their note issue cover. So, if theydo receive the proceeds at the end of the month as they hope, they-10-5/18/82don't have to come to us for this month. But I think what Gretchen issaying is on the horizon is that they may have to accelerate theirborrowing or find some other ways to deal with the issue to rebuildconfidence.MS. GREENE. The borrowing requirements are very heavy; theyare estimating their gross borrowing for 1982 at $20 billion.MR. GRAMLEY. How has the market reacted to the austerityprogram, or whatever you wish to call it, that the Mexicans have putinto place?MS. GREENE. I would say that the objectives of the austerityprogram are welcomed, but there has been some question as to theimplementation.MR. FORD. They're in the middle of an election campaign, arethey not?MS. GREENE. That's right.MR. FORD. And in Mexico, as I recall the history of thatcountry, traditionally if there is a change in such a period, there isan outflow of investments which come back after the new president getsin. Isn't that the way it usually works?MS. GREENE. It has worked that way before. And, of course,it doesn't help matters either in terms of the [timing].MR. FORD. Yes, the timing is terrible. This guy isbarnstorming all over the country telling the people the great thingshe's going to do for them and the question is whether he can [carryout] an austerity campaign under those conditions that satisfies them.MR. MARTIN. And I think here we're defining austerity ashalting construction on four office buildings.MS. TEETERS. Gretchen, you've given a rather detailedexplanation of why the dollar has declined and yet, as far as I'mconcerned, it doesn't get there. It seems to me that the dollardeclined without any of the traditional reasons as to whyinternational values of the dollar change. Is speculation [theexplanation for] what is going on in the market? Is there somethingother than rational [behavior]? Your explanations only go a littleway toward explaining the total turmoil that has been in that marketin the past six weeks.MS. GREENE. I share your view on that. And I answered thatquestion for myself in two ways. First of all, there was considerableselling of dollars by the professionals on expectations of a drop in[U.S.] interest rates, not unlike what we were talking about earlierthis morning. Secondly, the talk of a budget compromise wasinterpreted much more positively abroad than it was here. Most peopleare unfamiliar with our form of government and think more in terms ofa parliamentary system. When they read that the President has reacheda compromise with the Republicans in the Senate Budget Committee, [tothem] that means that the job is pretty much done. The implicationabout what that would mean for the bond market was held with far-11-5/18/82greater conviction in Europe than it was here. So it was a mismatch,if you like, in expectations.MS. TEETERS. Are you implying, then, that the value of thedollar will probably rise again, assuming that the domestic situationstays stuck together? If they don't get a drop in rates, will theyreverse that expectation and we could see a rising value of the dollaragain?MS. GREENE. Well, as I said, there was some short covering.I didn't make a major point of it because it happened, really, in twodays. It happened after publication of the retail sales figures lastweek and it happened yesterday; but it was sufficient to cut in halfthe drop in the dollar that we had recorded for the whole intermeetingperiod. The market is extremely thin. We ourselves had somecorrespondent business to sell about $100 million yesterday and wefound it very difficult to do that. The reluctance of people to takepositions is quite high, so that it doesn't take a very large force tomove the prices by a considerable margin.MR. MARTIN. Further discussion? Thank you, Gretchen. PeterSternlight is still working on the gathering of information withregard to the situation involving Drysdale Government Securities andits affiliates, and creditor banks and brokerage houses in New York.Why don't we move to Jim Kichline, who is here, and others for thereport on the economic situation. Jim.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. MARTIN. Thank you, Jim. Ed.MR. BOEHNE. While there are pockets of prosperity in myarea, notably in the health area, in general the news is quitebearish. It's grim in some quarters. There are just no signs ofrecovery, to take an example, has a number of productsthat they consider leading indicators--and they have been for a numberof years--and there's just no life in them at all. In fact, some ofthem are still going down. If you talk to the economists in some ofthese firms, they are still optimistic about a recovery later in theyear. But if you talk to the top guys in these firms, they may saythe same thing publicly, but their attitudes and expectations havedefinitely soured. One of the things that seems to be at work here isthat they see a longer-term deterioration of their competitiveposition going out into '83, '84, '85, and '86. And that's largelybecause they're having to cancel a lot of investment plans, given thebalance sheet constraint, plus what they see as the high value of thedollar that is putting them at a competitive disadvantage with theirforeign competitors. I think the feeling is that even if we got adrop in interest rates soon, which they certainly would like to have,they are really going to be in a very tight spot for a number of yearsif this situation continues. They see a considerable amount of redink. So, at least among the people that I talk to in my District, theattitudes--while they weren't good at the time of our last FOMCmeeting--are now [focused on] looking out three or four years. Andthey are saying the damage that the current climate has done is inareas where they think their longer-term competitive position is atstake. And while I think in general they are still supportive of whatthe Fed is doing, there is some erosion in that support because a-12-5/18/82number of them are beginning to think that perhaps the situation isgetting counterproductive because of the effect it's going to have ontheir own competitive positions several years out.MR. MARTIN. Thanks, Ed. Mr. Timlen.MR. TIMLEN. I must say with regard to this recession thatthings seem to be going a little better for the Second District thanfor our friends in the Midwest. On the one extreme we have Buffalo,where the steel industry, the auto industry, and the auto suppliersare all having a very, very poor time of it, with very highunemployment. If you go over to Rochester, though, they tell you thatit is a city with no trough in their peak. Kodak just issued a recordbonus at year-end and it helped some car dealers. In New York City, Iwould say we're all concerned about the thrift situation, but businessconstruction is quite strong in New York, particularly downtown. Weseem to have some of that [in the pipeline] through '84. In the City,the service industries are doing well with some minor upset inemployment, although I must say the IBFs in New York have not[unintelligible] 20,000 jobs. It's interesting to talk to bankersparticularly about what is going on today; they really don't seem tobe worried about what they know, for example, about Braniff, Pan Am,International Harvester, and Chrysler. The reaction to the Braniff[announcement] last week was kind of a "ho hum." I must say, though,that the bankers are now talking--in the terminology of the last twoweeks--about "survivor loans," which is the only thing that's keeping[some firms] going because of reduced cash flows. Just as recently aslast week, the bankers said they were worried about trouble spots thatmight jump out without warning. And I think we're in [that situation]today.On a personal note, in Manhattan, and particularly midtown,one can't help but notice the number of small businesses that areeither throwing in their keys and closing or going into bankruptcy. Iknow within three blocks of my apartment, I've lost my favoriteChinese restaurant and my favorite Italian restaurant.MR. MARTIN. And that's going too far! President Black.MR. BLACK. I think the point that Ed Boehne raised is onethat probably concerns us all. The economists seem to think thingsare a little better than the businessmen do. I was struck at our lastboard meeting how differently our directors look at this from the waywe tend to look at it. The answer lies at least in part in the factthat they are comparing what they're doing now with what they once didor what they did a year ago, whereas we are looking at the possibilityof a seasonally adjusted upturn on a monthly basis. And that's alwaysa problem in interpreting the Redbook figures. They always seem to bethe worst right before a turn. I guess I'm a little more optimisticthan most people on this, if we continue to make progress oninflation. Of course, I'm assuming away this financial crisis; thatwould make all bets off. But if we continue in that direction, as Ithink we will, then interest rates have to turn [down] pretty soon andthe upturn in housing that we've had should become still stronger. Iwould think consumer durables also could change very quickly, and evenbusiness spending on plant and equipment could turn around ratherfast--faster than any of us has been assuming--if expectations areimproved by a decline in interest rates that I sincerely hope is just-13-5/18/82around the corner. But the developments that Chairman Volckerinformed us about this morning are the main consideration now thatcould blow it all out of the water. I would have stayed with anestimate about like the staff's of about a 4 or 5 percent increase inreal GNP in these last couple of quarters. I believe they're aboutright on the second quarter. But of course, we're all guessing onthis.MR. PARTEE. You don't feel that the demand for housing mightfade as rates come down? There has been a lot of talk to the effectthat when rates come down, housing demand will explode again or atleast come back very nicely and quickly turn.MR. MARTIN. It will come roaring back.MR. PARTEE. But the question is: Are people no longerlooking at houses as a source of profits? Are they looking at jobinstability or income prospects that would make them less willing thanthey would have been a year ago to pay, say, 13 percent on mortgages?MR. BLACK. Yes, I think that's a fair assessment. But Istill believe we will see some strength there. That [concern] wouldcertainly weaken [the demand for housing]. People no longer feel surethat they're going to make a profit when they sell a house to upgrade.The behavior of house prices has made everybody who has a house worrya little.MR. MARTIN. Thank you, Bob. President Ford.MR. FORD. Well, moving down the East Coast, we feel fairlygloomy, as Ed does. We now have in our District, in the supposed SunBelt area, raw unemployment rates that exceed the national average,which is very unusual for us as you may know. That's weighted for thefact that our two most vigorous states, Georgia and Florida,especially Florida, do have [relatively large] populations. If youweighted it by the population, they would still look reasonably good.If you just take our six states, we now have an unemployment rate thataverages just under 10 percent. And that's due to the fact that wehave a southern version of Detroit going for us over in Alabama forone thing and the--MR. BLACK. Pittsburgh II!MR. FORD. In Birmingham, for example, we are down to oneU.S. Steel blast furnace in operation and there's a lot of talk thatit may be shut down in June. That would create another problem for usin that area and [contribute to the process of] deindustrialization inBirmingham. Other things that had been sustaining our regionaleconomy are also beginning to waiver. Most particularly, we had theenergy boom going for us over in Louisiana--a lot of gas well drillingand so on--and there has been a precipitous decline in that kind ofactivity. We've had heavy layoffs in oil field drilling operationsand related activities there. Most discouraging is the fact that evenin our high-tech belt, which is emerging around Atlanta and inFlorida, we've had companies such as Scientific Atlanta laying offpeople for the first time in anybody's memory there. Companies thatwe think of as having a regular 25 percent increase in profits yearafter year are starting to feel the pinch. So, things are looking-14-5/18/82pretty serious around the southeastern states in our District. Theonly thing that seems to be encouraging in our area is the fact thatwe have the World's Fair going on, which is attracting a lot of peopleto Eastern Tennessee and compensating somewhat for the manufacturingweaknesses in that state.On the subject of housing finance that you raised, Chuck,while I do think the investment aspect of buying a house is fadingsomewhat, there's a very strong feeling--I do know a lot of thebuilders in our area and talk to them regularly, and thrift executivesas well--around Atlanta and around the Florida Keys that they are justwaiting to get out there. Builders are chomping at the bit. We'vehad steady increases in permits and housing starts in a number of ourmajor metropolitan areas, although they are still at depressed levels.And I would say our residential markets will come back, though perhapsnot with the same vigor as when housing used to be a sure-fireinvestment as well as a place to live. We have a lot of pent-updemand for housing in Atlanta itself due to some unusual developmentsthere like Georgia-Pacific crossing out "Pacific" and coming back toGeorgia. We have a pretty good [housing] market. So, we have someencouragement from that side.We have another big minus force and that is that farmers inthe Southeast are getting clobbered credit-wise--almost like Mexico,you know. The story is that they are overextended on their debt.We're watching the markets for land very closely, trying to detectsignals of any kind of collapse in land prices and we're not seeing itbecause it seems as if the lenders just don't want to liquidate peopleunless they absolutely have to. So, we're really not seeing a lot ofturnover of property, but we are hearing from a lot of bankers inrural areas that they are not happy about their farm loan portfoliosin terms of credit quality. And that just reflects the fact that ourfarmers are having a tough time throughout the District. Overall, I'dsay that the bloom is off the Sunshine states in our area, and thatexcept for a few areas of brightness we're feeling the recessionpretty heavily. And there is a lot of worry and concern amongbusiness lenders in our District.MR. MARTIN. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I listened to my colleague Bob Black andI wish I could share his optimism. If we get a budget compromise andget it soon, I think I would go along with his view that we have apotentially good recovery ahead of us. I think we would get asignificant drop in bond rates, a pickup in stock prices, improvedconsumer confidence, and improved business attitudes generally. But Imust say that I think the likelihood of getting a significantreduction of prospective deficits before the election is pretty slim.We have to be prepared for the possibility that we will live for 3, 4,5 more months with this extremely gloomy set of attitudes pervadingfinancial markets and the nation more generally. I don't think thatwhat Bob is talking about is very likely. On the contrary, I seethings going the other way in recent months. Plans for business fixedinvestment are weakening. I had been worried earlier about thepossibility of a very, very large decline in business fixedinvestment, and I thought that the incoming evidence over the wintermonths had alleviated that concern; now I believe that that [revised]judgment was probably not right. I think we may see further signs of-15-5/18/82deterioration in business spending plans in the months ahead.Consumer attitudes are very, very sour. And until that situation isrectified, we're not likely to see a significant pickup in demand fordurables.I'm worried, and worried considerably, about the cumulativeeffects of high interest rates and what they are doing to the strengthof business enterprise. Interest charges are transfer payments; whatgoes out of one pocket ought to go into another. But I'm afraid theeffects on marginal propensities to spend in the aggregate are very,very negative as these high levels of interest rates continue. Ratiosof interest to profits plus interest have gone up very, veryconsiderably and they're going up further. And that is clearly havinga very substantial effect on the ability of businesses to financetheir operations, particularly smaller businesses. I'm wondering ifthe real danger at this point may not be that an episode of the kindwe were talking about earlier will cause credit markets to close inthe sense that lenders around the country will suddenly stop lendingas a means of protecting themselves against the possibility of veryserious effects. That's something we need to watch very, verycarefully. I hope the staff at the Reserve Banks will all keep incontact with their banks so that we can understand fully what is goingon in credit markets. I think we're going to have to be extremelycareful to avoid upsetting the situation, which could precipitate arenewed downtrend in economic activity instead of the upturn the staffhas forecast. If I had been in the staff's position, I probably wouldhave forecast just about what they did because that's what I think thelogic of the numbers suggests. But the logic of the qualitativeevidence coming in suggests that all the risks are on the down sideand I think that's what Jim Kichline was telling us this morning.MR. MARTIN. Thank you, Lyle. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, the news from the Midwest, which has beengrim all along, continues to be very, very grim. On the agriculturalside, though, there has been some very modest improvement from adepressed level. Livestock prices are better; and with theexpectation of some improvement on the export side, grain prices couldbe better. Having said that, farm incomes continue to be very low.Capital expenditures for tractors and combines and the like areexceptionally low. And farm land values declined significantly in thefirst quarter. On an appraisal basis there are few transactions andwhen they do occur--and the number of farms for sale is up--the salesare taking place at declines in prices of between 15 and 25 percent.On the industrial side, the District has been in a state of realdepression for three years; in terms of employment and unemployment weare comparatively far worse off than the rest of the country. Theweakness has now become very pervasive. The number of bankruptcies isgoing up, particularly among the smaller companies. In the month ofMarch in [our] District there were more bankruptcies than in all of1981. In the capital sector, railroad equipment is all but dead.Trucks, construction equipment, etc. are in an extremely depressedstate. Last week we had a meeting of business economists, which we doon a monthly basis, and the general tone was very, very depressing.In fact, it was generally regarded as the worst session that we havehad in a great many years of that particular group. So, to add towhat Ed Boehne has said, there is in the Midwest also a deteriorationin attitude. The great concern is that the recovery is not at hand-16-5/18/82and that, indeed, we could get ourselves into a cumulative downturnhere.MR. PARTEE. I read that Chicago report, Si, as indicatingalso a giving up in terms of expectations, not just for the next fewmonths, but for the next several years--along the lines of Ed'scomment. Was that the sense of the--?MR. KEEHN. Yes, there's a sense of greatly depressed morale,if you will, about the [near-term] outlook and further beyond. I'dagree with that, Chuck.MR. BOEHNE. Last month was the first time in my Districtthat I noticed the depressed morale had jumped from, say, the currentperiod, to out over several years. Maybe it has been that way in theMidwest longer, but it just struck me as being apparent in recentweeks in my area.MS. TEETERS. Si, are you getting a lot of out-migration?Can you measure that in any way?MR. KEEHN. Nancy, I can't give you a figure as to the numberof people actually moving out. Having said that, our employmentnumbers, as we commented in the Redbook, are just simply atrocious.And the unemployment also is a great deal higher. One wouldanticipate that in those kinds of circumstances people will leave.But unless there are opportunities in other places that can absorbthem, not as many leave as one would expect.MR. MARTIN. I think both Ed's and Lyle's comments withregard to the so-called "out years" represent a new note in ourdiscussions. I can't speak for the March meeting, but there is adifferent tone, isn't there? There's a different element that we'reconsidering. President Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, I can add to the doom and gloom if we needany more, which we don't.MR. MARTIN. You're the rebuttal, John!MR. BALLES. It used to be that some of the bad news from theMidwest could be offset by what was going on in the Dallas and SanFrancisco Districts. We haven't heard from Bob [Boykin] yet but Ihave to say that as far as the West Coast is concerned, we're nolonger recession-proof. We have very widespread weaknesses in allsorts of key industries. It isn't just forest products and it isn'tjust home building; the weakness has now spread to aerospace, semi-conductors, commercial construction, nonferrous metals, etc. As oneexample, at Boeing, which I suspect is one of the strongest aerospacecompanies in the United States if the not the strongest, employment ayear ago was at 75,000 people. It is now down 2,000 from that leveland is expected to go down another 8,000. That's a measure of theextent to which the commercial side of the business is down far morethan the defense side is up. About the only recent strength we'veseen is in sales of electronic equipment.Summing all of this up, and pretty much agreeing with whatLyle had to say, it strikes me that even though business confidence is-17-5/18/82an intangible and immeasurable, it is really worse than the businessstatistics. It's worse than what we might expect in terms of patternsof cyclical recovery. And that is really bad news. I'd say thatamong our five offices, about a fourth of our directors, including thebankers who see spreading loan delinquencies and problem loans or non-performing loans, are now so concerned that they're proposing that theFed either operate at the top of its monetary growth ranges--and somewould say we should go above those ranges deliberately for whateverperiod is necessary--because of the cumulative damage being done toall sorts of business concerns and individual consumers by the highlevel of interest rates. They are as worried as I've seen them in my10 years on this job.MR. MARTIN. Thank you, John. President Roos.MR. ROOS. Well, I guess inevitably I just don't reflect whathappens everywhere else around this table. In our part of the MidwestI don't sense the pervasive gloom that some of you are reporting, andwe have had CEOs of major corporations in the Bank just within thelast two weeks. I sense a general feeling that the economy is nearthe trough of the recession; I sense a rather positive recognition ofsome fundamental things that most of our people feel have been putinto place. First of all, they're comfortable with the level ofinventories; secondly, they are extremely pleased about the downwardtrend of inflation; thirdly, they see a stabilization, or an absenceof further downward movement, in the economy. The basic feeling isthat the economy has hit the bottom that was anticipated. The onepoint that comes through to me constantly is this plea: Please tellyour colleagues that the one thing that could push us over the brinkis if [monetary policy] becomes expansive because that would moveinterest rates up. In other words, the basic feeling is that we'redown the road in our cure process and they anticipate a recovery andhope that we, in our infinite wisdom, don't do anything to upset thatrecovery. I would just say, as a relatively senior individual aboutto go out to pasture, that I can remember every time in the shortseven years I've been here that when things were just about to improvea great many of us were saying "Oh my word, we're facing absolutedisaster. A couple more months and if we don't intervene in some way,everything is going to go down the drain." Well, I think we're on thebrink of improvement [as do] most of the thinking people in our partof the country who are out of the realm of politics. I think thepoliticians on either side always will be overly optimistic or overlypessimistic because that's how they do business. But there isbasically a subdued confidence, as I sense it, in our District.MR. MARTIN. Thank you, Larry. We at last had a rebuttal ofsome kind.MR. ROOS. I wish I didn't have to be the guy to do it.MR. MARTIN. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I don't want to add to the doom and gloom either,but I do have to say that I agree with a good deal of what has beensaid on the pessimistic side around the table, and I share a good partof the view expressed by Governor Gramley. Although the economyappears to be declining at a slower rate, there is no obvious andconvincing evidence that it is bottoming out at the present time or-18-5/18/82that an upturn is close at hand. The main concern that I have,therefore, is with respect to the timing and strength and possibleduration of the upturn--specifically whether we will have to wait forthe stimulus we'll get from the midyear tax cut or whether theinventory correction will occur before then and provide the spark forthe upturn. I rather doubt that we will see a substantial buildup ofinventories in the current environment. I agree with what has beensuggested by several people: namely, that the stress in the economyis probably understated by the macroeconomic figures. The data welook at probably don't reflect fully the strain and stress that a lotof business firms are feeling, particularly the debt-laden businessfirms. And as Lyle pointed out, many of these firms are experiencingthe stress of a rising ratio of debt [service costs] to profits. Inthis environment, I don't think we are likely to see a strong buildupof stocks. So, from my point of view at least, it appears that wewill have to wait for the stimulus stemming from the midyear tax cut,which we may not feel until some time further into the third quarter.Of course, that longer delay in the upturn will increase the stress onfirms and their vulnerability to failure and bankruptcy. Although thereduction and the elimination of inflation continues to be our primarygoal and a matter against which we mount a determined struggle, Ithink it is obvious in the present situation that we have made a gooddeal of progress toward reducing inflation and that we've made enoughprogress so that we can now look around and survey the damage that hasbeen done to the economy. It's also time, I think, to see what we cando to allow the economy to repair some of this damage.MR. MARTIN. Thank you, Emmett. Comments? Are youcommenting on Emmett's remarks or making a separate statement.SPEAKER(?). No, a separate statement.MR. MARTIN. Would you mind if we went to President Guffeyfirst? President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. First of all, I'd like to direct a question toJim Kichline. If I understood your comment, Jim, the Greenbook isbased upon an assumption that there will be a budget compromise andthat it will be in magnitude about half what the President hasrecommended. I was under the impression that the assumption had beenthat there would be no compromise.MR. KICHLINE. No, in February we had taken roughly half ofthe proposed deficit-reducing measures in the Administration's budgetat that time. We have retained that [assumption]; those numbers on aunified deficit basis are around $25 billion in deficit reducingmeasures both on the tax side and in expenditure cuts. The numbersbeing talked about in the Congress--adjusting away some of the thingssuch as interest rate declines, which we have not put into thesemeasures--are in the $50-$60 billion range. So, we're at roughly halfof what is being talked about in the Congress now.MR. GUFFEY. Is that for the remainder of calendar year '82?MR. KICHLINE. No, that's for fiscal '83.MR. GUFFEY. Fiscal '83.-19-5/18/82MR. GRAMLEY. What do you assume about cuts further out? Itseems to me that the critical issue in terms of the effect on theeconomy of a compromise is what happens to expectations about furthergrowth of the deficit beyond fiscal '83. What does that mean forlong-term interest rate expectations, not just for long-term interestrates now. If one were to assume that we had that kind of deficitreduction for fiscal '83, but much much more in '84 and '85, then Iwould be quite convinced that the economy would come out of itscurrent slump and turn up. But if that were the only action--a cut inthe deficit of $40-$50 billion or somewhere around there--and if thatwere the figure for deficit reductions in '84 and '85 also, then Idon't think we'd get much relief.MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have not, as you know, explicitlyforecasted '84 and '85. I think it's perfectly consistent, however,that whatever is done in the Congress would imply larger [deficit]numbers in subsequent fiscal years. In this forecast, however, wehave the persistence of very high long-term rates. One of thedifficulties, frankly, is that what is being talked about in theCongress is probably not sufficient to induce market participants tobelieve that things are going to get done in a sizable way. Thosenumbers are most discouraging. To look at specified cuts: TheCongress has raised once again [its estimate of the] sales of outer-continental shelf leases. Frankly, it's running the other way. TheAdministration has reduced the numbers, but the Congress wants to getthe deficit down so they say that the United States is going to sell$8-1/2 billion of those in fiscal '83. Even the Administrationdoesn't buy that number. I can only say that no matter what thenumbers are, if one goes through this line-by-line, it seems to methat the program has to be credible in order to have the kind ofimpact that you're talking about. And I really don't see that on thehorizon. Dramatic things are going to have to happen over the nextfew months to change this around.MR. GUFFEY. If I may [continue], Governor Martin, there arethree or four major economic activities in the Tenth District that I'dlike to comment on: the aircraft industry, energy, agriculture, andauto assemblies, the latter being a very big employer in our District.Starting with the aircraft--and I'm talking about the Cessna, theBeach, the Lear jet, the Boeing aircraft--operations essentially aredead in the water, if you will, with simply no sales on the horizon.They are completing their contracts and as a result some unemploymentis beginning to show up and quite likely will run out even into therecovery period. In the energy field, the number of rigs operating isdown something on the order of 18 percent, May over January. And thatsuggests some layoffs in that industry, [and with] less piping andother supplies it rolls back to other industries. But the fact of thematter is that that has been a very vigorous sector of our economy,and some downturn perhaps is not unexpected. I would observe alsothat even with an upturn in the economy in the third quarter orperhaps the fourth quarter, that problem won't be solved simplybecause it stems largely from the glut in the international market andfrom the stock markets. [Given] the stock market prices, the numbersjust will not work. So, until the oil prices come up on theinternational scene, we won't see a lot of improvement, but I don'tthink the downturn will go much deeper. In the auto assembly area, itis well known that there is unemployment, and that sector probablywill not come back until the economy recovers.-20-5/18/82In the agricultural sector, Si Keehn accurately described thesituation with respect to some optimism in the livestock area. Priceshave increased rather substantially over the last 30 days. That's asegment of the agricultural industry and, to be sure, the improvementis welcome. But on the crop side, there is a glut: there is anoverhang in the supply. We are looking at a very good crop and, as amatter of fact, there is no optimism in that area; unless we get thedollar in some better alignment internationally and pick up the exportsales, there isn't much hope for substantial improvement. Just togive you an order of magnitude: Net farm income last year was about$23 billion; they are estimating $15 billion this year. And whentaken in real terms in 1967 dollars that's almost the present levelfor the agriculture industry. Having said that, however, the bestestimate is that there will be only about a 4 percent withdrawal ofoperators during this year. In other words, this year will be awashout. They have about one more year of [unintelligible] before wewill see some very disruptive developments, such as sales of farm landand equipment in large numbers.In summary, there are some difficult spots. We are in aposition in the Midwest where, because of the nature of agriculture tobegin with and the energy area, we can weather another 9 months to awhole year fairly well. Lastly, in the energy area, I'd say that theannouncement by Exxon of the close out of the shale oil [development]on the western slope of the Rockies, which was a surprise to everybodyto begin with, will have some economic impact, estimated to runsomething like 10,000 in unemployed in that industry in Colorado.That probably won't impact the state, which is a small state andsparsely populated in some areas, to the extent of 10,000 employeessimply because those are employees who have been attracted to the areaand who quite likely will go home. But it will have a major impact onthe economy in that western area.MR. MARTIN. Thank you, Roger. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. It's difficult to evaluate the qualitativegloom against the quantitative evidence, such as it is. I wonderwhether one reason for the great gloom is not the disastrous profit[experience] that people have been through in the first quarter.Profits collapsed in the first quarter, as one can see from our data,and that is bound to impress people when the details come out; whencorporate reports go out. we may get some further impact from that.But it seems to me we experienced this kind of psychology too in 1980,and then we were in the worst recession since World War II. Theeconomy was going down 10 percent per year. Nothing seemed able tostop it. As we know, it was "coldest just before daybreak" and it mayturn out that way again. There was a big difference in 1980. We hadallowed interest rates to fall very sharply and that turned housingaround very fast. That [sort of rate decline] has not happened thistime and to the extent that it was [induced by] policy, I think it wasthe right policy. It is somewhat surprising that we're not gettingthe declines in interest rates that one would expect, given the rateof inflation. But if the economy continues weak, that in itself, ofcourse, would be a factor making for lower interest rates and for animprovement in housing.Now, the elements of strength in the situation, I'm surewe're all are familiar with. I wish we didn't have to count on the-21-5/18/82large tax cuts and social security increase as a kicker to theeconomy. The upshot of all this is that hardly any forecasters areseeing a decline even for the second quarter. After all I've heardhere, one would expect the second quarter to be a disaster like thefirst, or worse. Our projection is coming down, but is not yetnegative; even if the second quarter were a small negative, whichwouldn't surprise me, the decline would be slowing. I find itdifficult, with all these elements [of strength] ahead for the thirdquarter, to think that we are facing a great risk of continued decline[in overall economic activity]. What we're facing, I think, is theprospect of a very moderate advance and the possibility of chokingthat off. The possibility of the economy going down, barring afinancial crisis such as we've talked about here today, seems to methe lesser probability. Thank you.MR. MARTIN. Thank you. Bob Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I think it would be fair to characterize oureconomic situation in the Southwest as somewhat sluggish. The oilsector is still in decline; the rig count was down further in April.But there does seem to be a growing feeling that [the oil sector] isprobably near the bottom if it's not there, much as Roger indicated[for his District]. Refining operations are below capacityutilization, and unemployment in that sector is down about 12 percentsince December. We have had a little pickup in housing starts, butthey are still at a low level. Unemployment in the State of Texasrose to 6.4 percent in April and that causes us some concern. We arenot used to those kinds of numbers. Growth in bank credit slowed inthe last couple of months. The demise of Braniff recently, while itmight not have made a ripple in New York, caused quite a bit ofconsternation down our way. In fact, I wasn't sure I could get herefor this meeting.MR. PARTEE. You could rent one of those planes!MR. BOYKIN. In our immediate area that involved about 4,600jobs that disappeared overnight. On agriculture, again I think Rogerdescribed that very well. Our commercial construction seems to beholding up fairly well. There have been some pullbacks on announcedprojects but there are still a lot underway and some of the larger[announced] projects still plan to go ahead. In a subjective sense, Iread the comments of the people I've been visiting with very recentlymuch the way Larry Roos is reading them. Attitudinally, I think thefeeling is that if we can just make it [through] another 3 or 4months, the picture is probably going to look a bit better. I've notheard the concern that you were expressing, Ed--that you are nowbeginning to hear [expressions of] pessimism about the longer term or"out years." Just to end on a positive note: One straw in the windis that my favorite retailer--some of you know he deals in luxurygoods and in fact he says he sells absolutely nothing that anybodyneeds--did give me a call just to update me. He said he was a littledisappointed that instead of his usual 30 to 35 percent monthlyincrease, it had dropped to about 17 or 18 percent. He attributed itto the peso devaluation. But he said that in looking at the reportsthat had arrived in the last two days, he thought maybe that hadturned around too.5/18/82MR. BLACK. Is that stock publicly traded in their name?[Unintelligible] a chain.MR. MARTIN. At a risk, I've been desperate to close on apositive note for the coffee break. And if two or three of mycolleagues will indulge me in this, let us adjourn on that 17 percentupbeat note.[Coffee break]MR. MARTIN. Ladies and gentlemen, the Chairman has asked meto pass on a comment. He will be joining us in a few minutes so thatwe can hear from Peter and Steve, who are still involved in theDrysdale meeting next door [in the Chairman's office]. He asked me toindicate to you, knowing that you might want to change airlinereservations or whatever, that it looked to him as though it would benecessary to reconvene the FOMC after lunch. So, I'm passing that onto you from their meeting. We have a number of people who havecomments to make. If the Chairman is back by then, we'll hope to hearfrom our market-related colleagues. Let me recognize first GovernorPartee.MR. PARTEE. I don't know that I have very much to add towhat was said before the break. I'm not optimistic on the businessoutlook. It seems to me that the new factor is the possibility of adistinctly deeper drop in capital spending than we have been lookingat. I would point out to you that the surveys have been progressivelyless good. The McGraw-Hill survey now shows a sizable decline in realcapital spending for the year. And when you talk to businessmen andlook at the Redbook and things like that, one gets a sense that thereis a very substantial conservatism that is now being introduced intothe management of companies and that cash positions are a littlestrained. But I also have to admit that I have some sympathy withLarry Roos' point. This is a painful, difficult period that we'regoing through. We expected that, I think; at least I certainly did.It is necessary to squeeze profits unmercifully, Henry, in order toget businesses to cut their costs and become more efficient and toresist wage increases of size. And in the process, we're going tohave some business failures--quite a few failures. We have a wholeregime of business enterprises that had heavy debt ratios and werebanking on inflation. Now that we're not going to have inflationbecause that's our official posture, they are going to have to fail.It may be a sizable proportion of the business community and it mayinclude quite a few government securities dealers and people whospeculate in securities of various kinds. We just have to take thesekinds of things as they come because what we want to do, if Iunderstand it--and what we've put the economy through hell for overthe last 2-1/2 years--is to reduce inflation. So, let's get theinflation reduced and let the people suffer who are going to suffer asa result. At least that's my view.One caveat that I think is important was expressed at thelast Academic Consultants meeting that we had. Somebody said that therecession in 1929 didn't look too bad for the first 9 or 10 months;one might reasonably have thought after that period that the economywas going to recover and would be all right. But there was a second-tier decline. And that was much sharper and it occurred because offinancial collapse. So, if we really do have a crisis here with this-23-5/18/82firm, or if a crisis developed that tested the very financial fabricof the economy, I think we would have to deal with that. But short ofthat it seems to me that all we're hearing--and there's a considerableamount of it--is the pain that occurs when we have more than just atemporary little recession within a secular upward movement [in theeconomy] and instead have something that is going to affect a muchbroader number of people, businesses, profits, etcetera. So, I'malarmed, but I'm not yet panicked.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can turn to Mr. Axilrod. I guess thatis where we are, right?MR. RICE & OTHERS. We haven't heard from Mr. Sternlight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, you haven't had that report yet?Well, we will turn to Mr. Sternlight. That reinforces my feeling thatwe may run over into this afternoon.MR. STERNLIGHT. It all seems anticlimactic, Mr. Chairman.[Statement--see Appendix.] And, of course, in the wake of this othersecurities firm that is in great difficulty today, there's anadditional great note of caution about financing arrangements even forthe highest quality of credits.MR. BLACK. Peter, you say the "other" firm. Was thatreference to still another firm? When you talked about theuncertainty in the market rise earlier--MR. STERNLIGHT. When I mentioned that I was talking aboutthe Drysdale situation that the Chairman spoke of [earlier].MR. BLACK. I thought for a minute that you might be talkingabout another firm.MR. STERNLIGHT. No, that was the one I was alluding to.That concludes my statement.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't mean to cut off Mrs. Teeters andMrs. Horn from the earlier discussion.MS. TEETERS. As far as I'm concerned, we can go ahead andhave the presentation on the alternatives and I will make my statementthen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'll make your comment later on it.MR. BALLES. Since I was on the daily morning call for mostof the days since the last FOMC meeting, I just want to make a briefobservation. I think we gave the staff an unusually challengingassignment for all the reasons you know about, including the seasonalproblem with M1 in April, etc. From my perspective, I want to saythat both the engineering and the execution under Peter and Steve andtheir staffs was just really great. There were some nervous moments,at least on my part, around the middle of the month when theprojections showed a 14 percent rate of increase in M1 in April and a12-1/2 percent rise in M2. But, fortunately, that calmed down as thelater projections were revised downward and we came in almost smack ontarget for April, which was an extraordinary and fine achievement.-24-5/18/82MS. TEETERS. Could I ask Peter a question? You said thatthe Treasury cash balance went up to $30 billion. Is that an unusualincrease?MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, yes. I would think that was very likelya record. It had been quite high in February, and we had something ofa problem of the Treasury's Fed balance having to go up to about $7 or$8 billion then when the Treasury's [overall] balance had gotten upinto the mid-$20 billion area. But when it got up to nearly $30billion overall, the balance at the Fed went up to a little over $12billion for a few days.MS. TEETERS. So there really was a very large finalsettlement--well above normal--in the first quarterly payment.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MS. TEETERS. That would probably explain some of the run-upin NOW accounts that took place in anticipation of April 15.MR. STERNLIGHT. That could be. I don't know.MR. PARTEE. Peter, was the currency shipment to Argentina anoticeable factor?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in the last report I had received onthose currency shipments to Argentina, they totalled aboutmillion from the beginning of April up to then, which was about a weekago now. So, it's not a very big deal [in relation to M1]. Theestimate that I saw was [an addition of] about percent to M1growth in April. Of course, for those who look at currency growth orwho follow the monetary base closely, there would be more of adifference in those measures.MS. TEETERS. Does this imply that Argentina is about tobecome a two-currency country like Mexico?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know.MS. GREENE. The information I have on that, which isanecdotal only, is that there was great concern. Well, first of all,there are some dollar deposits in the banking system in Argentina.And what was happening was that depositors were taking the dollardeposits and cashing them in for notes out of concern that thedeposits might be expropriated in some way by the government and thatthe notes under their mattresses would be more secure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll turn to Mr. Axilrod at this point.Excuse me, I forgot that we have to confirm the operations.MS. TEETERS. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Now, Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we had a lot of "whereas" commentsin this report on the possibilities, anyway. Mr. Morris.-25-5/18/82MR. MORRIS. Steve, you assume that the impact of the sweepaccount is certainly going to be to reduce transactions balances. Ithink that will be the effect in the long run, but it seems to me itis possible that in the short run it could have the opposite effect.MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. It could--MR. MORRIS. The banks seem to be marketing them, at leastinitially, in a very conservative way, and people may still be willingto keep more in their NOW account as a price for the convenience ofcombining the money market funds with their deposit account. Inshort, we could have an increase in M1 as a consequence.MR. AXILROD. I think that's possibly quite right.MR. MORRIS. It could be very troublesome.MR. AXILROD. It depends on whether we get the very largeaccounts into the sweep accounts, and whether that is offset by peoplebuilding up balances in the smaller deposit accounts.MS. TEETERS. Frank, is this because there is a minimum thatone has to--MR. MORRIS. Yes, one has to have a minimum balance.MS. TEETERS. And those minimum balances are fairly high?MR. MORRIS. Well, let's say there's a fellow who normallykeeps $2,000 in his bank account and $10,000 in a money market fundand the bank offers him a deal where he can consolidate them but hehas to keep $2,500 in his bank account. So, his M1 balance goes up by25 percent. And he's willing to do it because of the increasedconvenience. If this is a typical account, then we could see aballooning of M1, which could be very embarrassing to say the least.MR. BALLES. I might add, Frank, that one of our largest S&Lson the West Coast just announced a sweep account and it started at a$2,000 minimum balance. So it isn't limited just to banks.MR. MORRIS. Competition will tend to bring those balancesdown over time, but in the short run they may be pretty high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who would like to comment on thisstatement and on this great economic monetary policy problem?MS. TEETERS. May I take my turn now? I have listened verycarefully, and I get a strong sense of crisis--which I've beenanticipating for quite some time--not just in financial markets but inpractically every sector of the economy now. No particular regionseems to be exempt. Even if today's problems with the money marketare resolved successfully--and we don't have any clue on that as ofthis point--I think there is another in the wings. Whether it's aparticularly new and inexperienced or maybe dishonest broker orwhether it's one of our larger firms, we are going to be facingfinancial crisis sooner or later. I would hasten to point out to youthat since we last met we've had five major bankruptcies, allanticipated. Braniff may not have disturbed New York but it obviously-26-5/18/82disturbed Dallas. We have a list of close to 75 major corporationsthat have had their credit ratings downgraded. And since that listcame out, there have been three additional bankruptcies reported.There are other firms that are obviously very shaky and that have veryhigh debt [levels]. I think much of this crisis and the problems,both in the international market and the domestic market, have comefrom the high variability of interest rates. And I think people havebuilt into the interest rates now a margin for risk, which reflectsthat variability. And the variabilities also have created new marketsthat I don't see any function for except for variable interest rates.Those are the futures markets, the options, and the ultimatesilliness--the options on futures, which strike me as just puregambling or trying to avoid risk.So, it seems to me pretty obvious when one looks at theeconomic projection, which I don't disagree with, that we are in theprocess of just pushing the whole economy not just into recession, butinto depression. And that's not a forecast of a good economy, I wouldpoint out to you. It seems to me utter foolishness to have 9.4percent unemployment and a 15 percent federal funds rate. Those arejust two things that have never occurred in this economy before. Thestaff has lowered its forecast, and has done so across the board,although mainly in business fixed investment. But everything is down.And when I questioned them about it yesterday, they said "We no longercan deny the April numbers." The April numbers are very bad. Andthey carry that forecast of very slow growth out for a longer periodof time. If you look at it closely, there is no recovery. By thetime we get to the fourth quarter of 1983, the unemployment rate isdown to 8.8 percent and capacity utilization is up to 73 percent. Ithink we've undertaken an experiment and we have succeeded in ourattempt to bring down prices, although I realize they are lower thancan be sustained. But as far as I'm concerned, I've had it with themonetary experiment. It's time to put this economy back togetheragain and to get us some stability as to where we're going and how ourinterest rates are going to operate. I have very little respect forthe long-term aggregate [ranges] and I don't feel we have to proveourselves any more. I think it's time to operate as rational peopleand to try to get the economy at least started on a tentativerecovery.Given the alternatives that Steve has presented, that leavesme in the position of alternative A. I can't conceive of maintainingthese interest rates and not having really severe problems as we moveinto the summer. I'm concerned, as is everyone else, about thosedeficits. I would hasten to point out to you that approximately $100to $125 billion of the deficit is due to the recession. And I don'tthink we should require the Congress to try to offset recession-induced deficits by cutting expenditures or raising taxes. Even if weadjust for that, the deficits are substantial. And that's what Iassume the Congress will be working on rather than trying to removethe other part of it. I think it's time to relax [policy] and toreliquify the economy. It's time to permit corporations to fund theirsecurities loans. It's time just to say we are finished one job andto start the next one.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.-27-5/18/82MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think everyone agrees that theeconomy is in a bad predicament now and that lower interest rates area prerequisite for any kind of sustained recovery. But where we havethe point of difference is how we think we ought to get those ratesdown. It seems to me that there are two main reasons why rates arestaying up. The first would be the uncertainties concerning whatmight be done by Congress on the present budget impasse; I guess allwe can do in that area is to jawbone, as I think you've done veryeffectively from time-to-time, with the rest of us chiming in wheneverwe could. But the second reason is a fear that the System at somepoint may be forced toward some materially easy monetary policy. Andagainst this background, I think the best way to reduce inflationarypressures, and with them interest rates, is to get these monetaryaggregates back within the target ranges and keep them there for thebalance of the year. So, I think we ought to stay with "B," which weadopted last time. But I would regard that "B" part on M1 as theupper limit. I would be glad to accept maintaining the language inthe directive about a lower rate or an actual decline in M1, if that'saccompanied by substantially reduced pressures in the money markets.I have two other points. The first is that I would be alittle concerned about leaving in the sentence in the directiveregarding M2--the second sentence in the operational paragraph. Weincluded that last time mainly to cover the effects of the tax-relatedflows into M1, and we are now well past the tax date. And I wouldn'twant to see M1 come in above the "B" specifications even if M2 were onpath. The second point is that paragraph 10 in the Bluebook statesthat the staff's best estimate is that an $800 million borrowing levelwould be compatible with "B." The borrowing level in the first four-week period of our intermeeting period averaged $1.3 billion. Andsince the demand for borrowings is notoriously volatile, I think itwould be a little better to start out a bit more conservatively. Forlack of a better figure, I would throw out $1.1 billion. And then I'dhave a clear understanding with the staff that borrowing would beadjusted down quickly if new data suggested that we had greater-than-anticipated weakness in the money supply and a lessening of pressuresin the money market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, as Chuck said, we have been putting theeconomy through hell. I think maybe a drop of water would be helpfulto those poor souls in hell at this point! So, in my view, we'vereached the point where we ought to put some downward pressure onrates. Something between "A" and "B" captures the spirit of what Ihave in mind. I would have borrowing in the $600 to $700 millionrange, with a federal funds range of 10 to 15 percent. I would,however, keep the aggregates figures for March to June the same atabout 3 and 8 percent [respectively for M1 and M2], with theunderstanding that if M1 is a little on the high side, that would notbe a great concern.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I attended a meeting ofcentral bankers from around the world at the New York Federal ReserveBank last week, and the various countries explained how they arecontrolling the money supply. The fellows from the Bundesbank-28-5/18/82criticized the Japanese for being too pragmatic in that they don'thave any monetary guidelines or don't seem to have any rules that weknow of and are just pragmatic. And the Japanese said: "Well, let uscompare the inflation rates in Germany and Japan and let us comparethe real growth rates in Germany and Japan. They said, in effect,that maybe there is a case for pragmatism occasionally in centralbanking. And I tend to feel that way at the moment. We are in anunprecedented period in that we've never been in a recession withinterest rates like this. We've never been in a recession where ourcorporate sector was not only unable to liquify its position and tostructure out its debt, but found itself needing to increase the levelof its short-term debt during the recession. So, it seems to me ourability to forecast the economy is pretty limited in thisunprecedented period and that, therefore, a pragmatic case can be madefor erring a bit on the side of ease at this juncture. So, I wouldsupport alternative A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me say first ofall that my preference would be alternative B, that is, retention ofthe second-quarter targets that we set last time and for the "B"proposal with respect to the intermeeting period of May and June. Iwould like to pose a question to Steve with respect to the $800million borrowing assumption associated with "B." It isn't clear inparagraph 10 on page 7 whether or not we start the period at $800million or end the period at $800 million or whether that is theaverage over the intermeeting period.MR. AXILROD. Well, President Guffey, what we try to do--if Icould take a minute [to provide some] background on that--is based onthe results of a study we did a year ago. We try to estimate the rateof interest that would be consistent with the intersection of themoney supply target with what we perceive to be money demands overthat period. And then, given the discount rate--that rate of interestin here we think is a little lower--that implies the level ofborrowing. So, we construct the total reserve path on the moneysupply target and project, in effect, what we think is the properinterest rate in order to say what the demand for borrowing consistentwith that path would be. And that's how we got to the $800 million,given the discount rate. That, in effect, is what we think thesustained amount of borrowing would be over the period.MR. GUFFEY. On average?MR. AXILROD. Yes, and consistent starting out if we'reright. Of course, we might very well be wrong in our interest rateprojection, but that's a way--just as a first step--of trying toderive a nonborrowed path consistent with that total reserve path.MR. GUFFEY. If that's the case, then it's my judgment thatstarting with--. Well, first of all, let's say that we have somethinglike a 14 or 14-1/2 percent federal funds rate at the moment with aborrowing level of about $1 billion, which was the level last week asI recall. If we're moving then to construct the paths commencing withan $800 borrowing level, then I would suggest that "B" does imply arather quick downward shift in interest rates. My best judgment isthat your [estimated decline to] 13-1/2 percent for the federal funds-29-5/18/82rate over the intermeeting period may be a little modest. It might bequite a bit lower than that.MR. AXILROD. May I just make one comment that I think isrelevant, particularly in this recent environment? What we haveexperienced very recently is a little less borrowing and the fundsrate just coming down. Before that we had a higher funds rate than wethought [likely] for the level of borrowing. I'm not at all certainthat the banking system feels that eager to borrow. If we ever gotinto a liquidity pressure situation, it may be that they'd want tostore up their goodies a bit. So, I'm not exactly certain. It couldgo that way. I'm really just not certain, President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Well, just in conclusion: "B" is attractive tome, and my own feeling is that a path built upon these dimensions willgive us a lower funds rate rather quickly, which will give the kind ofrelief that I think some around the table are suggesting may benecessary. I would hate for us to give up the quarterly target [forM1], however, at the 3 percent level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Well, I'd like to express myself in terms ofrealities. I would question very vehemently any implication thatmonetary policy in the last few months has really been as tight assome would imply it has been. Even if money growth from April to Juneis zero, second-quarter growth of M1 will be somewhere between 3 and 4percent. And when combined with the first-quarter M1 growth of 10.7percent, that would result in money growth of 6-1/2 to 7 percent forthe first half of 1982. That is not starving orphans; it is notsqueezing the economy to death. It is relatively robust growth.I would opt for "B" because I think it would set the stagefor M1 growth of about 5-1/2 percent for the second half of 1982,which should allow for positive growth of real GNP. Even though thatrate of growth, when combined with the 6-1/2 to 7 percent growth inthe first half, would produce approximately 6 percent M1 growth forthe year as a whole, which is slightly above our annual target, itwould still work toward reducing the basic rate of inflation from thecurrent 7-1/4 percent. If we were to opt for an expansionary policyof something along the lines of alternative A, I think we would mostassuredly end up with 6-1/2 to 7 percent growth of money in the secondhalf of this year, and that sort of money growth would reigniteinflationary expectations and start to undo the progress we've madeover the past year and a half. The consequence is--and apparentlythere is some difference of opinion and difference of understanding onthe part of some of us on this Committee--that the inflationaryexpectations resulting from an expansive monetary policy would causeinterest rates to rise, and I underscore rise, rather than fall.Finally, while I don't want to get into a philosophicaldiscussion and would rather imply my attitudes toward this, I couldn'tcharacterize monetary policy as it has been conducted as entirely afailure. It has gotten us from those glorious double-digit inflationdays that apparently some enjoyed a few years ago to inflation at atolerable rate. It has brought down short-term interest rates by 300to 400 basis points. And, unless I am as blind as a bat, I don't-30-5/18/82think that that is all wrong. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, but in sum, Iwould opt for alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I come from a very different position,but I'm going to get somewhere near Larry's. I should begin to thinkabout that; I wonder if my logic is as tight as it ought to be! Wehave made a lot of progress against inflation but I don't think thebattle is over yet by any means. I think the recent numbers on theactual PPI and CPI changes overstate considerably where we are interms of the underlying [inflation] rate. And, indeed, the underlyingrate itself has come down because of this very, very severe pressureon labor markets. But I think we've made enough progress to havegained some credibility and it's time to let the economy grow at arestrained pace and still make progress against inflation.I expressed earlier my deep concerns about the possibilitythat we might inadvertently push the economy off the cliff. Thatshould be one of our major concerns now as well as doing what isnecessary to make continued progress against inflation. However, theroom we have to maneuver is very, very limited because of what ishappening in fiscal policy. It is true, as Governor Teeters says,that the present deficits are primarily recession deficits; but is nottrue that the deficits we're looking at beyond, say, the coming fiscalyear, have anything to do with recession. The budget deficitsprojected for the out years take place--and are growing--in thecontext of a fairly well functioning economy. Indeed, our staff isforecasting by way of a change in the high employment deficit betweenthe first half of '82 and the last half of '83 an $87 billion swing;that's over a period of six quarters. And, of course, it gets biggerand bigger as far out as one can go. That is horrendous fiscalstimulus in process if we do not see a compromise reached that hassome meaning to it. I think Mr. Kichline's words are well taken; hesaid that these unspecified budget cuts being talked about are notgoing to convince anybody. That is having a negative effect on theeconomy now because of its impact on expected future interest ratesand on some present long-term interest rates. If we were to engage inany actions that suggested, in effect, that we were throwing in thetowel, I think the effect on public expectations would be extremelyadverse.So, I think we have a little room to maneuver and we ought touse it. We are doing basically what we wanted to do in the secondquarter; things are coming out about as well as we could haveexpected. The money growth rates are about on target and interestrates have inched down a little from where they were. So, I wouldlike to stay about where we are--that is, about "B." I might lean alittle in the direction of Ed Boehne, going toward "B+," but Iwouldn't want to go far enough in that direction to generate asubstantial downward movement of interest rates. Although that wouldbe nice from the standpoint of the economy, it would be adverse fromthe standpoint of public expectations and would take some of thepressure off Congress and the Administration to get something donewhile there's still time.MR. MARTIN. Governor Rice.-31-5/18/82MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't believe that thealternatives we're looking at have much to do with inflationaryexpectations. Whichever of these alternatives we might choose, Idon't think it would have very much effect on inflationaryexpectations. I just don't think many people out there are greatlyworried about the fires of inflation being reignited in the immediatefuture. So, I don't think that's the issue. The question is howquickly we want to return M1 to the upper end of its target range. Ishare the view that has been expressed that our main problem is to tryto do what we can to get interest rates down. My own view is thatthere is not much we can do to get interest rates down. If we takealternative A, the most we can look to is a funds rate of around 12percent; I think the estimate is slightly above 12 percent. That'snot a very low funds rate with unemployment at 9-1/2 percent. Andwith a recession of the kind we're looking at and with the economy inthe shape that was described by Governor Gramley, that's not what Iconsider pushing interest rates down to the levels that the economyneeds in order to begin recovery.What we can do, though, is to create an environment in whichinterest rates can fall more easily than they can rise or where theywould be more likely to fall than stay where they are. The only oneof these alternatives that increases the likelihood that rates willfall is alternative A. And alternative A really just returns us tothe target range at a later date. We're still approaching the targetrange. And if we don't get there until the second half--the end ofthe third quarter or the beginning of the fourth--I wouldn't begreatly worried as long as we're facing the kind of economicconditions that we're facing now. So, I would opt for alternative Ain the hope that it might encourage--though it may or may not--somedownward movement in interest rates. Along with that I would like tosee a funds rate between 10 and 15 percent and borrowing in the $500million range.MR. MARTIN. Thank you, Mr. Timlen.MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I think the Federal Reserve hasdemonstrated over time--what to many of us seems a very long time--itscommitment to its objectives. Today the credibility of the FederalReserve in terms of that commitment is not at issue. We all recognizethat the country has had some success in its war against inflation.But I think this Committee must also recognize that we areencountering a very weak economy. Against that background, theCommittee should avoid any dramatic action of easing. I fear that anysuch dramatic action would be misinterpreted and would stir upinflationary expectations. I do think those inflationary expectationsare a real risk in the financial districts, particularly as theycontemplate the outlook for the federal deficit. I must state that mythinking is quite close to Ed Boehne's, which will probably make himrethink his position! I do, however, like alternative B. I mightshade it slightly in the direction of alternative A and that shadingin my mind would be in terms of, say, shooting for borrowings aroundthe $700 million level rather than the $800 million level indicated.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe just for my benefit--I am sorry Igot called out here--your concluding comment was "B," I take it?MR. TIMLEN. Shading a little toward "B+" but not much.-32-5/18/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't hear any of Governor Rice'sargumentation. You reported that you were for "A"?MR. RICE. In a nutshell, I was saying that none of thesealternatives can be described as easing. And I just cannot believethat any of them--alternative A at the extreme--would set up anyserious inflationary expectations. People are not worried aboutinflation now; they are worried about staying alive. And alternativeA stands the best chance of allowing interest rates to come downsomewhat, though it probably won't even accomplish that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope I don't get called out again. Ishould report that the market on the surface is behaving normallyenough. Bond prices are actually up today. I guess the federal fundsrate hasn't behaved very well; it remains around the same level or alittle higher, but I don't think that has anything to do with thislittle flurry in the market. I wouldn't think the funds rate isaffected. We get contrasting reports about whether the marketclearing arrangements are affected. They are not drastically affectedat this point, but there's a lot of nervousness about them. And stillnobody knows anything about the position of this firm, as near as Ican figure out. So, so far so good.On policy, I was going to interject a few comments of my ownhere. I don't know whether it's time to do that or not but I heardsome concerns, which I well understand, and I heard various bits ofanalysis. I'm sorry I missed the earlier discussion. I think we arein a stage where we could tell ourselves that nobody said it was goingto be easy to change these expectations and behavior patterns. Idon't think we have changed them completely. We have a situationwhere prices are moving much more favorably than can be sustained onthe basis of cost trends, and we have costs rising at a somewhatslower rate of speed, but a modestly slower rate of speed. There is areal prospect, I think, of further progress in that direction over aperiod of time. It is going to take some time and we can't count onsurface price improvement to continue. Meanwhile, there's ahorrendous squeeze on profits and all the manifestations of thataround the economy. And I think we are vulnerable to the kind ofthing that is happening in the market now in some form of another astime passes. I would also be concerned, and have been for some time,about influences on M1 of the liquidity/uncertainty/precautionarymotive that Steve referred to. Did you refer to this survey? Ididn't hear it.MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can always reevaluate our longer-rangetargets at any meeting. I haven't heard anybody pressing that at thismeeting and I think that's probably appropriate because it's verynormal to do it at our next meeting. But we have to do it with somecare at the next meeting, particularly against the background of thebehavior of M1. Steve has outlined the possibility that M1 growthwill be quite modest as soon as the economy turns around and as theprecautionary motive unravels. I think there's a reasonable chance ofthat happening. It probably will once the economy turns around, butthat assumes that it turns around and, of course, that people perceivethat it has turned around. It is devoutly to be wished at this pointthat interest rates come down. And even more so, I don't think we-33-5/18/82have much leeway for surprises in the aggregates that drive [interestrates] up through a too mechanistic interpretation of the aggregates.I put this all together in two ways, which isn't unique fromthe comments I've heard already. I've argued the case before--notalways successfully--that unless we have a good reason, we shouldn'tchange the quarterly targets. However, there are all sorts of ways tointerpret that and the operational decision is where to set theborrowing path. I don't know whether Steve is right or wrong; Ipresume that there's at least a 50-50 chance that he's right that aconsiderably lower level of borrowing will be accompanied by a growthpath in the aggregates that is consistent with the target we alreadyset. In any event, that is basically a two-track strategy that hassome appeal to me. Fine-tuning the aggregates in the middle of aquarter I'm not sure buys much. I am not going to [be greatly upset]if M2 growth comes out at 8-1/2 percent instead of 8 percent or even9-1/2 percent instead of 8 percent or if M1 continues to run somewhathigh under a pattern of liquidity pressures as reflected in NOWaccounts in particular. I'm right in the middle of something, tellhim I'll call him back in just a minute. [Secretary's note: Theprevious sentence was an aside to a messenger informing the Chairmanof a phone call.]In effect, I would at this point take the chance from onepoint of view or buy the protection from another point of view--however one wants to express it--of easing the pressures on bankreserve positions along the lines of plus or minus what is suggestedin "B." If it turns out that the figures are more favorable in termsof restrained growth, we could move more aggressively pretty promptly.I think that would bring some easing sooner or later in the fundsrate. The borrowing is substantially lower than we've had for a longtime. But I am not persuaded that that has to be reflected in precisechanges in the targets. I'd be inclined to leave them where they wereand then take the chance that that will turn out to be consistent withan easing of money market pressures for which I think there is areasonable chance. That's how I'd play the risk situation. There isa risk in the sense that whenever we set these reserve paths we neverquite know where M1 and M2 and the rest of the Ms are going to comeout. I'd play it in the sense that we will take some chance that witha lower borrowing figure, they will behave. If they don't behave, wemight have missed a little low on the borrowing side but we don't haveto react too quickly on the other side either if there's no veryextreme movement within the confines of any of these numbers we'retalking about. Well, with that much introduction or comment, I willmake a telephone call and return very promptly. Next on the list isMr. Ford.MR. FORD. I come out right about where you do, Mr. Chairman.I like "B." I'd like to see the federal funds rate range widenedsomewhat. I would not be concerned, as Lyle is, if rates were to dropnow. I don't see why rates can't drop, with the high level of realinterest rates that we're currently suffering under, toward a single-digit range. That ought to come sooner or later, so I'd want to widenthe band, certainly on the lower end. And given the uncertainty thatwe're facing presently with the Drysdale situation, I'd perhaps justwiden the band on both ends. I always like to do that. And aborrowing assumption of $800 million to $1 billion, or somewhere inthere, sounds reasonable to me. I am concerned that we not go too far-34-5/18/82beyond "B" toward "A" because we don't yet know what will happen as weget into the second half of the year, and I wouldn't want us to giveup all our leeway as we look ahead to the second half of the year. Myfeeling is that we should go generally for "B" with a somewhat lowerinitial borrowing assumption, though not a lot lower than we had lasttime, and a wider fed funds range--dropping [the lower limit] down toperhaps 10 percent and making the range, say, 10 to 16 percent. Thatwould widen the range to 6 points as we had it some time ago. Itwould allow for more unusual variability [given] the currentconditions that we face with the special situation in the market.MR. MARTIN. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we do need to review the long-range targets. A very, very large proportion of the increase in M1since the beginning of the year has been in NOW accounts. I thinkit's 85 percent. I had that number someplace but I can't find it now;but it's a very large proportion. That is suggestive of thepossibility of a change in precautionary balances that might notcontinue, but at least we shouldn't try to offset the lower growthrates for something that occurred in the early part of the year and isalready water over the dam. I also didn't know that Argentinaaccounted for million of the money supply increase in April.That takes off a good deal of the strength in currency this year. Ithought that April bulge indicated that people were spending. Allthat increase in currency indicates is that the Argentineans areafraid they might have their money taken away from them. We shouldmake allowance for that kind of thing, and that's going to continuefor some time into the future.As far as this meeting is concerned, I'm also attracted tocontinuing on the target path that we set at the beginning of thequarter, which is alternative B. It calls for an increase in themoney supply in June--May is largely over and seems to be minus--of4.3 percent or thereabouts and continued expansion in M2 throughoutthe quarter. I'd be most concerned if we didn't get that Juneincrease. Last year we didn't, if you recall; money growth in Junewas very weak. And we ought to be prepared to move in case weaknessdevelops as we go through the period. So, I would take "B" for thistime but reserve [my options] on the question of respecifying theaggregates for the year, which we'll be doing at our early Julymeeting. I rather like Mr. Ford's idea of widening the [funds rate]range. I wouldn't look forward to a 16 percent funds rate; on theother hand, I do think it could drop as low as 10 percent. So, Iwould widen it just on the lower end and make it 10 to 15 percent; andI'd choose a beginning borrowing number that is somewhat skewed in thedirection of encouraging lower rates, which is probably around $700million. I would agree with you on that, Tom. In sum, I would take$700 million as my initial borrowing figure, 10 to 15 percent for thefunds rate range, and the aggregates as specified in alternative B.MR. GRAMLEY. I have the numbers that Governor Partee waslooking for. Of the $11.8 billion increase in seasonally adjustedmoney supply from December to April, $11.7 billion came from other--MR. PARTEE. Oh, is that right? It's almost 100 percent. Isee.-35-5/18/82MR. GRAMLEY. From the fourth quarter to April would be thenumbers that you had, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Martin. Is that who we're up to?MR. MARTIN. Yes sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was there any particular comment of greatacuteness that the two last people wanted to repeat very briefly? Isee where you came out generally. If not, Mr. Martin.MR. MARTIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we have to beaware that there are limits to the impact we are going to make on thisrecession at this time with "A" or "B" or whatever set of targets wechoose. We must be careful to keep in mind that in addition to arecession, the recovery from which is highly complicated by the levelof interest rates, we are also undergoing in this country severalstructural changes in the overall national economic base. And thosestructural changes are not entirely responsive to monetary policy. Itis obvious that we are in the process of moving from a heavy industry,smoke stack, economy to a service economy. We're well along thatpath. The difficulty of utilizing a more liberal monetary policy tobring us more strongly out of this recession is involved in that.Much of what we've read in the Redbook, District by District, has beenabout the changes occasioned by primary employment contraction. Andthat, of course, produces a multiplied effect on the economic base assecondary employment is hit by that. I submit to you that until ourstructural changes are farther along in that economic base we willhave a weak recovery and that our policies here will have only alimited impact.Furthermore, we face changes in the financial structure inthis country of which we all are acutely aware. Those changes areresistant to monetary policy in the sense that the departure of thelife insurance companies and the other long-term investors from thefinancing of industrial plants, industrial parks, and office buildings--their abandonment, if you will, of the debt side of that kind ofgrowth in private domestic investment--is not going to be turnedaround by what we do here. Those investors are going to equityparticipations, and in many cases that means that the factory buildingwon't be built and the computer facility won't be installed and theoffice building will not be constructed, and that's not going to turnaround. That is a structural change that has to work its way throughuntil there are additional long-term sources of funds to financebusiness investment. The same comment applies to housing and housing-related investment--I'm stretching that term a little. The thriftinstitutions are not going to recover. "A" or "B" is not going toaffect their financial health materially. Lower interest rates willhelp, but we can't get interest rates low enough, long enough, tobring the thrift institutions back as the primary financers ofhousing. That is not going to occur. So, those are some of thestructural changes.There has been another structural change--I use words any wayI like when I have the podium, and I may be cut off any second herefor that remark--and it is in federal fiscal policy. It is notentirely the province of one political party. The old days when a $5or $10 billion dollar appropriation would have bounced through the-36-5/18/82Congress to revive housing are behind us. When a $1 billion-a-yearprogram is called generous in terms of a level of housing output of 1million units, you know we have a changed structure there. I don'tbelieve this Administration or its successors will get back into thebail-out of the Chryslers and the Lockheeds and so forth. So, readyfederal spending in multi-billion dollar amounts is another structuralchange, and that has implications with regard to the recovery.I note--maybe I was too many years in the supervision offinancial institutions--that I am very sensitive to the upcomingfinancial crisis that we will have, and I know many of you share thisview. Drysdale is just one; there are going to be a number of others.There are thrift institutions that are greatly overextended--and theyare multi-billion institutions and they are heavily dependent on largeCDs. They are buying all the junk assets they can find because of thefees and the yields on those, which are coming down; they will fail.They may get through this interest cycle but they won't get throughthe next one. So, from time to time we're going to have to injectreserves. From time to time, or over and over again I should say,we're going to have to play the lender-of-last-resort role; and thatis going to persist for some years. I'm not sure that it will be thePenn Central [situation] all over. I don't know that history repeatsitself that way. I think the recent bulges in the reserves that weprovided and in the various measures of the money supply won't go awaybecause there's going to be another wave behind that first wave. Idon't believe that the markets believe us entirely. I think we have agreat deal more credibility than we used to have, but don't tell methat part of the disbelief is not reflected in the level of interestrates. I feel there is still disbelief and it is so reflected. Ofcourse, the awareness of how the Congress works is reflected infinancial markets. The perfectly normal, usual, ordinary historicalprocess in the way Congress grinds along and finally produces a budgethasn't helped us any in the interest rate situation. I don't put muchweight to polling results, but there was a recent poll of 1200families around the country who were asked if they believed thatinflation has come down recently. About a quarter of them said yes,we believe inflation has come down recently and about 75 percent ofthem said no; and some of them said it has gone up! So, do theybelieve us? Do they believe in the effectiveness of our inflationarypolicy? No.It is those considerations that get me over to "B," not "A."Absent the structural changes, absent the disbelief, absent thenecessity for us to be the lender of last resort, I'd go for "A,"frankly, because our credibility is high enough and we've been able togo from numbers of $4.9 billion in the M1 weekly changes and havegotten through that without the markets being that disturbed. I'mtrying not to repeat what my colleagues here have said because they sowell covered the other aspects of the economy and the price situationand the growth in the aggregates. I'm just trying to add a particularview here. Given the situation as I see it, I would go to "B," but Iwould hope that with the excellent job done by our colleagues at theDesk--and here I'm second guessing the Desk, if I may put it that way--that if the numbers came in a little high, they would be left alittle high. I hope it would be "B" but an easy "B" rather than arigid conformance to these numbers, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.-37-5/18/82MR. BALLES. Well, I guess I ended up as tail-end Charlie,today. Did I?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nope.MR. BALLES. I'll try not to repeat some of the views thathave already been expressed because I agree with a number of them. Iwould like to go back to Mr. Axilrod's analysis. That suggests thatperhaps we should extend the strategy of allowing a bulge in M1, muchas we did in April, and that because of the possible increases thatmay have occurred in precautionary balances, because of the recession,etc. we should in effect give more emphasis to M2. We agreed in Aprilthat we would [accept an overshoot on M1] provided that M2 stayedessentially close to its target for the year. Of all the differentoptions that we might choose that's the one that appeals to mepersonally as making the most sense at this time. All of us areextremely anxious, of course--if we knew how to do it--to get interestrates down. The question is: How can we, in fact, do it? I'm afraidmy perception is that there is probably more of a risk in bigovershoots in terms of getting inflationary expectations up again, andhence interest rates up, than the risks we otherwise would run. Thatwas more or less confirmed in my thinking at the meeting last week ofthe Committee on Investment Performance where we talked to threeinsurance companies and five investment counselors who handle ourretirement fund. I asked each one of them their explanation of whynominal rates are staying so darn high in view of a very significantdecline in the actual inflation rate. The answer was pretty much thestandard one about the fear that these big deficits will at some pointresult in the Fed monetizing a good part of these deficits again,recreating inflationary pressures, and thus double-digit interestrates reappearing.Coming down to the bottom line, in view of the conflictingpressures on us, I would favor alternative B for M2, but I would beprepared to be a little more generous on the M1 side depending on theunfolding evidence of this continued buildup in precautionarybalances. As Messrs. Black and Guffey pointed out, however, that $800million borrowing assumption could be a little too generous to keep M1from getting too much out of hand on the up side. The work that we'vedone in our Bank on the short-run effects on M1 of the rate of bankloan growth suggests that we might need a higher level of borrowing--say, around a billion dollars--to keep M1 from growing too fast. Asfar as the federal funds rate is concerned, I would join those whowould broaden the range just to make sure we have all the basescovered. I would suggest a federal funds range of 11 to 16 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, it's a difficult choice. It's interesting:Alternative C certainly doesn't seem to have had any friends today.Given the gains that we have achieved on the inflation front and, mostimportantly, given the current state of the economy, I do think we areat a point where we could provide some room for the economy to growand hopefully some scope for interest rates to go down. Since most ofthe growth in M1 so far this year has been in OCDs as opposed tocurrency and demand deposits, it seems to me that we could providesome scope there. I would be in favor of alternative A, and I dothink we can accomplish that without any significant adverse reaction.-38-5/18/82We simply will be getting back to the target at a later date, and inmy view there would not be undue negative reaction on the part of themarkets. I'd stick with the funds rate range of 10 to 14 percent.That kind of band has been appropriate so far and I don't see anyparticular reason for making a change in that now. A borrowing levelof, say, $500 million would be appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich, you have your chance todefend "C."MR. WALLICH. Well, I would like to remind you that this isprobably the low point on inflation that we're going to reach in thiscycle. From here on out visible inflation--[as reflected in] theindexes--is going to rise. I know that the underlying inflation rateisn't as low as the indexes show and that that underlying inflation islikely to continue coming down. Nevertheless, from now on out thenewspapers are going to be reporting that inflation has started again.Who was it that did it? I'll give you three guesses!So, I fear that we're in some danger of repeating pastperformance and that we may shift to an accommodative if not expansivestance too early. And things need not improve, unemployment wise,under such a scenario. Mrs. Thatcher now has 12 percent unemploymentand she had up to 20 percent interest rates. That may happen to usthe next time around if we start the next expansion from the presentlevel of inflation. I do agree with those who say that our job is toget interest rates down. We need to get credibility for what we'vebeen doing. Interest rates in real terms are surprisingly high and Ithink this is largely because people don't trust what has beenaccomplished so far. They see inflation accelerating again. Theylook at inflation as something on the order of at least 10 percent peryear over the long run. I don't see great [problems] in maintaining adegree of pressure at this time. Monetary policy really hasn't beenvery tight given that it is operating at very high interest rates.We're above our M1 target. We have not made a dramatic effort to getback into it as we did a year ago in April. The concerns that thetargets might be too low to accommodate a reasonable rate of growth ofnominal GNP have been largely removed. We're now looking at nominalGNP growth of 6 to 7 percent; a target at a peak 5-1/2 percent plus anormal gain in velocity of 2 or 3 percent clearly would accommodatethat and even would allow, possibly, for some decline in interestrates.Finally, the danger of provoking a severe downturn seems tome to be protected against--not guaranteed against, obviously--both bythe endogenous workings of the economy, such as the inventoryturnaround, financial endogenous factors such as the possible drop ininterest rates if the economy stays very weak, and the exogenousfactors of the tax cut and social security increase. So, it seems tome that we could continue to pursue a policy of moderate restraintuntil the economy turns. I would lean--I'm not always to be going for"C"--toward something like "B-." That would mean to me a funds raterange of 11 to 16 percent instead of the 12 to 16 percent associatedwith "C;" I'd shade the range on the low side because we do want toget rates down. And for the borrowing assumption I think $800 millionis peculiarly low and I would opt for something around $1 billion.Thank you.-39-5/18/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A billion dollars is where we are now infact.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's where it is implicitly; we'venever been there. Last week the borrowing averaged $914 million or soand thus far this week it has been just a shade under $800 million.MR. BLACK. Peter, as to our operations, you said yesterdayon the call that the Desk anticipated that we would hit our borrowingtargets of a week ago.MR. STERNLIGHT. The level implicit in the path is a littleover [$1 billion]--about $1044 or $1045 million. But, as Steve said,borrowing has been running around $750 to $800 million so far thisweek.MR. BLACK. But would your guess still be that you'd come outabout on the borrowing target? Or has that changed since yesterday?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know. The way borrowing has beenrunning I wouldn't be surprised if it stays around that $800 millionlevel today because tomorrow we may be looking at something that'saveraging $800 million. Now, how we shape operations tomorrow mightdepend on the decision reached here today. If the borrowingassumption were to come out around that $800 million level, let's say,I'm not sure there's a great point in obliging that final day of theweek bulge in borrowing that would bring borrowing up to the $1040million average.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, borrowing, let us not forget, is inany case the residual; what we are aiming at is the reserve path. Andif the excess reserves vary from their assumed level, we will get adifferent borrowing figure simply because excess reserves are off.MR. BLACK. The only reason I asked the question is that Iwas on the call yesterday and the staff thought at that time that we'dprobably be about on target. I just wondered if that had changed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin, would you like to contributeto our--?MR. BOYKIN. Briefly, I would opt for alternative B. I woulddo it in a fairly firm way. I don't think I'd want to see it shadedtoward "A." I would accept the borrowing assumption of $800 million.It seems a little low, but I would accept that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn, you are left either topronounce the benediction or to change everybody's mind, or to bring afresh point of view in any event. I don't know whether your view isfrom Cleveland or Philadelphia at this point--perhaps a mixture ofboth.MS. HORN. The point of view is Cleveland as of a few daysago. I would choose alternative B. If we're either on alternative Aor [C], it seems to me we run the risk of the market--or of all of us--being surprised by another accident in the money supply when we'reabove target. I think that's particularly damaging to marketexpectations. I believe the market expects us to stay on the track-40-5/18/82that we seem to be on for this quarter and would not be disappointedby our continuing with alternative B. My staff's work would indicatethat the $800 million initial borrowing assumption would shade thispath toward "B+," but basically alternative B as specified is where Icome out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we seem to have some considerable,but not unanimous, consensus around some variant of "B" with a plus orminus [or] in the middle. I take it a number of people have made thepoint, and I made the point, that we face the possibility of surprisesand uncertainties along the line, which might require a deviation froma strict application of a reserve path. But we have to assume we'retalking in the usual manner. There is one consideration that wouldbear upon me, which I didn't mention earlier, and I don't know whetheranybody mentioned it explicitly. I'd like to get interest rates down;it wouldn't hurt my feelings at the very least to give the market alittle sense of a lead in that direction. On the other hand, it wouldbe unfortunate if we gave it such a strong lead and created a sizablerisk that we would have to reverse it in a considerable way. Thatwould damage precisely what we're trying to do; we always have thatrisk to some extent.Borrowings have been around $1 billion and very briefly havebeen a little below that. Actually, the Desk has been aiming at apath consistent with $1 billion. Such a level has been very slow toaffect the federal funds rate so far, but presumably at some point itshould. The federal funds rate is about where it was when theborrowings were $300 or $400 million [higher]. Sometimes it takes afew weeks. All I'm saying is that, balancing all this out, maybe the$800 million in the Bluebook is a reasonable compromise between a bitof a lead and not being so aggressive that we maximize the chances ofhaving to turn things around on relatively short notice. I reallyhadn't thought of it before particularly, but as I sit here, I feelthat if we promote a great rally in the bond market and have itdisappointed in three weeks, we may be better off with a little moremoderate increases in the first place. We can't control that becausethe market has a mind of its own. We can't control it fully, but wecan try to avoid giving a false lead. And if we have to go lower [onthe borrowing], I'd go lower a little more gradually. That is mysense of that.As for the federal funds rate, it's hard to put the limitbelow 15 percent when it's above 14 percent right at the moment. ButI would not have a comfortable feeling if the federal funds rate wentabove 15 percent at this particular juncture, and I would want toreview that pretty carefully. I am inclined to think we ought to say15 percent; we should review it if it goes to 15 percent. I wouldn'texpect it to do so but I would want to think a bit if it did. Thelower end of the range on a 4-point range comes out to 11 percent,which gives us a lot of room from where we are. I don't feel stronglyabout the lower part of the range. But just to give you something toshoot at, we're at "B." And, picking up on John Balles' point, whichI think had some echoes elsewhere, I personally do feel more relaxedabout M1, given the various influences or uncertainties bearing uponMl within limits. It's a great source of comfort that M2 is somewherenear the upper end of the range. I have made this point veryfrequently in informal public and private discussions, though I havenot done it in writing or in a big public speech. I think it might be-41-5/18/82useful at least to suggest in a public speech, of which I have aplenitude still on my calendar, that one should not be too literal ortoo aggressive about M1 when there is all this uncertainty about theprecautionary effects in M1 and so forth. I also would note that thatfigure gets interpreted in the light of what is happening in the otheraggregates and is not looked at just as a figure itself.I have to discuss a bit a letter from Mr. Reuss discussingvarious resolutions in Congress and what we would do about them. Iwant to take that up with you. I can do it now or after we make thisdecision. I don't know whether it's relevant to anybody's decision.So, let me just introduce it. I have been abroad, but he sent me thisletter, which arrived on my desk Monday morning, May 12. That meansit was sent on Friday. It's a six-page opus. Page 1 says the SenateBudget Committee has tentatively adopted a budget resolution and he'surging the House Budget Committee to have [such a] resolution; theyhadn't adopted it at the time he wrote this letter, I guess. Sincethen the House Budget Committee, in Committee stage, has adopted thesame resolution, with the same language as the Senate resolution. Itsays that it is the sense of the Congress that if the Congress acts torestore fiscal responsibility--that's a big if--and reduces projectedbudget deficits in a substantial and permanent way, though I don'tknow how one makes that judgment, then the Federal Reserve's OpenMarket Committee shall reevaluate its monetary targets in order toassure that they are fully complementary to a new and more restrainedfiscal policy. It seems to me a fairly unexceptional kind ofresolution and one that can be lived with, since it's entirelyappropriate that we reexamine our targets on our own initiative withor without the Congress speaking for this and for other reasons.Obviously, we are approaching the midyear date to make that anexplicit part of the [agenda].Now, Mr. Reuss has been trying to get in a much more specificresolution, and page 2 reviews the background for that. He[unintelligible] it in other ways; he didn't say how specific adirective or resolution at least, but it comes down to a more specificresolution. He says he thinks that is going to prevail when thebudget resolution is finally enacted. That's not the resolution theyadopted in the Committee. He says here or elsewhere that he's goingto press it as part of the debt ceiling legislation. If it appearsthere, I would note that that is legislation and not just aresolution. Then he has 2 or 3 pages about how the Constitution saysthat Congress shall have the power to coin money and the FederalReserve is its agent. He notes that that is in the preamble of someresolutions that he has introduced and he reviews [comments by] pastChairmen [of the Federal Reserve]. I don't know whether he quotedsome language from me--he could have; somebody should look it up--buthe could have mentally, though he didn't. But he quotes Mr. McCabe,Mr. Martin, and Mr. Burns as saying that yes, indeed, if Congressappropriately by law ordered the Federal Reserve to do something, theFederal Reserve would do it. I don't think he gets right to the pointof what we would do if there were a resolution. [He says] it is vitalfor the Congress to know whether the Federal Reserve will now accedeto the directive of Congress or instead assert that it is a fullyindependent fourth branch of government accountable to no one. [Henotes that] the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee ison May 18 and that it would be in the public interest to give the OpenMarket Committee an opportunity to vote on this question. So, I'm-42-5/18/82going to ask you to vote on--not seriously--whether we will obey thelaw or not.He suggests a rather vague resolution--well, I don't knowwhether it's vague or not: "Resolved that the Federal Open MarketCommittee will comply with a directive in a concurrent resolutionrequesting the Federal Open Market Committee, if the Congresssubstantially reduces budget deficits, to adjust its present monetarytarget range in order to permit lower interest rates." That leavesopen the question of whether adjusting the monetary target range willin fact speed up the achievement of lower interest rates or not; thatis a matter of some controversy. I do not think it's appropriate thatI take a vote on this particular resolution that he has proposed, butI wanted to expose you to it. And I wonder whether I can report tohim that we have discussed this matter and I will tell him that it isclear in the minds of the members of the Open Market Committee thatindeed we follow the law. If Congress had a law that told us to dosomething, we'd have to do it. But a resolution is a much more trickything to handle. I think we probably ought to duck the question ofhow binding a resolution is, in the last analysis. But obviously we'dhave to take it seriously and I'd say so. I would propose to pointout in a letter that it would be a very difficult matter if they gotvery precise in a resolution. It would be a departure, I thinkwithout precedent, if there were a really precise resolution. Itwould create a very serious dilemma if we didn't happen to agree withhim. But I would not say what we would do. However, I would like toreport that we take their [views], however expressed, very seriouslyand would certainly give them our fullest attention without [directlyaddressing] the issue of whether we really would feel compelled ifthey say that our target should be 8 percent or whatever, to say thatour target is 8 percent.MR. WALLICH. I would stress the difference between the lawand the resolution. If they pass a resolution, it seems to me clearthat they didn't want to pass a law.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one hears all kinds of mixedarguments. I don't disagree with you in one sense. But it's notquite as simple as that, I'm afraid. They can put resolution languagein a law. If it is resolution language, such as "It is the sense ofthe Congress that the Federal Reserve ought to do something," whichdoesn't sound like a law, but is signed as a law, what do we do withit? There is also the more subtle question, when we have alwaysclaimed that indeed the Congress has the power and that's in theConstitution and all the rest, of whether they need a law if bothhouses pass the same resolution. I just don't want to meet thatquestion at this point. It would pose a very difficult issue for us.MR. ROOS. Can't you respond just by transmitting to him somesugar-coated, beautiful, unadulterated, double talk? I don't thinkyou have to dignify the gentleman's request. Frequently in the gameof politics when somebody tries to put you on the spot, you respond ina very dignified way with some vacuous terminology and hope he makesan inspection trip to the Falkland Islands or something like that!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He's not likely to do that. My ownjudgment is that we can't evade this issue that fully. He's going tocome back. He's going to come back in another letter or hearing very-43-5/18/82quickly if he thinks our response is too obviously evasive. Now, atthe same time, I don't think we can answer the question. And weshould not, in my opinion, prejudge precisely what we would do withouteven knowing what the resolution is.MS. TEETERS. We also run the danger that if we don't paysome attention to the resolution, they will pass a law.MR. PARTEE. I'd be very much impressed by a resolution.After all, this is not just any Congressman; this is the Chairman ofthe Joint Economic Committee, the ex-chairman of a Banking Committee,and a Congressman who has announced he is not going to run forreelection. If he can get the whole Congress behind him to support aparticular path for monetary policy, as long as it's not too specific,I would take it extremely seriously and be inclined to vote with it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question that they will pass aresolution. The sentiment is very strong. The question is whether wewill get a resolution of the type that the Committee has adopted,which I think is the probability. The danger is something much morespecific. But it depends upon whether it's said precisely; I don'tthink we can answer. It could put us in a very great dilemma. It hasto be taken seriously; I don't think there's any question about that.Also, some of us have to go to a lunch and we have to quit for thetime being. Maybe we can think about this over lunch and come--MR. ROOS. Do you have some idea, Mr. Chairman, when wereturn how long you think [the meeting will run]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it's going to takevery long, because I think we were very close to concluding. We haveto resolve this issue in general terms and I don't think we will needmore than a half hour, I would guess, and maybe less.MR. GUFFEY. Would it not be possible to take a vote now onthe directive? There's a consensus probably on the resolution as youhave outlined it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, okay, if you're willing to go thatfast. Let me just repeat. What I'm suggesting is that I would preferjust to keep the wording of the directive with a modification in thetime period. That's where we are. Instead of just rewriting it, we'dhave the same substance with a different time period. I would takeout those intermediate sentences that we had before and just say thisis it. I'd make clear, not in the directive but in the interpretativelanguage on the Committee discussion--the policy record or whatever wecall it--these nuances that we're a little less worried about M1 andthat if it went a little high we wouldn't be all that concerned,particularly provided M2 is okay. I'd leave that to the policyrecord. Is that what it's called?Mr. Altmann has suggested that we put in a phrase that forthe short run the Committee reaffirmed its decision of the previousmeeting. It's 50-50 for me. We are in one of these peculiar caseswhere we are right on track with what we said at the previous meetingin terms of the aggregates. We can leave in that first sentence--wellwe can't really say the tax date--but we can leave in the sentence-44-5/18/82saying that M1 is affected by these liquidity shifts and so forth, ifwe want to.MR. GRAMLEY. I think that would be a good idea.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have the precise language. We'dhave to modify that language.MR. GRAMLEY. All we have to do is to make it: "TheCommittee also noted that deviations from these targets should beevaluated in light of changes in the relative importance of NOWaccounts as a savings vehicle." Just cut out everything from--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. That's consistent with--MR. GRAMLEY. Just drop the next sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Drop the next sentence. The borrowingsare $800 million and the funds rate range is 11 to 15 percent, ifthat's the most natural thing to say here. Do you want this clausesaying we reaffirmed? I'd be inclined to leave it out.MR. PARTEE. How would you like 10 percent for the bottom ofthe funds range? There was some expression around the table for that.MR. BALLES. What did you say on the federal funds rate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I said 11 to 15 percent. Governor Parteeis suggesting 10 to 15 percent.MR. BOEHNE. I prefer 10 percent. What do we have to lose byletting it go to 10 percent?MR. MARTIN. Let's go to 10 percent.MR. PARTEE. You might ask for a show of hands or something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll see. Is that the majoritysentiment--to go to 10 percent? It seems to have a fair amount ofsupport. That's the proposition. Is it clearly enough understood?We will vote then.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Ford YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich YesFirst Vice President Timlen YesEND OF MEETING-45-