Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 1-2, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., starting on Monday, February 1, 1982, at 2:30 p.m. andcontinuing on Tuesday, February 2, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. KeehnMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford, Timlen, and Winn,of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, 1/ and Roos, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, Ettin, 2/ Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld,Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market trans-actions in Government securities, agency obligations and bankers acceptances.2/ Attended Tuesday session only.Alternate Members2/1-2/82Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. McIntosh, 1/ First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of BostonMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, 3/ Senior Deputy Associate Director, Divisionof International Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Lindsey and Slifman, 3/ Assistant Directors, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Johnson, 3/ Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Fousek, Keran, 1/ Koch,and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Cleveland, Kansas City, New York, SanFrancisco, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Soss, and Syron, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, New York, and Boston,respectivelyMr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of New York1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market trans-actions in Government securities, agency obligations and bankers acceptances.3/ Left the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domestic policy directiveand returned prior to the action to establish longer-run ranges.-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 1-2, 1982February 1--Afternoon Session[Secretary's note: Chairman Volcker opened the meeting bycalling on the staff to make their "chart show" presentation.]MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, TRUMAN and PRELL. [Statements andrelated charts--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any comments or questions onhow these people see things?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a question. I understand thatin most or all of these new wage agreements that are coming in at muchlower levels, such as the Teamsters and others, there is for the firsttime a clause indicating that labor can reopen the contracts ifconditions improve in the industry. Do you know more about this? Andto what extent is that likely, when recovery starts, to bring about avery sharp reversal in the downward trend in labor costs?MR. ZEISEL. Yes, it is apparently a fairly common part of alimited number of such agreements so far, and one can understand why.In a sense it's one of the things the union is trading away; that is,the union is willing to accept a generally reduced fixed rate ofincrease in wages leaning heavily, let's say, on cost of livingadjustments. But they want the opportunity to come back in to takeadvantage of any improved profit position of corporations. And Ithink your point is well taken that it creates greater flexibility anda more rapid response of wages to any change in demand. Usually thereis a lag situation with 3-year contracts; it takes a while for anytightening of the labor market to be evident in a wage adjustment. Ithink this will occur more rapidly but, of course, it depends in asense on how tight labor markets get. Our forecast certainly does notsuggest an environment that would be conducive to very effectivebargaining on the part of labor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have the line for compensation perhour going down pretty steeply; it's all in the future. What givesyou that great confidence?MR. ZEISEL. Well, it's not entirely in the future, butyou're perfectly right that in large degree it is. We did have areduction in compensation over this past year. As I noted in mypresentation, I think one has to look through that compensation figurea little to the wage figures behind it. The wage rate figuresimproved somewhat more than compensation last year. We had an $18billion social security tax increase that raised compensation costs byabout 3/4 of a point; and if we adjust for that, we have a betterperformance of compensation. Beyond that, we expect furtherimprovements in the rate of increase in wages. We have an extremelypoor labor market projected: 9 percent unemployment persistingthrough another couple of years. This will have been, by the end ofthe projection period, about 4 years in which the unemployment ratewas higher than anybody's [estimate of the] natural rate that I'maware of in any event. And the logic leads us to feel that this isgoing to result in further easing in wages. [Looking ahead,] we have2/1-2/82as well less of the self-inflicted damage that occurs when socialsecurity taxes are raised. We have a relatively small tax increase ofabout $5 billion this year as opposed to last year's $18 billion and arelatively small increase next year as well. So, we think things areworking in our favor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Federal Reserve had a bigger increasein compensation [and is] looking forward to a bigger increase incompensation on some catch-up theory. How many other people areengaged in that?MR. ZEISEL. Well, it's hard to know, but one can--MR. GRAMLEY. The Federal Reserve's recession hasn't hit yet!MR. ZEISEL. The kinds of adjustments that President Solomonmentioned a few minutes ago suggest that we finally are getting thewage adjustments that we were really hoping for.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we see some signs of this, and somewage agreements that are reported in the newspapers suggest that someindustries are under very heavy pressure. But I do hear a lot aboutother industries that in the total I'm sure are much more important.I'm just wondering what other people hear. Banks in particular tellme they are raising salaries by 11, 12, 13, 14 percent this year.MR. SCHULTZ. I'm delighted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'll have to explain that comment.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we do studies to see what the comparablesalaries are out there. And when comparable salaries go up, why it'sconsistent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They will be looking at ours and then wewill be in the hole next year!MR. ZEISEL. You're perfectly right. In analyzing thoseindustries where institutional wage adjustments remain [to be made],they did tend to be characterized--in industries that were under verysubstantial pressure--by market pressure of one sort of another.There are other sectors, for example petroleum, where a wageadjustment apparently occurred which was in line with the kinds ofinflationary wage increases that have been occurring in recent years.But we expect spillover effects from this [pressure]. It creates anatmosphere in which bargaining is done against standards that are lessinflationary than in the past. And we feel this will have an effect.In addition, of course, we have had a cost-of-living pattern recentlythat has been somewhat less inflationary; it has been rising somewhatless rapidly. That has a feedback effect as well.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to offer a thesis. As I seethe data, the services sector part of the economy is likely tocontinue to be characterized by relatively high wage settlements andprices. The divergence in the price trend between the services sectorand the rest of the economy in the last year is remarkable. In fact,in the second half of 1981, prices of services went up again at a 10percent rate whereas [other] prices continued to come down.2/1-2/82MR. ZEISEL. That's generally true of wages as well. Theyhave held up really quite well in the services sector. We feel thatmarket considerations will be operating there; that is, the generallyslack product and services markets and relatively slow growth in realincome will be operating to damp prices somewhat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They don't seem to operate very well inthat sector. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Aren't we somewhat in a minority in regard to ahopeful outlook for inflation in '83 and beyond? I see that outsidemodels we review seem to feel that in '83 inflation will pick up againwith recovery. I look at our own alternative long-run strategies andthe easy strategy, number 2, has inflation virtually leveling off in'84. It still goes down in '83. Now, is all this due simply todifferences in assumptions on monetary policy or are there more realsector things built into these estimates?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I'm not sure. We have not examinedoutside forecasts in detail. We have a running tally of fourcommercial forecasters and, in looking at those, I would judge thatmonetary policy differences have a great deal to do with that. A meanof four commercial services has M1 growth of something like 6-1/2percent in 1982 and 5-3/4 to 6 percent in 1983. That's two years ofreally quite a bit more money growth as compared to the Board'snumbers. In addition, they have alternative fiscal policies. The netresult is that they have a much stronger recovery in activity; theyhave something like a 4 percent rate of increase in real GNP in 1983compared to our forecast of 2-1/4 percent. So, all of those things dohave an impact on the price side. And you're quite correct: Relativeto outside forecasts, we have a fairly optimistic price projection.MR. WALLICH. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. To pick up on your comment, Mr. Chairman, I didget the impression as we went through the chart show and discussed theoutlook [at the Board briefing] this morning that this is not aforecast that emphasizes the negative. Everything's possible, but youhave a really remarkable decline, as the Chairman said, incompensation per hour. It could occur. But, as you know, it's towardthe extreme of what one might think could happen. I must say thatyour output per hour forecast strikes me as being pretty strong, giventhe fact that there won't be much recovery in the economy under yourprojection. As a matter of fact, for the period from the latter halfof 1982 to 1983 you have the longest sustained increase in output perhour that we've had since 1977. When you look at prices relative tounit labor costs on the next page, the price index goes down nicely,mirroring the decline in unit labor costs. There apparently isn'tanything that occurs in food or anything else that tends to [push]prices up.On the real side of the economy, it seems to me that you havean extraordinarily optimistic projection for plant and equipment[spending] given the capacity utilization chart shown and also thefinancial factors that are on the page previous to that. And finally,you have consumption really doing pretty well. Apparently, none of2/1-2/82the alleged effects of cuts in tax rates is working in terms ofstimulating savings. So, therefore, consumption remains high relativeto after-tax income. The general impression I get is that this is apretty upbeat forecast that you're giving us, under the circumstances.Would you like to comment on that?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. It depends in part on whether you'reemployed or not!MR. CORRIGAN. Is that a personal reference?MR. KICHLINE. Not yet! In any event, you're quite correctthat, looking at the assumptions we have, we do foresee some realgrowth. It's small relative to past cycles, but it's an extraordinaryperiod, given our monetary assumptions. We have what I believe to bea realistic price forecast, given the assumptions, and I view that asquite optimistic. I think something very important is happening onthe price side, and 1982 is a key year. I'm fairly optimistic on theprice outlook. There very clearly are downside risks in the forecast.Mike pointed to some on the financial side; things can go wrong.Jerry pointed to business fixed investment, which is a sector wherethere are clear downside risks. I would only say that we are sure tobe surprised by some bobbles in the numbers over the two-year timehorizon that we're forecasting. But on average, this is our bestview, given the assumptions, and I think it's realistic.MR. PARTEE. Well, as a matter of personal preference, wouldyou say that there are more downside risks or upside risks in yourprojections?MR. KICHLINE. Given the assumptions, I think there are moredownside risks, particularly in the shorter term.MR. PARTEE. That's my impression too.MR. SCHULTZ. Can we pursue that for just a minute? Ibelieve it is of some importance to think about the possibility of areal shock, a break of some kind. It is difficult for me at thispoint in time to see a single domestic shock to the system--the kindof thing that really sends a big tremor through the system--of thesize of Penn Central in '70 or Bank Herstatt in '74. If InternationalHarvester or if Chrysler goes [belly up], I don't think those wouldcreate that kind of shock in the system. The paper market seems to bein so much better shape. Now, if Ford goes, that would give usconsiderably more to be concerned about. One worries in theinternational area about all the East European loans and about thecondition of the German banks. And yet whenever one asks the questionthe answer always is that [the German authorities] would keep anymajor German banks from going under. They may have a problem. So, itcertainly is worthwhile to think about where the shocks could be. Wehad, what--about 43,000 corporate bankruptcies in 1981? It seemsclear that the number is going to be larger [this] year. The order ofmagnitude is very difficult to forecast, but one would think that theerosion of those balance sheets would cause more difficulties.However, it doesn't seem logical that that would provide a shock tothe system of the kind that a single traumatic event would. Or wouldyou disagree with that? Do you think that the number of bankruptcies2/1-2/82could reach such proportions that it could provide major problems tothe financial system?MR. KICHLINE. Oh, I think it clearly could. I don't thinkthat's the most likely forecast one would want to run with at thistime. I very much agree with your assessment early on that thefailure of Chrysler or of International Harvester probably wouldn'tprovide the kind of shockwaves that a large corporate bankruptcy mightif it were totally unanticipated. I wouldn't rule that out. Thingsthat are unanticipated are precisely that; we can't predict them.What we do know from looking at some of the individual cases as wellas the aggregate numbers is that a large number of corporations appearto be [financially] strained. And part of the outcome, in fact,hinges on what happens to the economy. If cash flows were to erode orstay depressed for a longer period of time than we have in ourforecast, then those pressures would tend to build.In the numbers you cited on corporate bankruptcies are a lotof smaller enterprises that have gone out of business. Some of thatis related to the federal bankruptcy laws and it can be a misleadingguide as to the pressures on the system. But our perception is thatthere are many corporations, and probably individuals, that over thenext year or two could find themselves under severe financial straingiven the nature of this forecast.MR. BOEHNE. Just to add to what you were talking about,Fred, I agree that it's hard to see the sequence of events or the bigshock that would cause a real bust. But I must say that in recentweeks I've heard the term "depression" used by businessmen andordinary people more than I can ever recall. It just keeps coming up.It's not that it's on everybody's lips, but the term or the conceptseems to be bubbling up more than I would have expected.MR. FORD. It has a lot to do with the FDR television show.It has been on every channel and everybody is reading about it orlooking at it every night.MR. PARTEE. Yes, but that was just a few days ago.MR. BOEHNE. That was just a few days ago. I'm talkingabout--MR. BLACK. We always hear more of these things when theeconomy is near the bottom.MR. SCHULTZ. Are you hearing as much of that as you did inlate 1974 and early 1975? I'm not, but maybe it's because I stillonly get a parochial point of view.MR. BOEHNE. No, I wouldn't say it's more. But I just getasked the question: Are we in a depression or are we going into adepression? I have found the frequency of that question picking up inthe last few weeks.MR. KEEHN. I think there's more comment along that line,Fred, than there has been before. When you stop to think about it,Penn Central was an isolated incident. It was a tremendous shock, butit did occur all by itself. Herstatt, while a tremendous shock,2/1-2/82occurred all by itself. But a whole series of companies now aremoving toward this line, along with the S&Ls. One does worry that theclock is running on all these companies and that if there isn't somerelief soon, it could begin to get ahead of itself and a lot couldoccur all of a sudden.MR. FORD. May I ask what the staff does know on thatsubject? I have the same feeling impressionistically--that there aretwo or three of the major airlines, a substantial number of thrifts,Chrysler,--SPEAKER(?). International Harvester.MR. FORD. Yes, at least two of the major farm machinerymanufacturers. So right there, just based on impressions, I can comeup with over a half dozen big corporations. But has anyone looked atthe so-called raw z-scores, the predictors of bankruptcy, as towhether the actual number of firms that in all probability are closeto bankruptcy is rising sharply or--MR. KICHLINE. I'm not aware of that. Mike or--MR. FORD. Would that be interesting do you think, Mike?MR. PRELL. Well, I don't know how large and how reliable thecurrent data base is that we have access to. I know much of theindividual firm data that are available are dated and not veryreliable. But it might well be worth looking at. Of course, as youmentioned, there are large companies in the agricultural machinerybusiness and strings of suppliers to the automobile industry as wellas strings of suppliers in the aerospace industry who are affected,given that commercial aviation is off. So, there may be hard timesfor many industries. What is different about this period versus 1974is that we have very high real rates of interest as best we canmeasure them. And that does have an eroding effect on corporate cashflows. I think that's one of the fundamental differences in thepicture now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Well, the thing that troubles me most in yourforecast is the level of unemployment. There is very little progressmade during the period of the next couple years. With thesupplemental unemployment benefits starting to disappear and with thesituation in the states being worse than projected--I think you getyour totals because of Alaska and Texas, which are in very strongpositions--we have a widespread absence of support for the [affected]population group, in light of the reduction in some of the federalprograms in this area. And I think the FDR [television series] is nothelping us much in terms of a background on that. I sense in thelabor movement and in the political movement a stirring that I don'tthink is going to let this thing grind out in the kind of sequencethat we see. Then supplement that with further bankruptcies in someof these sectors, and it seems to me that we haven't factored intothis [forecast] a scenario that could be quite explosive. This levelof unemployment is quite different than in previous [recessions] interms of the hard core element. And we're removing support [byscaling down] some of the programs that perform the cushioning effects2/1-2/82there. So, I think there is more explosiveness in these numbers thanis apparent in the actual figures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. May I ask if, as I take it, this chart show iscorrelated with the projections in the Bluebook? It is. There'ssomething very interesting in the chart of long-range projections thatI think is wonderful, but I don't understand how it can happen. Thatis, on strategy 2 you have the fastest money growth associated withthe lowest interest rates and the highest inflation. How did thatwork out? Do you see what I mean? On the strategy 2 you have thehighest inflation with the highest money growth, which I would expect.But then you also somehow get the lowest interest rates out of it;that's the part that puzzles me. How would you explain that?MR. PRELL. Well, there are lags in these relationships, ofcourse. And within the time period, in essence we're getting amovement down the demand for money curve. There is more money andpeople hold it only at lower interest rates. So, within this timespan, that does hold interest rates down. And that also produces thestronger performance of the economy, the tighter labor markets, andthe greater cost pressures on prices. I think there is a clearconsistency. Now, perhaps someone who believes in rationalexpectations and is of a monetarist persuasion would say: Well, if weknow that the money stock is going to be growing 1-1/2 percentagepoints faster forever, then under the base forecast here, interestrates would adjust instantaneously. That's conceivably an outcome.But as we model short-term interest rates primarily through atransactions demand for money [approach], this is the outcome we get.MR. WALLICH. Could I pick up on that? We often findourselves saying that we cannot control interest rates except maybevery temporarily at the short end. And here we see that apparentlywe're supposed to be able to bring down Treasury bill rates for threeyears and make that stick. I find it hard to see the consistency ofwhat one finds oneself saying about the difficulty of providinginterest rate relief and these numbers here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get out of the model what the modelsays. And what the model says is the more money, the lower theinterest rates.MR. KICHLINE. In the short run. I would say you can argueabout the lag because if we had 1985 on the chart, you'd find interestrates under that strategy rising sharply. And maybe it wouldn't takeuntil 1985. But that very strategy would provide higher interestrates in the long run than any of the other strategies.MR. PARTEE. Is that really true? It wouldn't equilibrate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless you provide more money.MR. PARTEE. I'm struck by the fact that your chart show hasreal GNP relative to potential dropping to the lowest level since1960. That is a fairly long time period. If you were to raise thatlevel relative to potential by a point or two--from 91 to 92 or 93--Iwouldn't think it would do an awful lot for inflation or interest2/1-2/82rates because that would only produce a somewhat [higher] lowest levelsince 1960 in the GNP relative to potential.MR. KICHLINE. All I can say is that the way this modelworks, as I think many others do, is that if you raise the moneystock, it just takes a matter of time--and one can quibble about thetime--but over the longer run, it's reflected in prices and notoutput.MR. PRELL. You can see that just in that table for '83 and'84 on the high money alternative. The 5-1/2 percent does have abottoming out of the bill rate in the second year. It's a perceptiblydifferent pattern from the others.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I'd just like to ask Jim a question on thesefiscal policy assumptions. In the Bluebook, of course, a discreterange of alternatives was set forth--strategies one, two, and three,depending on whether we follow the high end, the midpoint, or the lowend of the specified monetary growth ranges. On the fiscal policyside, Jim, I wouldn't know of more plausible assumptions to make thanthose you have made here. But having said that, how the federalbudget will really turn out is in my view one of the big uncertaintiesnow. I'm just wondering whether you experimented with any alternativescenarios on the budget and how sensitive real growth, theunemployment rate, and inflation are to different scenarios.MR. KICHLINE. Well, we did, and we had so many alternativesthat it was a question of which one to present or what to talk about.It was a real problem. We did try something that was a much tighterfiscal policy by getting rid of the 1983 personal tax cut, forexample, and the 1985 indexing. We stripped that out and assumed moreexpenditure cuts, and in that process we found that in 1983 when thestimulus of the budget was taken away, output dropped and theunemployment rate rose. That was the short-run effect; but the long-run effect gives you a much better posture with much lower interestrates and a better inflation performance. There is this output costin the short run but that fiscal alternative of a tighter posture doesin fact provide a good deal of relief on the interest rate front,according to the model, and does provide opportunities over the longerrun for improved inflation performance.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much relief for interest rates doyou get in your model with a tighter fiscal policy?MR. KICHLINE. With this fiscal alternative and thejudgmental money assumptions, the model reduced the bill rate in 1983by some 2-1/2 percentage points; the bill rate was a little under 10percent versus 12-1/2 percent. So, it's 250-300 basis points. But Imust say that was a package of about $50 billion on the tax andexpenditure sides. It's a big fiscal change from what we have here.MS. TEETERS. This was with no change in monetary policy?MR. KICHLINE. That's correct.2/1-2/82MS. TEETERS. You didn't postulate that if we had a [tighter]fiscal policy we might have a more--MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we did. Fiscal alternative[unintelligible] higher money. In 1983, we'd get a 6-1/2 percent billrate instead of 12-1/2 percent. One can get all sorts of things, butthat was an outcome that at least in the first 3 years produces a muchbetter performance on most of the variables you might be interestedin. Then it begins to get worse as you go out further in time.MS. TEETERS. Does that give you an increase in businessfixed investment and housing and so forth? It must.MR. KICHLINE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming here on the budget?You're assuming a higher level of expenditures than the Administrationis going to project by a considerable margin, right?MR. KICHLINE. I presume so. Those numbers were still beingchanged, I am told, even as of this last weekend. I really lost trackseveral weeks ago. I think we are higher because of the economy aswell as--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I was going to ask. How muchis the economy and how much is a difference in [the fiscalassumptions]?MR. KICHLINE. Well, in fiscal '83, they have an unemploymentrate of around 8 percent or so and we have a little over 9 percent;that alone probably is worth roughly $30 billion on the deficit.Also, I'm told that for fiscal '83 they have something like $15 to $20billion of tax raising measures and $30 billion of expenditurereductions, and we've taken about half on those sorts of things.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've taken half of what you expect themto propose?MR. KICHLINE. Correct.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's probably as good a guess asany because they certainly don't expect to get all of that out of theCongress.MR. WALLICH. Jim, isn't your model in a sense vitiated bythe fact that you have data going way back into the '50s wheninflation wasn't very important but fairly sizable actions were takenboth to curb inflation and to get the economy going. So, you have ahistory of large actions, large swings in the economy, and modestreactions on inflation. The model then gives you these same answersfor the present period when it would seem to me that large swings inthe economy would also have large effects on inflation.MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think that's possible. When talkingabout long-run forecasts I'd be very cautious simply because for mostof the very important variables we're out of the range of historicalexperience. So, I wouldn't disagree with that.2/1-2/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I find it interesting that theinterest rate projections in the bond market that are consistent withyour GNP scenario show virtually no change. [The bond rate] isprojected to be between 15 and 16 percent over a 2-year period. Whatdoes that say about inflationary expectations and investors affectingthe bond market at a time when you're showing such a sharp drop inactual inflation? How do you tie this whole thing together? Are youin effect saying that bond market investors are going to continue tohave a fairly high level of inflationary expectations notwithstandingthe major progress that you're assuming in '83 and '84?MR. SCHULTZ. But think of the deficit that they're assuming[in their forecast].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not disagreeing. I just want tobe sure that I understand what the man said.MR. KICHLINE. I think that's right. Our forecast would beone of continued high or, in fact, rising real rates given that wehave inflation coming down. So you'd have to be thinking in terms ofdisbelievers in the market; that's certainly a possible way ofreconciling these differences.MR. PARTEE. You're talking about real rates building to 10percent or thereabouts, aren't you?MR. KICHLINE. Well, as Governor Wallich would say, beforetaxes--MR. PARTEE. Just a little on the economy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is. if there is any tax left!MR. BALLES. Another question on your tighter fiscal policyassumption: How did that translate, if you did this, with MikePrell's chart on the Treasury borrowings and the percent of totalfunds raised? The chart shows that percentage shooting up to 40percent by 1983. Would we get any significant relief under thattighter scenario from the crowding-out phenomenon that I'm quiteafraid of?MR. KICHLINE. The borrowing that we have with that tighteralternative would drop about $45 billion, which is about 10 percent oftotal funds raised. So it would make a substantial difference interms of the federal borrowing as a share of total funds available.MR. CORRIGAN. Let me pick up, John, if I may, on the pointthat Tony started to get at. I think there's a natural coincidence ofconversation about the downside phenomenon here, but this real/nominalinterest rate issue strikes me as something that really may cut theother way, even if it's only in the realm of possibility. As I lookat all of the numbers here, basically, you have nominal interest ratesunchanged between 1981 out to 1983. And that's true whether it'smortgage rates or bill rates. But at the same time, you do have inthat time frame a very sharp change in the measured rate of inflation,ending up with 5.7 percent or something like that in 1983. Myquestion is: Isn't it at least conceivable, everything else equal,that you could end up with quite different nominal interest rates,2/1-2/82particularly when you're also talking about higher savings? In Mike'sflow-of-funds tables, I must say I am struck by the fact that evenwith the deficits the way you have them, total funds raised as apercentage of GNP is down fairly sharply from where it was as recentlyas 1980. Now, I wouldn't project it, but isn't there clearly some[possibility that], if things worked a little differently, we could belooking at something much more favorable in terms of nominal and realinterest rates?MR. PRELL. I'd make a couple of observations. One is that,of course, that outcome on flows is the outcome of supply and demand.And one of the things holding that flow down is our basicinterpretation of the monetary target and the constraint it places onthe supply of funds. The other thing is that, indeed, if one adheresto this policy and sees the progress on the inflation front and aslowing of all the underlying indicators of inflationary trends, thenone might anticipate some improvement in nominal interest ratesreflecting a decreased inflation premium. We've been cautious inthat. Given the short-term interest rates we see as in essenceclearing the money market, we've been hesitant to put in a big drop inlong rates at the same time that short rates are pretty much stableand at some points higher than they are now. It's just totallyagainst all history to have a pronounced drop in long rates when shortrates are under this kind of pressure. But it's not inconceivable inthis kind of environment.MR. FORD. Well, if I may, again on the same question thatthe rest are asking: If you do calculations on trends in real ratesand compare them under the three strategies--strategy 1 being the onethat I assume starts with 4 percent growth--the way it seems to workout is that by 1984 under strategy 3, which is really tight money, thereal rate of interest is 8.6 percent versus 3.1 percent under the mostexpansionary monetary policy. And if you give any credence at all tothe expectations notion, it would seem to me that after 3 years in arow of tight money and dramatic reductions in inflation down to 3percent, the real rate of interest would be smaller under thatstrategy than the others--certainly not 3 times as high as it is understrategy 2 by 1984.MR. PRELL. Well, this is a short-term rate of interest. AndI don't think there's any clear evidence that as one models the demandfor money one can find clearly a separate influence of the expectedinflation rate. In essence, the nominal interest rate captures theopportunity cost of holding cash balances and, therefore, there's notan obvious place for inflation expectations per se to enter into that.But the farther out you get on the maturity spectrum, the moreplausible it becomes that this kind of inflation expectations effectwill have a significant impact.MR. FORD. In other words, if instead of just the T-billrates shown here you also had shown, say, rates on 5- or 10-year notesor bonds, the apparent inconsistency there would be less apparent.That is, you could have the [lowest] long-term rates under thetightest monetary policy.MR. PRELL. Not necessarily, using a traditional model. Thatprobably would tend to show rising long-term rates because short-termrates are rising.-11-2/1-2/82 -12-MR. FORD. Does your model put out a long-term rate or a 5-or 10-year rate?MR. PRELL. It [does use a long-term rate], but it has notbeen especially reliable. That's one of the reasons we have not usedit very much. In fact, it has been underpredicting long rates overthe past year.MR. CORRIGAN. You have mortgage rates on there.MR. BOEHNE. Getting at this real rate effect: Don't youhave to trade off the effects of the inflationary expectations, whichhave become commonplace, versus the demand effect that comes from thisvery large deficit? It seems to me that it's the demand side that isdriving up the real rate and more than offsetting the positive effectsyou're getting from inflationary expectations.MR. KICHLINE. That's right. And I wanted to mention that Ithink it's both the federal side as well as the private sector. Onthese tight money alternatives, essentially the economy very muchwants to grow more rapidly in nominal terms than monetary policy ispermitting it. And it's that kind of squeeze in the short end that isdriving these rates up. So, I'd say it's both the federal governmentsector as well as the private sector; even though we have a fairlysluggish private sector, in our view there are still demands thatwould be satisfied at these rate levels. And you need those sorts ofrates to restrain the economy over this time horizon.MS. TEETERS. You still have a fairly substantial shift inthe demand for money in 1982, don't you?MR. KICHLINE. We have assumed about 2-1/4 percent.MS. TEETERS. How does that compare to what happened in 1981?MR. KICHLINE. Well, 1981 is bordering on 6 percent, I guess.MR. PRELL. About 5-3/4 percent.MR. KICHLINE. Yes.MR. PRELL. And we have greater drift in later quarters.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me, notwithstanding therapid decline in the actual rate of inflation that you are projecting,that inflationary expectations will stay high for two reasons: (1)the short-term volatility of rates; and (2) as two years go by, if westay at 9 percent unemployment and very depressed housing conditions,etc., notwithstanding the progress on inflation, there will be lessand less patience with that situation in the political arena. If youadd to that some changes in the election in '82 or changes in thepolls of public opinion, then I think there is going to be pressurefor reversing some of the spending cuts. On the other hand, there maybe some willingness to do something on the revenue side, so I'm notsure what the net effect on the deficit would be. But I don't see anyrealistic scenario that assumes that the country will simply stay withthis situation for two years, notwithstanding the very attractivedrops in the rate of inflation. I don't know what follows from that2/1-2/82because there are so many different possibilities as to what form thereaction would take.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we had very little in the way ofdifferences in the forecast for '82, although a slight difference inquarter-to-quarter performance. The main difference we had was theone that Jerry elaborated on more than anyone else. With theprojected decline in inflation, I think rates have to come down morethan what we see projected here. And on the point that Mike Prelldeveloped a while ago: If long-term rates did come down, I wouldexpect short-term rates also to follow as people use the proceeds ofthat long-term borrowing to liquidate some of their short-term debt.So, our guess would be that we are underestimating the amount of realgrowth and overestimating the amount of unemployment that we wouldhave in '83.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On that happy note, Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think one of the answers to why realrates are so high is contained in one of the charts that the staff hadin its briefing [to the Board] this morning. I don't happen to haveit with me, but it showed the components of GNP and the trends inthose components over time. It had consumption going up like [arocket] to 65 percent [of GNP], the highest ratio since 1948; it haddefense expenditures going up from something like 4 percent to 6percent, as I remember the numbers, and investment dropping out ofbed. In effect, what is happening is that when we have a fiscalpolicy that stimulates consumption and is designed to increase defenseexpenditures, real interest rates have to go high enough to hold downthe rate of business fixed investment to the point where it will fitwithin the monetary growth assumptions provided. If you look at thenumbers for monetary growth and nominal GNP, you find that strategyone provides for an increase in velocity of roughly 4 percent in 1982,3 percent in 1983, and 3.8 percent in 1984; it's 3.3 percent onaverage. And what has to happen, if we're going to get a bettereconomic performance than what the staff has provided here, is that wehave to get awfully lucky and have another one of those big downwardshifts in money demand. That may happen, but I think the staff isquite right in saying one can't be sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you saying anything different--in anelegant way--than that the deficit is pushing interest rates higher?MR. GRAMLEY. It looks at it in a different way. It sayswhen we have a combination of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you're going to get those samevelocity shifts regardless of what the deficit is, on one theoryanyway. Well, you get it at lower interest rates.MR. GRAMLEY. I wouldn't subscribe to that theory at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you get the same velocity but atlower interest rates.2/1-2/82MR. GRAMLEY. I don't subscribe to the theory that you getthe same nominal GNP no matter what fiscal policy does.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get a lower nominal GNP; you get moreunemployment, too.SPEAKER(?). That's right.MR. GRAMLEY. A lower nominal GNP with a smaller deficit,right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And you get lower [employment] and lessgrowth.MR. GRAMLEY. You get more unemployment and somewhat lessgrowth. Yes.MR. PARTEE. In the short run.MR. GRAMLEY. In the short run. But you'll get an economy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why is it only in the short run?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, over the long run--and by long run I meanover the next 20 years--if you believe that prices are sufficientlyflexible, then the real GNP will be related to productivity and realresource use.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eventually prices will go up, too.MR. PARTEE. I guess what you're saying is that that big hunkof 42 percent of the demand for funds is not interest sensitive atall. Therefore, you have to force the real rate up on the residual inorder to keep the total down to the point that it fits within yourmonetary assumption.MR. BLACK. To the extent that inflation comes down, thatnominal rate does not have to go up as high.MR. CORRIGAN. But Chuck, under that argument, if you didn'thave the 42 percent, you could end up with the best of both worlds inthe sense that all credit demands were interest sensitive and the realeconomy could be stronger even though you had lower deficits.MR. PARTEE. Well, the first effect would be lower GNPbecause you have the reduced federal spending; but the second effectwould be the impact lower interest rates would have on expanding totaldemands.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any comments? Howfull is the strategic oil reserve these days, Mr. Truman?MR. TRUMAN. I don't know. My memory is that it's about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much are we putting in it now?MR. TRUMAN. We're putting in about--. Let's see, I do havethat figure.-14-2/1-2/82 -15-MR. SCHULTZ. We were putting in 100,000 [barrels] a day.And then didn't they raise it?MR. TRUMAN. Well, it was moved up, I think, to 1/4 millionbarrels a day. If you hold on a minute, I'll tell you what they didlast year, at least. Last year it was 340,000 barrels per day onaverage. And that was high relative to the previous periods. We havein the forecast something only on the order of a little over 100,000barrels per day. They put a lot in over the last three quarters.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have it going down.MR. TRUMAN. The rate of fill has gone down. I think that isone of those things that is locked up in the budget financingsituation with Mr. Stockman. It's no more certain than some of theseother factors.MR. SCHULTZ. Is 120 billion what they're trying for?MR. TRUMAN. 120 billion?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MR. SCHULTZ. I mean million.MR. TRUMAN. As of the middle of 1980, it was 91 millionbarrels and they've been putting more in at the rate of about 100,000[per day]--I'd have to multiply that out--for the past two years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This last compensation figure--I keepstaring at Mr. Zeisel--you have plotted: Is that the third quarter orthe fourth quarter?MR. ZEISEL. The last real figure would be the fourthquarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fourth quarter.MR. SCHULTZ. Was it 5.7 percent in the fourth quarter?MR. GRAMLEY. This is year-over-year as the chart reads?MR. ZEISEL. Yes.MR. SCHULTZ. What was that figure for compensation in thefourth quarter--5.7 percent or something like that? It was prettylow.MR. KICHLINE. For total private business it was 5.7 percent;for total private business for the full year 1981 it was 9.3 percent,and that was down a percentage point from the year earlier.MR. SCHULTZ. I never did get to ask the question. Why wasit so low? I recognize that there's a lot of volatility in thosequarterly figures, but that 5.7 percent did seem to be quite low. Doyou think that's an aberration or was that indeed indicative of somereal progress?2/1-2/82MR. ZEISEL. I would think it's an aberration. There's acertain amount of--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For the first three quarters, theaverage earnings per hour figure was coming way down while thecompensation index was not. And then finally in the fourth quarter,there was this delayed parallel trend movement in the compensationindex. For the first 9 months of the year, as I remember, we had asignificant drop in average earnings that we did not have incompensation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take a couple of minutes [on recentdevelopments in the aggregates], since it bears upon what people thinkabout the long run--or at least what I do. Although I don't know theanswer on what has been going on in the money supply in the last 2 or3 months, maybe you can say something, Mr. Axilrod, in terms of thecomposition and the surveying that your people have been doing and soforth. Then let's get comments from around the table on how everyoneis looking at this.MR. AXILROD. Well, so far as we could tell, in the last 2 or3 months we have had this very sharp run-up in the money supply, whichpartly was expected, given interest rates, and partly unexpected. Ican't divide it very easily between the expected and unexpected parts,but I would point out, as many of you have heard, of course, that wehave had a fairly sharp turnaround in all of the components of money;but in particular the turnaround in other checkable deposits seems tobe correlated with a turnaround in savings deposits. For example, thesavings deposit component of M2 declined over the 6-month period fromApril to October '81 at about a 21 percent annual rate at a time whenother checkable deposits were growing at around a 15 percent annualrate. I picked that period because that is after the bulk of theshifting into other checkable deposits was finished in the first 4months of the year. Since October--in the last 3 months--savingsdeposits on the new seasonals have increased at a 12 percent annualrate, compared with this 21 percent decline, and other checkabledeposits have moved from a 15 percent annual rate of increase to a 53percent annual rate of increase. At the same time, of course, demanddeposits have turned around. They had been declining at a 6 percentannual rate and are now expanding at a 6-1/2 percent rate throughJanuary. But the bulk of that expansion in January occurred in thefirst week and is now ending, whereas the expansion in other checkabledeposits has remained strong through the balance of January. So, Ithink the demand deposit expansion is working its way out whereas asyet we have not seen the NOW account and savings deposit expansionworking its way out.We've tried to investigate the various reasons for theincrease in savings and in demand deposits. We have surveyed thebanks and we have not gotten very satisfactory replies. In my viewsome of it is related to nonconsumption, just savings resulting from afailure to consume [and funds] flowing into the easiest alternativesfor a while--demand deposits, NOW accounts, and savings deposits.Some of it is related to actual financial uncertainties. We see thatin time certificates; small time certificate growth slowed verynoticeably in December and January, and that money is being placedelsewhere, at least temporarily, in more protected forms. And we haveheard bits and pieces of evidence that corporate demand deposits were-16-2/1-2/82rising toward year-end and early in the year, partly for corporatewindow-dressing and partly for compensation balances. However, thosewere bits and pieces of evidence and they were not very clear-cut.This rapid expansion has tended to exhaust much of the growthfor the year [allowed for] in the tentative targets, as the Committeecan see by observing chart 1, following page 11 in the Bluebook. Thatrange of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent is plotted from the actual level forM1 in the fourth quarter of 1981. As you can see, the Januaryexpansion has brought growth well above the range; growth is wellabove the parallel dashed lines [unintelligible]. In effect, much ofthe expansion for the year has been used up. It is quite possiblethat we could get negative numbers in February and March. As theBluebook points out, we had that in 1981 following the April bulge ata time when short rates rose very sharply. And that has occurred onrare occasions at other times. But absent such a sharp drop, theamount of monetary expansion [that could occur] over the balance ofthe year is relatively limited [if money growth is to be] within thetentative range adopted by the Committee. That, of course, Mr.Chairman, brings up questions about the range and its basing andwhether it should be raised.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't quite want to get to those[issues] now. But, obviously, what you think is going to happen inthe next few months makes quite a difference in how you look at a lotof things. Everybody has been looking at this to some extent. Wehave this phenomenon of big NOW accounts in particular, although otherthings are mixed in with it. We don't even know whether the seasonalsare any good, and they may well not be. Does anybody feel that theyhave any stronger insights into what is going on here? Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I may have a feeble one.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We want a strong one.MR. MORRIS. I think one of our problems is the assumptionthat we made at the last meeting--that the adjustment to NOW accountsnationally was over. The New England data lead me to suspect thatthat may not be the case--New England being the only section [of thecountry] with mature NOW accounts. I looked it up to see if we havehad any bulge in NOW accounts and we have not. They have been quiteflat. So, that at least is a little evidence that perhaps the problemis that the national NOW account adjustment is going to take longerthan we had assumed.MS. TEETERS. Do your back data show anything on--MR. AXILROD. The data we got show that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just pursue that for a second as apossible explanation. My understanding was that very few of you, ifany, found much of the explanation in the opening of new accountsinstead of [an increase in] existing accounts. Is that true?MR. AXILROD. That's right. This was all [accounted for by]existing accounts going up.2/1-2/82 -18-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There seems to be a little inconsistencywith that explanation, but that's an interesting phenomenon.MR. MORRIS. Well, maybe it's not the right explanation. Ithought it might be because it's not clear to me why New Englandersshould feel more secure and not need to put more money into NOWaccounts than people in the rest of the country.MS. TEETERS. In the past have you had increases in NOWaccounts in the first part of January? You've had NOW accounts forwhat, five years now?MR. MORRIS. They go back to the middle of 1972.MS. TEETERS. But do you show in those early years a suddenjump in January?MR. MORRIS. No, I don't think so.MR. RICE. Did your demand deposits increase along with therest of the country?MR. MORRIS. Yes, our demand deposits were up.MR. RICE. Have they fallen off recently?MR. MORRIS. I haven't seen [data for] the latest week whenthey apparently have fallen off nationally.MR. BOEHNE. The demand deposit [increases] have been more onthe corporate side, not the personal side.MR. PARTEE. What kind of seasonal do you have on the NOWaccounts? Are you using your own seasonal because you have this--?MR. MORRIS. We've just been comparing our nonseasonallyadjusted data to the national--MR. PARTEE. Unadjusted data, I see.MR. MORRIS. The unadjusted data.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, I don't really have any answer, Mr.Chairman. I do have a couple of questions that I thought I might tryon Steve. We couldn't find any good reasons for this explosion we'vehad in NOW accounts in the Twelfth District. Our banks weren't veryhelpful in throwing any light on why it has occurred; it just seems tobe happening. Maybe it goes back to the thought that you expressed;it could be a belated reaction to interest rates having fallen latelast fall. It could be increased liquidity preference in a period ofuncertainty. The more I mull over why it's going on, the more I justhave a hunch that we may be asking the wrong question in a sense. Irecall a debate around this table some years ago in the mid-1970s--Ican't remember exactly when it was, perhaps 1976 or 1977--when we wereagonizing over an excessively rapid and unexpected rate of monetarygrowth and why it was occurring. I think it was Chairman Burns who2/1-2/82said at that time: Well, it's very simple; we've been putting toomany reserves into the market. And I wonder if that isn't really thebasic answer when everything is said and done.MR. AXILROD. Well, there's a correlation, obviously. Itwouldn't be there if we hadn't put the reserves in. The question onehas to ask oneself is: Why this much money at current interest ratesor rising interest rates? That is the question, mostly, that we aretrying to answer. Why has the demand for money at current interestrates expanded? If we had somehow managed to get all those reservesout and not permitted this much money in these NOW accounts and demanddeposits and currency, then it's our thought that, of course, interestrates would have been a lot higher. So we'd have to ask if you'dstill be wanting to know the answer to the question at that point. Ifwe had succeeded in doing that and had these high interest rates, youwould want to know why interest rates were so high in the middle of arecession and we'd be trying to explain why the demand for money wasstrong. That's what we're looking for, those kinds of explanations.MR. BALLES. Well, taking the whole period of Novemberthrough January, Steve, when we had this very rapid growth, net, doyou have an impression of how much of it was due to changes inmultiplier relationships? Does that explain very much of it?MR. AXILROD. Well, I'd have to go back and review. We triedto [determine] the extent to which we might have been off on themultiplier relationships that we put in the reserves to money path.Of course, we change these each week as we get data, and with laggedreserve accounting in some sense we are always perfect on it. But thecurrent relationship doesn't mean anything and the lagged one does. Idon't recall to what extent we've had to change them. We've madeconsiderable changes, but I don't recall that as being a big source oferror with the lagged reserve accounting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with that explanation is thatwe've been putting in reserves since July or so and it has only beenin November, December, and January that money growth suddenly tookoff.MR. BALLES. It suddenly grabbed and the question is why.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. As you requested, we did a survey. And if it'sbad to contribute, then we're guilty, because our growth in the lastmonth has been distinctly above the [national] average both in demanddeposits and other checkable deposits. We've had a particularlystrong kick in terms of percentage growth in NOW accounts, the areathat you expressed an interest in. There was virtually no change inATS-type accounts. I asked my staff to take a sample of the banksaround the District that were contributing particularly to this growthabove the trend growth for the whole nation and, like the others whocommented, we could not find any clear, simple, new explanation. Thefacts we came up with were that virtually all of it was in existingaccounts--to address the possibility that you raised, Frank. We didnot see any surge in the number of new NOW account openings; growthwas in existing accounts.2/1-2/82MR. MORRIS. Is there any evidence of higher minimum balancesbeing imposed now that might have led to a change?MR. FORD. We didn't pick that up. There's a drift higher.Right now in our District there's very heavy competition among[financial institutions] on pricing of all types of deposits,particularly the IRAs. And the terms and conditions for IRAs seem tobe getting more and more competitive from the consumer standpoint. Ididn't check any trend on NOWs, but I haven't noticed it. I justdon't know. So, we didn't get any strong indication of any surge innew NOW account openings. It's just the existing accounts that arebuilding up.As far as the speculation as to why, a couple of bankers saidthat they think people are holding off, waiting to see what developsin IRAs, and are just parking money in these NOW accounts until theyfigure out the best IRA deal, at which point they will switch to anIRA. The IRA deals are still being unveiled in our District. Anotherexplanation is the simple old one that people are just saving more andspending less. It seems consistent with other information we have.There's nothing really exciting, though, on the demand deposit side;we don't see anything particularly interesting there. We looked at itand considered it normal corporate window-dressing during this year-end period; nobody believes it's an unusual amount of corporatewindow-dressing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos, as I remember, money growthwasn't very big in your District. It probably means you have bettermonetary policy out there!MR. ROOS. I asked our staff to see if they could churn upsome figures that perhaps would explain not the IRA thing but why M1acted as it did. And they did come up with some interesting figuresthat I'll be brief in touching on. The bottom line of the figuresthey gave me indicated that we were somewhat slow in our willingnessto change our nonborrowed reserve path under certain circumstances.They looked at four periods. One, for example, was the 3 weeks endingAugust 19 and, Steve, let me see if I can explain what I'm trying tosay. In those 3 weeks, the projected deficiency of total reservesrelative to path averaged about $152 million, according to ourrecords, and in that period we did not change our nonborrowed reservepath nor did we change the discount rate. The average in the 4 weeksending September 15--and this was when the aggregates wereundershooting--was about $244 million. The deficiency in the 3 weeksending October 7 was about $405 million. And in each of thoseperiods, if my staff's figures are correct, we apparently did notchange our nonborrowed reserve path nor did we change the discountrate. Now, back in May of [last] year, when total reserves wereprojected to be about $500 million above path, we increased thediscount rate and we reduced the supply of nonborrowed reserves byabout $375 million. And as a result of those actions, Ml begandeclining immediately and we did avoid a continuation of that. We, ineffect, interrupted the bulge that occurred then. Is there any logicin their conclusion, based on that type of evidence, that one of theproblems has been a problem of our not moving our nonborrowed reservesas quickly as we should?2/1-2/82MR. AXILROD. Well, President Roos, maybe to put a littleperspective on this--I don't know about those figures but I'm surethey're accurate--from September to December of [last] year theCommittee originally wanted M1-B growth, shift adjusted, of around 7percent. They changed it a bit in mid-course. By the time Septemberto December was over, we had [M1-B] growth on the order of 8-1/4percent. I haven't checked the most recent seasonal figures, butthese are the figures before they were adjusted. That's not far offfrom what the Committee found perfectly acceptable and is probably onthe order of what the Committee would find generally acceptable givenwhat happened. What then occurred was that January growth wasunusually high, going into a period when the Committee wanted growthto phase down into the longer-run range. It was made unusually highby a bulge in demand deposits early in the month, which I believe isin process of working its way out, though not entirely. And it hasbeen maintained at a high rate by NOW accounts not quite working theirway out so far but, in fact, growing faster in January on average thanin the preceding two months. In light of all that and with totalreserves running strong, of course, a downward adjustment of around$190 million was made in the nonborrowed path midway through thisperiod. We put additional pressure on the funds rate. There's no wayin a period as short as a month, given lagged reserve accounting orpossibly even given contemporaneous reserve accounting, to have gottenthat growth of 20 percent down to, say, 5 or 6 percent or whatever theCommittee would have felt comfortable with, short of a funds ratemoving up I would guess into the 27, 28 percent area, withcontemporaneous accounting. I made a theoretical calculation at onepoint, which would not have changed the basic question that theChairman raised as to why money demand was so strong in this veryshort-run period. One would have had to answer that question eitherway. But I think the actions taken with regard to the reserve pathwere such as to work in a constraining direction.MR. ROOS. In other words, that's the answer: That youwithdrew reserves by about $190 million.MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. ROOS. The excess of the total reserves was up in the$300 or $400 to $500 million area. You say that if you had pulled allof those out, it would have had a dramatic upward influence oninterest rates. And that's the reason you didn't.MR. AXILROD. If we had pulled out $400 million, we wouldhave had more borrowing, of course. But all the research I've seensuggests that to pull out $400 million of total reserves in a month--under contemporaneous reserve accounting, let's say, not under lagged--we would have to reduce nonborrowed reserves by something like $3billion because the banks are going to offset that with borrowing.And if we reduced nonborrowed reserves by about $3 billion, the bankswould borrow $2.6 billion to get the total down $400 million, andinterest rates would go up extraordinarily high. That's how themechanism would work in the short run. You might conceivably getJanuary down, assuming contemporaneous reserve accounting, but theninterest rates would be so high that February would be plungingnegative. Then interest rates would have to drop very sharply toinduce banks to expand again and get the February growth up. That'show the process seems to work.2/1-2/82MR. ROOS. Steve, our experience in May, though, when we hada similar bulge and when you did take strong action to reducenonborrowed reserves--I think by about $370 million, if my numbers arecorrect--was that it did cause the fed funds rate temporarily to go toabout 19 percent, but then it receded, didn't it? In other words, Iwonder if we are exaggerating the possible volatility of those fedfunds rates and whether we're not in the long pull affecting interestrates more meaningfully than if we really bit the bullet.MR. AXILROD. Well, in my judgment, President Roos, lastApril that bulge probably would have come out to some degree withoutour doing anything--that is, with interest rates unchanged. And therise in rates that occurred--because it was just [due to] temporaryfactors--of course encouraged it to come out more. It may even havecontributed to money running low for the rest of the month. So, I'mnot sure how the variability would have worked out in that respect.You can make the case that you could get less variability in moneygrowth with less variability in interest rates if you examine thesethings carefully through a different procedure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, we tried to look at thisquestion of the money supply both analytically and by relying onanecdotal information as well. Let me just touch on each of thesebriefly. On the analytical side, we really looked at two things. Onewas the seasonal adjustment, and there I guess what we found is a bitof good news and bad news. There was good news in the sense thatusing a different procedure than X-11 one could point to a pattern ofweekly movements in January that is quite different from the one thatthe official numbers suggest. Now, I don't mean to imply that onemethod is better than the other. But it really tends to underscorehow extremely volatile these seasonal factors are and how badly theycan lead us astray in a given period of time. The second thing we didis probably more important. We tried to take a quick and dirty lookat this question of how the measured money supply responds to changesin interest rates, recognizing that there are at least some people onthe staff--it's not many--who argue that if you go back and look atdeclines in interest rates in the late summer and fall of 1981, maybewhat we have been seeing over the last 3 months isn't all thatunusual. We tried to look at that and found at least in a verytentative way that perhaps more of what we've seen can in fact beexplained by declines in interest rates earlier on. Indeed, whilethis work is very tentative since it has been done in only about 8days, it does suggest that the response in money to changes ininterest rates or shocks in the federal funds rate is a lot greaterthan I thought possible. And it may well argue that the problem isn'tso much too quick a response on the part of policy but the other wayaround: That the harder we hit the short-run blip in the money supplyby jiggling reserve paths or whatever the more we may be creating aworse problem for ourselves a little further down the road in thesense that by hitting it hard it builds in this perpetuating cyclethat we've seen a little of over the past 2-1/2 years or so. Ofcourse, the argument could be made the other way as well. I don'tknow the answer yet, but certainly this work does suggest that more ofthe increase in money than I thought possible can be explained, atleast by this exercise, by what happened to interest rates earlier.And to my way of thinking that's not inconsistent with the argument2/1-2/82that we ought to respond more slowly rather than faster to some ofthese temporary blips in the money supply.But even under the best of circumstances, I don't thinkeither of those factors can fully explain the more recent developmentsin January. And there we did try to develop some anecdotalinformation. Certainly in our case we were able to find on thebusiness side patterns of window-dressing by large corporations thatinvolved larger amounts of money than both they and their bankers saidhad been typical in earlier years. And that phenomenon was veryshort-lived, which of course is compatible with the idea of that bigbulge in business-type checking accounts in the first week withwashouts in the next two weeks. On the household-type checkingaccounts, NOWs and so on, we really don't have much to add. In ourarea, in terms of Frank's point, we too didn't see many new accounts.It was all existing accounts. The bankers and others we talked tobasically made the argument that we have some kind of precautionaryphenomenon here, some of it related to the economy and unemployment,some of it related to uncertainties about the interest rate outlook,some of it maybe related to savings flows themselves, and some of it--at least in the case of our own employees in the Bank, based on alittle informal survey we did--related just to a desire to build uplarger balances to pay off bills incurred in December faster than theymight ordinarily do. That's about it.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, President Corrigan mentioned theeffect of interest rates and I probably should point out to theCommittee that our monthly money market model, which is very oftenwrong and is sometimes right, would have projected very sharp growthin the money supply. That is one of the reasons we thought [M1] wouldgrow in November and December, way back when. And [the model] wouldproject that growth continuing on, given interest rate moves that hadalready occurred, into January--but not at this rate--and February andMarch and petering out after that. On the other hand, if you look atour quarterly model, it would suggest that the money growth we'vegotten in January is more than enough to finance the quarter's income,given interest rates. And to get what it says we would have for thequarter, then we would have to expect [M1 in] February and March todrop at around a 13 or 14 percent annual rate. That's just about whatthe money model says it is going to increase. So, the models tend togive varying results.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We get explanations and counter-explanations for every phenomenon. Mr. Keehn.MR. PARTEE. The only trouble is that we don't know if it'stemporary or permanent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. That's all I want to know.Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. In the surveys that we did with the banks in ourarea, we were impressed by the consistency of the compensating balancecomment. Apparently corporations allowed their compensating balancesto fall during the latter part of the year. We were surprised by howmany banks commented on that and by how many companies apparently drewon their lines of credit to build up their [cash] balances, even theircompensating balances, over the year-end period. Secondly, IRAs have2/1-2/82been receiving a lot of publicity in the Midwest, and one institutionthat we talked with in January has accumulated $60 million in IRAaccounts. They conjectured that if they were any sample at all, thisis going to be a very big program. And there has been a lot of moneyparked in various NOW accounts waiting for the IRA programs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They had $60 million already in the IRAs?MR. KEEHN. One bank had $60 million in IRA accounts.MS. TEETERS. Which ones have the--MR. SCHULTZ. That was First Chicago, though, and that wasbecause they put that 2-point bonus on, wasn't it?MR. KEEHN. Yes, and they are a very major savings bank, sothey have a big base. The program was very big and they conjecturethat if they are symptomatic--and perhaps [their flows] are heavierthan most--there are a lot of people who had money saved up waitingfor January and the opportunity to begin to open these IRAs.MR. SCHULTZ. Did you find any other bank that had that kindof percentage increase?MR. KEEHN. No, this was heavier than typical.MR. BOEHNE. In fact, most of our bankers were ratherdisappointed about the IRAs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything else, Si? Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The only thing I can add that hasn't been saidabout the bulge in January is that we've found one of our large banksengaged in what I would call a reverse sweep--a sweeping out ofinterest-bearing assets as of [December] 31st and into demand depositsand then out of demand deposits back [into interest-bearing assets] inJanuary. This was to take advantage of the Pennsylvania personal taxlaw on personal assets, and it was done this year more than any otheryear for some reason. And because of a long holiday weekend, this didcause an unusual bulge in demand deposits during that week of January6th. That's just local in Pennsylvania, but perhaps other states havepersonal property tax laws that may have contributed to the bulge.MS. TEETERS. Doesn't Illinois have something like that butthe date is in March?MR. PARTEE. It's April 1.MR. KEEHN. They used to but they've done away with it.MS. TEETERS. They've done away with that?MR. BOEHNE. Just one other comment. There may be someflight from other checkable deposits. As I left the Bank this morningthe lines were unusually long for the Treasury auction. The lobby wasjust full of people.MR. PARTEE. One of their last chances to get a free one!2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our survey didn't turnup anything that hasn't already been noted to this point. But thereis a bit of work that was done by our staff that may be of someinterest to you. It relates to a float factor that might be being[double] counted. It's principally perhaps a reporting problem.Since we started charging for servicing checks, more and more of thechecks have been collected through the correspondent system ratherthan through the Federal Reserve. And we have some indication thatthere's a bit of double counting in the correspondent system. Thatis, the collecting bank will record the checks in "due from" balancesas opposed to checks in the process of collection. As a result it's adouble counting in the demand deposit that they pass along to thecustomer and thus could affect M1, for example. And that would bemagnified in terms of the checks drawn on NOW accounts simply becausethey start from a very small base.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is known as the Auerbach theory.MR. GUFFEY. Well, he started at our Bank. I'd prefer toname it something else.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Irv Auerbach?MR. PARTEE. This is a different Auerbach.MR. GUFFEY. Oh, okay.MR. AXILROD. We looked into that, President Guffey. TheBach Committee a long time ago recommended an alternative measure ofthe money supply which grosses up the demand deposits side by adding"due to" [balances] and grosses up the subtraction by adding "duefrom" [balances]. Presumably, then, we would not have this bias youare talking about. We keep track of that series seasonally adjustedand compare it with our current series seasonally adjusted. And theyhave shown similar patterns; that is, they both showed this sharpbulge in early January and they showed subsequent weeks about thesame. Actually, the alternative series showed larger growthunadjusted in November and December than did the present series. So,we have used that as the basis for checking. We are well aware thatthis bias could arise and could get worse. It's there, but it couldget worse. But it doesn't seem to be getting worse and making ourpresent measure more biased in terms of growth rates at the moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Another theory dashed, presumably. Mr.Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, in searching for possible answers here, Ihave another question I'd like to raise with Steve. In each of thetwo years, Steve--in 1980 and 1981--when we have had a convergence ofthe federal funds rate and the discount rate, and the funds rate evenhas gotten down to a bit below the discount rate, that was followed bysome very rapid monetary expansion, as we all know. With the benefitof hindsight, looking back on that period between the November andDecember FOMC meetings last year, total reserves were almost ontarget. They were a little above. But the nonborrowed reserve levelwas raised quite sharply, by almost $200 million. And that-25-2/1-2/82undoubtedly had the effect of keeping the interest rates down becauseif we hadn't raised that, borrowings would have gone up. And Isuspect, as I look back on our feelings in December, that most of uswould have viewed that as not a very opportune time to be letting thefederal funds rate rise, which would have been the result if we hadnot increased the nonborrowed reserve path. I'm just wondering ifmaybe we aren't falling back into the trap of intuitively trying tokeep interest rates down at a time when it seems logical to do thatand then paying the price for it later on when we get this delayedreaction of sudden very sharp expansions in monetary growth, as we gotin both '80 and '81. A companion question would be: With respect tothat major study of our operating procedures that you headed up, as Irecall there was a recommendation for more frequent changes in thediscount rate. As I look back on it, we haven't really done thateither. Well, those are just a couple of thoughts as to some deeperfactors that might be at work here in these sudden surges of monetarygrowth. I'd like your reaction to that.MR. AXILROD. Well, there is nothing in any evidence we'veever looked at or in any experience certainly in the past two or threeyears and earlier that says that money demand is naturally smooth. Inthis large an economy, it seems to me that money demand is naturallyvolatile. And we're annualizing, and the numbers look terrible. A1.5 percent change in a level looks like 20 percent because we'reannualizing it. We probably shouldn't be annualizing those monthlyfigures. It gives a wrong impression.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hear, hear!MR. BALLES. Yes, that's a point.MR. AXILROD. So, I don't think that policy is ever going toget away from the question of: Do you want to try for a smooth growthpath with what every bit of evidence anyone has dug up says will besharp variations in interest rates--and you can only do that withcontemporaneous reserve accounting, if then--or are you going to tryfor a path over a more sustained period of time and live with theshort-run variations in money demand that seem to be built into thekind of economy we have? We have this huge economy with severalhundreds of billions of dollars of money flowing daily, some of whichhappens to sit in demand deposits on top of which--and I don't meanthis to sound preachy--we now have a narrow money supply that hassavings in it. They are not being paid a very high rate, but they arewhat many people consider savings. When these NOW accounts wereinstalled, people in many cases just transferred what were savingsaccounts into NOW accounts. So, for whatever reason, people decidedto increase their savings, and it flowed into these accounts. You andI know they have very low rates of interest, but many people feel theyare safe. And people are willing to take that [low rate] for a veryshort period. So, we have a mix that is changing over time, making iteven more complicated to evaluate money movements, which to me meansthat one has to have a longer-term horizon to come to some judgment.Sure, we could begin to constrain it faster by letting interest ratesrise faster, lowering nonborrowed reserves faster, raising thediscount rate. But that again gets into areas of policy judgment forthe Committee as to whether it wishes to put those kinds of interestrate variations in the economy or live with the potential for a littlemore money volatility or whatever trade-offs it can think of there.2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd be more impressed by these theoriesabout reserves and all the rest if the increase in the money supplywere not so divergent between the different components of the moneysupply. That doesn't prove that it's wrong, but it's just a littlesuspicious when the NOW accounts are going up at the same time thesavings accounts are going up. And that's a sharp change in trend.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could we get an explanation fromSteve on the seasonal adjustment? As I understand it, starting in '82we're doing a common seasonal adjustment for demand deposits and NOWaccounts. Is that correct?MR. AXILROD. We're trying. That's right. Last year we didsome very complicated [calculations] by assuming that part of the NOWaccounts were demand deposits and part of them were savings deposits.In concept, that's right, but it strikes me as a distinction that isgoing to be impossible to [judge] in terms of whether [the actualproportion] is 2/3 or 3/4 or 1/2. So, we felt that as time went on weshould simply begin constructing a seasonal for total demand and NOWaccounts based on the movement of the total and that whateverdifference there is in the movement, with the increasing compositionof NOW accounts, it gradually will be worked out in the seasonals.And that's how we have begun to proceed.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. May I ask you a hypotheticalquestion?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ten years from now we'll have a goodseasonal!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My hypothetical question is: If youwould apply to the NOW accounts the same seasonal correction that youapplied to the savings, would you have had less of a bulge in January?MR. AXILROD. I'd have to look up the answer to that. We'llcheck that out. I don't know, but I doubt it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. This is purely a technical change, but a couple ofbanks with the largest increases in NOWs closed out their ATSaccounts, so it was just a transfer. And that would still--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that would have been in the sametotal.MR. WINN. [The total would] still be the same, but just forthe NOW account category--MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's an OCD.MR. BLACK. Well, the [reserve] requirements were not yetphased in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments on this orany other insights, which seem to add up to not very much? Did youwant to comment?2/1-2/82MR. BOYKIN. I was just going to say, but I really can't addanything, that we tested the corporate balance sheet question and therepresentations were that there was nothing unusual, just thetraditional [window-dressing]. The only thing I did find, which Idon't think has any bearing at all, was a relatively small bank thathad a very large upswing. Inquiring about it, we were told it wassimply the liquidation of a very sizable estate; temporarily severalmillion dollars were put in, but the funds were being distributed.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, the only thing I'd like to add,since it has been mentioned and I think it's significant, is that thebulk of Christmas sales came much later this year than in previousyears. And the bad weather in January also caused extremely weaksales. Credit card companies with whom we checked emphasized that thesales were very weak. That tends to give some logical common sensesupport to the view of various bankers that these are temporaryincreases. Add to that the precautionary reasons that call forsomewhat larger balances. I don't have any hard proof, but my feelingis that a substantial part of this increase will be washed out over aperiod of time. I do not believe that we could begin to attributesuch a sharp increase to economic reasons--advance indicators of avery strong economic recovery. There may be many factors involved;there probably are to get such a sharp increase. But I think it'shard to conclude that a substantial part is not temporary.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, before we leave this, I wonder if Icould ask Steve if he could give us any further explanation on theprojection for the week of February 3rd, which shows a further rise.New York shows a decline from the previous week on M1 and you show apretty significant increase there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Neither of them knows anything!MR. AXILROD. That's right; that's pure projection.MR. BLACK. Well, if that's his answer, then that leads me tomy final point. No matter how much we rationalize, I don't think wecan explain all this away. And if we can't explain it away, we hadbetter assume that there's some reality to it and act accordingly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's a certain reality in thatsome of it seems to have gone up quite rapidly, whatever seasonaladjustment factor one uses. But what is causing this is interesting,not just because of the short-run significance. If we knew theanswer, it would tell us something about whether money is too tight ornot. We have a system where the money supply balloons every timeinterest rates go [down] to 11 or 12 percent in the short run and theeconomy goes into the tank; when interest rates are 11 and 12 percent,we have problems at some point and it says the money supply is toolow. I don't know how or when we will arrive at that conclusion, andI'm not arriving at it now, but I think that's what we are discussinghere under the cover of what causes a blip--or more than a blip--inthe short run. Does the economy want more money than we are allowingin order to grow in line, let's say, with the projections that Mr.Kichline presented? You are saying, okay, the economy will make thatprojection anyway even with the interest rates that we have. Now,-28-2/1-2/82that remains to be seen, but it all bears on where the targets shouldbe. And I don't think we have much evidence to reach any sweepingconclusions on that point at this time.The worst kind of result would be if people had a biggerliquidity preference in some sense, particularly in NOW accounts, thanwe assume and interest rates were to go [down] to 10 percent [andthose accounts] began ballooning. What would they do if rates went to8 percent even if the economy were shooting way down? And, of course,we would have this problem with NOW account interest rates at 5-1/2percent. If you dream of that day when interest rates get down to5-1/2 percent, the money supply is going to balloon. There is noquestion about it the way we now define [the money supply] with that[NOW account] component in there. Now, when we reach that point--andI would have thought we were nowhere near it with market interestrates at 10, 11, 12 percent, but surely that would happen some day ifinterest rates got low enough--are we going to say there's an enormousincrease in NOW accounts because we are now under the NOW accountceiling and that's an excuse for tightening up money with anunemployment rate of 32 percent, just to exaggerate a bit? We'd havea problem, right? I don't think we're there and I don't mean tosuggest that. But what is behind these forces is an interesting areaabout which we do not know enough. I'm struck by the lack of theexplanation that I would have thought would be the most common one:That a lot of money is being parked temporarily not because interestrates are necessarily so low, but just because of uncertainty aboutinterest rates and the fear--or not necessarily the fear on the partof the depositors but the hope--that rates will go up again and peoplecould make a better deal on a money market certificate or something amonth or two from now than they could in December or January. I heara little anecdotal evidence myself on that point, but I won't--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's all part of the temporarything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that much background andelucidation or lack thereof, [we will proceed]. We had a discussionof long-range targets at the last meeting. I guess it's appropriatenow to ask whether anybody has changed his or her mind or wants tomake further observations on that point.MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have had a few secondthoughts since both our July '81 meeting and also our preliminarydiscussion of this in December. And at the risk of being atroublemaker, I do feel fairly strongly that we ought to bite thebullet on the inconsistencies among the M1, M2, and M3 ranges,specifically by increasing the M2 range by a full percentage pointover what it was last year and the M3 range by a point and a half.I've set forth in a brief memo the rationale and the advantages thatwould have, along with upping a bit the lower end of the M1 range.With your permission, I would like to have it distributed so thatpeople could see what it's all about and see what the ranges looklike. But that is the bottom line.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want to do anything about Ml?MR. BALLES. Yes, I'm suggesting, for reasons set forth inthis very brief memo, that we ought to increase the lower end of the2/1-2/82[tentative M1] range to 3 percent instead of 2-1/2 percent, keepingthe upper end at 5-1/2 percent. Very briefly, the reason is that, asI looked back to last July, we hadn't known about the weakness nowemerging in the economy. We had expected--I think more than we donow--the prospect of a further downward shift in the demand for money,and that downward shift seems to have slowed pretty considerably.Whether it will resume and go on in 1982 remains to be seen. Butgiven the fact that we now are in a fairly serious recession that wehadn't really anticipated in July, and given the fact that the demandfor money is no longer shifting downward as much--and maybe not atall--as compared to last summer, and given the fact that a 2-1/2percent lower band would seem pretty Draconian right in the middle ofa recession in terms of public announcement effects, I believe wewould be better advised to use a 3 to 5-1/2 percent range. That wouldhave the virtue of being uniform across the board; the upper end, thelower end, and the midpoint [of the M1 range] would all be 1/2 pointlower than our 1981 range. And this would continue some credibilityin our longer-run anti-inflation approach of gradually cranking downthe growth ranges every year. If we were to hit the midpoint of the 3to 5-1/2 percent range that I'm proposing, which is only apresumption, the growth would be 4-1/4 percent. And 4-1/4 percent isa pretty healthy decline from the actual observed M1-B growth of 5percent last year. So, although I supported the tentative decisionlast July for the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range, I've changed my mindfor reasons I've just set forth on M1.On M2, it gets a little more complicated. The composition ofthe M2 and M3 aggregates, in terms of the portion that is sensitive tointerest rates, has really changed dramatically, as we all know. Mystaff calculates that as recently as the end of 1978 assets yieldingmoney market rates of interest comprised only 8 percent of M2 and thatthat's up to 45 percent now. The interest-sensitive portion of M3 atthe end of 1978 was calculated at 21 percent and it's now up to 54percent. We knew this last year, but we didn't really do anythingabout it. We decided for reasons the Committee felt satisfied with--and I didn't object because I thought it was a good idea--to keepthose ranges down more or less for public reaction purposes. Wedidn't want to be in the posture of raising the M2 and M3 ranges. Butas we all know, the actual [growth] last year, certainly not to mysurprise, was considerably over the ranges that we set forth for theyear. A final word--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M2? M2 did not go considerably overthe range last year. [It was over by] 0.3 of a percentage point as Irecall.MR. AXILROD. Yes, it was 0.4 percent.MR. PARTEE. Only a half point over.MR. BALLES. It just seems to me--if we're willing to bitethe bullet in terms of what might be a reaction among the generalpublic or superficial observers of our policy that we are going to beaccelerating monetary growth--that a range for M2 of 7 to 10 percentversus the 6 to 9 percent we've been talking about tentatively and arange of 8 to 11 percent for M3 instead of the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percentwe've been talking about would simply be more realistic. I personally2/1-2/82consider the likelihood of strong inflows into these interest-sensitive broader aggregates to be great in a year when there's a goodprospect, as we've heard from the staff today, that interest rates aregoing to continue at pretty high levels throughout the year. I'd justhate to get in the middle of the year and then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I understand the reasoninghere. Let me explore it. You say there is a lot more interest-sensitive money; that is certainly true. Why do you expect that to bemore pronounced in terms of influence this year than last year?MR. BALLES. I don't necessarily think it will be morepronounced, Paul, but I don't think it could be diminished any interms of rates of increase in these aggregates. Some of us broughtthis point up at the meeting the last time. If the staff forecast iscorrect, as I understand it, it implies a continuation of pretty highinterest rates throughout 1982. And that's why I would just--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what do you expect could happen?If interest rates come down, what would happen to M2 all else equal?Or if they went up, what would happen to M2, all other things equal?Why is there a presumption one way or the other?MR. BALLES. The presumption is that M2 and M3 in the futurewill continue to be more sensitive to interest rates than they wereunder the old definition.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That means that M2 will go down ifinterest rates go down.MR. BALLES. Yes, the growth rate would go down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why? What's the mechanism?MR. BALLES. Well, it's simply the huge proportion that isinterest sensitive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but where else are people going toput their money?MR. BALLES. Well, there are some things that aren't ineither M2 or M3 such as Treasury securities.SPEAKER(?). But those rates are--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But what if those rates go down just likethe certificate rates go down? Now, if people put funds in long-termsecurities, that will make a difference. But I--MS. TEETERS. They could move them out just for[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's also in M2.MR. BLACK. One can make a clear case if you think aboutrising rates back when we had ceilings on some of those items in M2---31-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know what happened when there wereceilings on them, but the point is made that there aren't ceilings. Idon't know what will happen now.MR. BLACK. Well, it clearly slowed down then and there areno ceilings now, so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question that when we hadceilings, [M2 growth] slowed when rates rose and increased when ratesfell.MR. BLACK. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not clear to me why it would do theopposite now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We did not find when we analyzed M2into those components that pay market rates and those that are belowmarket rates--and we analyzed the movements in these two [components]--that we could arrive at any better correlation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the answer to thisquestion is. We have had 3 years since the market rate issue becameimportant and in all of those 3 years the velocity change in M2 hasbeen very close to zero. That's not a long enough period of time toconclude too much on that, but the evidence that we have since thattime is zero [velocity change].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And last year [M2 growth] was 9percent, virtually the same. Nominal GNP was also up in a range ofabout 9.4 or 9.3 percent, as compared to M2. And I noticed thateverybody's projections were in the 8 to 9 percent range for nominalGNP. If that's one to two percent real growth, plus about 7 percentinflation, then one would think that we would come comfortably withinthe tentative M2 targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, can the staff help here? Is thereany evidence that they know about that says what the interestsensitivity on M2 is now?MR. AXILROD. Well, it's getting much less sensitive tomarket rates. So, we wouldn't think it's [going to be] as volatile as[those] rates change. The conclusion we came to in evaluating thiswas that with more and more instruments in M2 having market rates, forany given reserve target aimed at we'd get more rate movement inholding money growth and prompter income movements, so to speak. Thatis, you hold if there's a money demand of so much--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're losing me.MS. TEETERS. Yes.MR. AXILROD. There is a money demand of so much. Marketrates tend to rise. In the old days, people would shift out of M2-type instruments into market instruments. Now, instead of thathappening, the institutions mark up the offering rates so people don'tshift out. So, if you insist on holding [M2 growth down], theninterest rates rise even more on both instruments until income falls2/1-2/82back to where you're producing only enough savings to be consistentwith your monetary targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you saying: that M2 is justgoing to reflect nominal GNP, period?MR. AXILROD. In the limit, not totally.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But just to state the converse of that,would you or would you not make a presumption other than through theeffect of interest rates on GNP that the interest rate level itself isgoing to affect M2?MR. AXILROD. Well, I don't think the institutions will movetheir rates quite as fast as the market rates. So, I think it wouldhave some effect.MS. TEETERS. But it will have an effect of making M1 and M2diverge?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Reducing it.MR. FORD. When the rates rise.MS. TEETERS. When the [market] rates rise over and above thestatutory ceilings.MR. FORD. When they drop, you would expect them to converge,wouldn't you, because of this other phenomenon?MS. TEETERS. Not at the level the NOWs are at.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I think Steve has addressed thequestion, "If you're trying to control M2, what would happen?" Tofocus on the simpler question--the interest elasticity of M2--the workwe've done indicates that it still has a negative elasticity of aminor dimension. When interest rates fall, it grows a little faster.The redefinition, taking out the institutional money market funds,should probably make it even less interest elastic because the lag inthe money fund yields stimulated this kind of shifting of funds byinstitutions into M2 and out of M2. So, we say there's a very smallnegative elasticity on it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, now you're saying there is avery small negative elasticity; as near as we can say it's declining.If I understand this correctly, that's the opposite of the presumptionthat Mr. Balles is making.MR. PRELL. That's right.MR. BALLES. Well, I'd like to ask you, Mike, you are takingout the institution only money market funds but aren't you putting inthe retail RPs? What about their elasticities?MR. PRELL. Well, as for the retail RPs, once again theycarry a current market yield. So, there are unlikely to besubstitutions--a great shifting of funds from outside of M2 into M2--when interest rates change. Our supposition at least has been that2/1-2/82most of the money in retail RPs has been diverted from small timedeposits. Indeed, that's one of the rationales for putting retail RPsinto M2: they are a close substitute for those things that alreadywere in M2.MR. BALLES. Coming back just for a minute to the facts, wedo know for a fact that M3 grew by 11.4 percent last year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M3, I think, is a different animal. Thatshows you how fast bank credit is going up and how much financing isbeing pushed into banks, as one influence anyway. The more financingthat is pushed into the banks, the higher M3 will be. If we didn'texpect much bond financing, we'd expect high M3 growth.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, it's very difficult to isolatethe structural changes as they're occurring now, operating with aninstrument that pretty much has market rates in it. For example, Iwould not argue that M1 was weak last year because in a sense M2 wasstrong. There was a partial element of that but there was a downwardshift in the demand for M1, where people were taking money out ofcurrency and demand deposits and putting it into a lot of otherassets, some of which were in M2. But that was a substitution thatdidn't affect M2 itself. So actually, on the level of M1, thedownward adjustment in M1 that occurred was a structural change thatwas evolving. When we get away from that structural change, it'squite possible that M1 and M2 will move closer together as we areprojecting that they will this year. We really have a slower growthin the nontransactions component of M2 this year than last year,largely because income is growing more slowly and we expect M1 to growa little more normally in relation to income than it did last year.With that combination we still would have M2 slowing in this comingyear. We don't have a reason to think the nontransactions componentof M2 will grow substantially faster in 1982 than it did in 1981 witha sharp slowing in income in prospect, regardless of the interestrates that they're offering on those [deposits].MR. CORRIGAN. Is that another way of saying, Steve, that youview the midpoints of the tentative ranges for M1 and M2 for '82 asconsistent with each other in a structural sense?MR. AXILROD. Yes. We have growth a little above themidpoint for M2 but, rather than put our neck out on the line, I thinkthe safer way to put it is that it's a lot more consistent than it waslast year.MR. CORRIGAN. May I ask one other definitional question? Isaw the comment in the Bluebook about retail repos. Has a decisionbeen made to take the IRAs out of M2?MR. AXILROD. No. We are just going to be getting the firstcomplete data at the end of February. We may not make [the decision]then.MR. CORRIGAN. What about the ones that are already there?MR. AXILROD. Well, we haven't done anything about the IRAsin M2. We're waiting to see what we're dealing with.2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just one more point on M2. I don't knowhow strong a case one can make in practice because I don't know howmuch of this is mostly individual money and how much of that would golong term. But if you have a shift in preference toward longer-termsecurities, then I would think M2 would be depressed somewhat or viceversa.MR. AXILROD. [From] the money market funds they can go intobonds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if people really went out and boughtbonds--but not many individuals buy bonds anyway. I don't know howmuch else is in there that's not--MR. PRELL. The more attractive time deposit instruments thathave been created will tend to limit that effect [on M2] in any event.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I argued last time for retaining the sametargets that we had adopted tentatively. I want to come out the sameplace, having gone through a [lengthy] thinking process in themeantime because of the big jump [in monetary growth] that we got inJanuary. Obviously, the question was why and one got very nervousabout whether these targets were going to allow us to have anythinglike the leeway we might need. So, I went through the process oftaking a long look at what would happen if we shifted the base:Should we go to [the average for] December or even the end of Decemberor use November-December-January instead of October-November-Decemberand all that kind of thing? I might tend to opt for some change inthe ranges for the aggregates if I had a little stronger feeling thatwe knew precisely what all these relationships were. But it does seemthat we have been a bit off in these from time to time in the past.All of which seems to me to argue very strongly for a broad family ofaggregates and for some fairly wide ranges in each of the aggregates.If I had to make a bet, I would bet that whatever we come out withwe're going to miss something along the line. And, therefore, if Ifelt it was really critical that we set these targets very preciselyand say that absolutely we're going to stay within these ranges forthe aggregates in every case, I might feel a little differently. ButI have some considerable doubts on that score. The other side of itis: What do we give up?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may do that every now and then.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, there's no question about that. That's adifferent subject. You know, there is some very good news. This isthe last time I'm going to be with you and it's very clear that when Icame on board things got worse and now that I'm leaving things arebound to get better! So you're going to do better this time than youhave before. But even under those circumstances, it strikes me thatthere are some costs in making any changes. How big are those costs?I have talked to a lot of market participants and I can't find asingle market participant who doesn't feel that it's going to havesome impact if we change these targets. They will argue differentlyon how big that impact is going to be. But I think that's a vitalquestion here. It's not only what we do that's critical but whatpeople think we're doing and what we say we're doing, and that's going2/1-2/82to make a heck of a big difference through the year. So, I would beperfectly willing to see us take our time getting back to the targets.I have a feeling that we probably are going to end up in the upperpart of the range for M1, but I really do believe that if we changethose targets, there is going to be a cost and I urge you to thinkcarefully about that cost.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I have several things on my mind. One isthat I think we're in a real box and we have a way to go with themonetary aggregates in 1982, M1 in particular. Given what hashappened so far, if we were to reach the midpoint of the range by thefourth quarter, we would end up permitting an increase in M1 of all of1.55 percent from January to November. And I just don't think we canlive with that. With M2 I haven't made the calculation, but taking arough ruler and laying it out and comparing it with this 6 percentgrowth triangle, to get to the midpoint must imply a growth ofsomething like 6-1/2 percent from January to November. I don't thinkwe can live with that either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we have last time?MR. GRAMLEY. If we want to get to the midpoint of a 6 to 9percent range, starting with where we are in January, a rough guess isthat it must be around 6-1/2 percent. Have you made that calculation,Steve?MR. AXILROD. No, but it doesn't sound wrong. It soundsabout right.MR. GRAMLEY. Unless we're awfully lucky, I'm afraid thosegrowth rates are not going to permit the economy anything like thekind of progress this year that the staff is projecting. We need tothink seriously about doing something that will give the economy somebreathing room. Also, I think this year we ought to start out givingmore weight to M2 than we have. We ought to express that publicly sothat the focus of attention is not all on M1 as it has tended to berecently. And I think there's a way to rationalize John Balles'suggestion that we raise the target range for M2 that's different fromthe rationale he uses, and that is that the increasing interest-sensitive component of M2 has probably raised the income elasticity ofdemand for M2. If you look back at history, the studies of demand forM1 and demand for M2 have always come out that M2, the luxury good,has an income elasticity that is bigger than 1 and M1 has an incomeelasticity of considerably less than 1. The main reason was that M1didn't have interest payments on it and M2 did. But as more and moreassets that are interest sensitive are shifted into M2, the chancesare that its income elasticity has grown. And I [considered] the factthat Fred Schultz has said we will have some adverse reaction in termsof loss of credibility if we adjust our targets. But I said at eitherthe last meeting or the previous one, I don't remember which, that Ithink our credibility basically doesn't depend so much on thesetargets and whether we stay within the ranges from one month to thenext as it does on the basic fact that we've been following a verytough and tight monetary policy since October of 1979. That is whathas gained us our credibility. If we stick with that basic posture,we will still have credibility. I think we ought to give serious-36-2/1-2/82thought to the suggestion of raising the M2 target range to 7 to 10percent. And I think we ought to go further than just raising thebottom edge of the M1 target. I would prefer to do something likeusing a different base--starting out with the lower end of the rangefor 1981 as the base figure rather than starting from the actual.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make just one observation on yourobservation about how little room we'd have for M1 in particular togrow between now and the end of the year if we're going to stick tothe midpoint. Your arithmetic is undoubtedly correct. It makes a bigdifference what you assume will happen, let's say, in February orMarch. If M1 comes down, we will have quite a different picture thanif it doesn't. If it doesn't come down, it certainly will look as ifwe are too tight by every evidence, but it's just hard to make thatjudgment right now. That's where this explanation of the short rungets pretty critical.MR. GRAMLEY. Unfortunately, we have to make the judgment interms of what we decide for the long-run ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to do something. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I would support John Balles and hisproposals. I would prefer not to fiddle with the base because that'sgoing to be so hard to explain and so difficult to deal with. I wouldrather consider the possibility that M1 growth is going to be high inthe range because we had a shortfall of size last year that was justbeing made up toward the very end of the year and into January. I dothink, though, that the fact that we have had a shortfall and that weobviously have a very weak economy is a pretty good reason for sayingthat on reconsideration we think a number as low as 2-1/2 percent for1982 would be too low, and therefore we're going to nudge the lowerend up to 3 percent and make the range 3 to 5-1/2 percent, which isour typical 2-1/2 point range [for M1].On M2, I do believe that there are things that have tended toadd to its growth relative to the economy over time. They keephappening. We had a number of them last year. Some, like the allsavers certificates, didn't really work out, though it could come backthis year if interest rates at some point rose to a high enough level.Others involve considerable lead times and change gradually, such asthe IRAs and the Keoghs, some considerable part of which is going tobe showing up. Maybe we can make some kind of adjustment for it but Ireally don't think we're going to have the figures to adjust M2 bytaking out all IRA and Keogh accounts, which tend to be spread throughthe deposit instruments in the banks; they are not just in one depositinstrument. That's the terrible problem, I believe. Then we havethings like the Treasury's proposal to start charging a fee [fornoncompetitive tenders] or to shut off altogether the lines of peopleat the Federal Reserve Banks and at the main Treasury [building]. Theeffect of that will tend to be--and it is intended--to push money intodeposits that are in M2 form rather than to open market instruments.So, there is a whole series of these things. It's not totally withoutreflection in the numbers. If you look back, you'll find that in 1980nominal GNP rose 9.4 percent with a 9.1 percent growth in M2. Then in1981, GNP rose 9.3 percent with 9.4 percent M2 growth. There is 0.1less GNP with a 0.3 larger increase in M2. Most people are looking atsomething in the area of 8-1/2 to 9 percent for nominal GNP growth2/1-2/82this year. That certainly is where the whole focus of the range ofexpectations for both voting presidents and nonvoting presidents andBoard members is. And that suggests to me very strongly that we'regoing to have an M2 growth of 9 percent or above, maybe 9-1/2 percent.Therefore, I see no great reason for starting out with a range, whichis supposed to give us some flexibility, in which we expect to come inat the very top right from the word go. So, I think it would be bestto recognize that there has been a tendency for the kinds ofinstruments included in M2 to increase in popularity and also atendency for the number to be high relative to our ranges and,therefore, to say that we're raising the range. And I think 7 to 10percent is about right. So, I guess for somewhat different reasons,I'd come down with John.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I think what is happening to the variability ofmoney suggests that our ranges in a sense are narrower than thisvariability. And the variability is also greater than the differencebetween expansion and contraction in the economy, so that interestrates really become the one meaningful check on what the aggregatesare doing. Another possible but not very reliable check would be tosay "Let's go to a single number for the target, which would be themidpoint of what we've had so far." Then we'd get rid of the problemof having a wide target and still missing even that. But the basicproblem is to make a decision as to whether this January number ismeaningful or not. We do not have worthwhile guidance on that. Thatleads me to the conclusion that we ought to do something about thebase. I listened to Chuck and I listened to Fred; I can see thedanger of manipulating these things. I think it is perhaps lessdangerous to manipulate the base than to manipulate the ranges,because we've always accepted base drift. We had upward base drift in'80 and we're going to have downward base drift now if we're acceptingwhere we came out. Therefore, I don't feel that the base is verysacred. I think there's something to be said for the Bluebook versionof basing it on the lower edge of the band that we had because thatwas, after all, one end of our target. We're not going to have thebase drift that events gave us but we'll take advantage of that much.That seems to me acceptable. Another acceptable rationale, it seemsto me, is to say we will go back to July of 1981 when we set thesetargets and use where we thought we were then. We've shifted in aprobably fortuitous manner since then and if we go back to where weset the tentative targets and reaffirm them on that basis, I think wehave the rationale. I looked at the possibility of going even furtherback in order to eliminate past base drift, as it were. If we go backto late 1980 as a base, of course, we have to accept that we don't getthe benefit of the upward drift that occurred during 1980. If we goeven further back to 1978 and follow all the midpoints of the variousranges we've had, we are now within $100 million of the target. It'sreally quite a success.MR. MORRIS. There's nothing like compensating errors!MR. WALLICH. Of all these various devices, the Bluebookversion strikes me as the most plausible. We do accept that somethinghas happened. We don't take it fully into account. We have areasonable rationale. I think on that base we can probably live with2/1-2/82the [tentative] targets that we have and that's the [lesser]sensitivity than having to face a change in these targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What Bluebook alternative are you talkingabout?MR. WALLICH. The Bluebook alternative for the short-termranges where the base takes off--. Where is it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For a short-term target?MR. AXILROD. There's a discussion in the Bluebook ofshifting the base, Mr. Chairman.MR. WALLICH. Which page is it?MR. CORRIGAN. There's a footnote on page 12.MR. AXILROD. There's a text discussion in paragraph 14.MR. PARTEE. I would be inclined to be sympathetic to that,except that as I understand it we were targeting in terms of M1-Bshift adjusted.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, you have to adjust M1 the same way. Youjust take the difference--the amount of shift adjusted in that period.MR. PARTEE. I read that footnote on page 12 and that's whatled me not to want to do that.MR. GRAMLEY. It sounds too messy.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. WALLICH. The arithmetic is messy, but the concept is areasonable one.MR. FORD. Would you also shift to the lower end of the M2band. Henry, to at least be consistent between M1 and M2? I'mserious: I'm not kidding.MR. WALLICH. That doesn't sound--MR. FORD. How can you rationalize shifting M1 up from theactuals to the bottom of the band unless you also do the same thing byshifting [M2] on some end of the band?MS. TEETERS. You ought to shoot to the top of the M2 band.SPEAKER(?). Oh, come on!MS. TEETERS. Well, it's the same thing as widening therelationship.MR. WALLICH. I don't think there's an absolute logic that wehave to do the same thing for the two aggregates, particularly whenthey clearly have been moving in opposite directions.2/1-2/82MR. GRAMLEY. If you want consistency, you follow GovernorTeeters' suggestion: Use the upper end of the band for M2.MS. TEETERS. That's exactly the same thing that John issuggesting.MR. GRAMLEY. The base drift.MR. FORD. When my turn comes up, I'll--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I want to align myself with Fred Schultz. Ialso am very impressed with the perception, based on what I'm hearingfrom everyone I've talked to, that if we make any changes in theranges, it could be misinterpreted. I would much prefer to see ushold with the tentative ranges that we have set. One thing that has alittle appeal to me--we're not sure what is happening right now andyou mentioned that things might look differently in March and April--is the thought that was expressed at the last meeting I think by TonySolomon, who made some reference to the midyear review. That is anopportunity to reassess and take a look. It seems to me, if we'regoing to make a change [in the 1982 ranges], that rather than doing itnow we ought to defer it for 4 or 5 months at least and we would havemore information on all these changes that are occurring. Certainly,we might have a better explanation of what is happening to the moneysupply. So, given my perception of how [a change] would beinterpreted, I would prefer to leave the tentative ranges and thenhave some kind of caveat that we could make a fairly serious[adjustment at our] midyear review.MR. PARTEE. We said at midyear that we would look at itseriously in January.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. I have some sympathy with Fred's view, too, givenall that has been discussed, that we should stay basically with thelonger-run targets that we already set but [I would] pay a lot moreattention to trying to get back into the ranges on both if we can.With regard to base drift, I'm very concerned about how thisdiscussion is going. Look at the history of what we've done and thinkback to last year's big debate about what to do about base drift. Ithas been suggested, if I understand Henry right, that we not onlychange the way we handle base drift from last year by going to thelower end of the M1 band instead of the actual [outcome] but that onM2 we do yet another thing. My feeling is that the market people willtake this to say that we're just fooling around so much that we'repurposely trying to manipulate the game so that it will come out theway we want it. If we go with the established procedure, as Iunderstand it, of not drifting the base a new way but the way it hasbeen drifting--MR. WALLICH. Which is a bigger drift.MR. FORD. Yes, so? If we stayed with it on M2, it probablywould solve the problem of having to adjust the M2 band upward becausewe would be starting way up there and will in effect have incorporated2/1-2/82 -41-some of the past problems. We'd be able to project the existing bandoff the higher [base]. The real problem comes on M1. I think we willaddress that tomorrow morning when we get around to the question ofhow fast we will try to get back into the band. That's the place todiscuss that problem. So, I would say, for the sake of the appearanceof consistency certainly and to avoid the appearance of purposelymanipulating the base drift issue, let's stick with the ranges thatwere already announced and then concentrate tomorrow on trying to getdown to the question of how hard we should try to adjust to what hashappened.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I too have been around this alot of different ways, and basically I come out to the view that weought to maintain the targets that were adopted tentatively last July,in part for the reasons that Governor Schultz articulated and for afew others as well. I wouldn't be allergic to trying to do somethingwith this base issue, but I've looked at that a number of ways and I'mnot sure how to do it in a way that doesn't add more confusion ratherthan less. I am still a little concerned that any change we make hereamong the ranges that are being discussed is going to be perceived astinkering that won't materially influence where things come outanyway. And I think we have to give some consideration one way oranother to changing the targets at a point in time when some peopleare telling us to change them as well. To me at least all of thosethings point to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you amplify that last comment?MR. CORRIGAN. Basically, the way I read the newspapers andthings like that, the message that seems to be coming through bothfrom the Hill and the Administration is that it's time to change thismonetary policy in some [way]. The money supply has to be allowed togrow faster and it will grow faster even with the existing targets.But my point is that if we change the targets, the risk we run is alittle different than just the risk Governor Schultz was referring to.I think we run the risk that credibility will be affected in a moreamplified way because of the perception that the Fed has buckled underagain; they always have and they always will. And that just elevatesthe concern that Governor Schultz spoke of.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You remind me--and I will insert this inour consideration now, if you will permit me--that when I wastestifying before Mr. Reuss the other day he wanted me specifically tobring to your attention his recommendation that the M1 band be madethe same as last year which was 3-1/2 to 6 percent. He wanted thatconsidered as a proposal from himself and maybe some of hiscolleagues.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that's the kind of thing I had in mindwhen I mentioned this point. Now, I know it can cut either way interms of being responsive on the one hand or being whipsawed on theother hand. As I look at it, particularly in the context of M1, whichis the measure most people seem to want to look at, no matter what wedo to the targets we're going to be looking at a rate of growth on acomparable basis that is going to be above last year. Indeed, if weended up at the midpoint of the current range, M1 growth would be2/1-2/82roughly 2 percentage points above last year's growth even though it isstill within the tentative targets. I do recognize, as I said, thatmaybe something can be done with the base, although I'm not sure howto do it. Personally, I would have sympathy for the notion that maybeM2 is a little incompatible with M1 or from a presentational point ofview maybe talking about an M1 range of 3-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent. Justchanging the bottom and not changing anything else doesn't matter, andI wouldn't fight that to death. But anything that comes across as asystematic raising of these targets--raising them all, for example,instead of maybe raising the bottom end of just one--will cause us torun into some problems.On this question of what growth is left for the [remainder ofthe] year, I am very sensitive to that as well. I would just observethat all these lines in the Bluebook are drawn more or less on theassumption that we will go through the year without having anynegative months. I don't know when we're going to have them, whetherit will be February or July or whatever, but the one thing I am sureof is that we will have some negative months. So, I don't think thesituation is quite as bleak as the pattern one gets just by drawingthose straight lines off of that January number. In a nutshell, I'dlike to see us retain the targets either at or pretty close to wherethey are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Having established the preliminary targets thatwe did last July, I'd be very reluctant to make a change at this timeunless there are good supportable reasons for so doing. And I'munpersuaded by what I've heard today that, with regard to M1, a changewould be in order. It seems to me that we are in an environment whereabsolutely everything we do is so carefully scrutinized that we'd haveto have very supportable reasons for making a change. A change upwardwould be inappropriate, particularly given the economic forecast wehave for 1982. Therefore, I'd be in favor of leaving the M1 target aswe had established it. But with M2 it does seem to me that there aresome supportable reasons for a change, namely, that we did not come inwithin that range last year and that from the figures that we have forthis year [an unchanged range] would be very tight at best. And Ithink it would be too bad to go through the year having to explainconstantly why we are out of the range on M2. Therefore, I would bein favor of making a change upward with regard to that target to, say,a 7 to 10 percent range, to give us a little room to operate.MR. FORD. What base would you go for?MR. KEEHN. Where we are now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have three points, probably noneof which will prevail. The first is that I would raise the lowerlimit of M1 to 3 percent and I would put the top at 5 percent. Ithink 2-1/2 percent is too low and I have long favored narrowing thatspread because I think doing so would give additional credibility towhat we say we're going to do. But I sense that we'll go for 2-1/2 to5-1/2 percent, so I would suggest that we ought to aim definitely at 4percent regardless of which of those two routes we follow. The second2/1-2/82point is that I wouldn't favor what the Bluebook called rebasing. Ihad some sympathy for it back when we had overshot our targets, butthen I started trying to contemplate how difficult it would be toexplain to the market how an aggregate was going to grow at a certainpercentage rate from where it really wasn't at the moment and Idecided that it was best just to adjust the rates. And now, sincewe've come in on the low side in the case of M1, I think we'd reallycatch a lot of flak if we tried to do that. Furthermore, with ourshifting from M1-B to M1, which is going to be very difficult toexplain, if we had to explain rebasing on that, too, I just don'tthink anybody would really understand what we're trying to do. Myfinal point is that I'd really rather solve this problem of runningover on M2 and M3 by not setting ranges for them. I realize we don'tknow all we would like to know about M1, but I think we know moreabout it than we do about M2 and M3. So, I'd get rid of thesemultiple targets and focus primarily on M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I think it's important that we stick with ourpresent targets. If we were able to achieve precise gradations, Iwould think that M1 should grow as in the strategy [2] scenario atsomething like 5, 5-1/2 percent. I'm not sure, with our presentprocedures, that we can hit our targets anyway much less achievesubtle differences between 4 and 5 percent. I would agree with [BobBlack] in that I'm not disturbed about [the behavior of] M2 or M3.Except for the cosmetic aspect of it, the defensive end, I think we'dclear the air by not setting M2 or M3 targets because they don'taffect output or prices as effectively as M1, and I think it would bedisastrous to start horsing around with the base again. People knowwhat we're doing; they watch us like hawks. And I think it'simportant for us to say what we're going to do and then try our levelbest to improve procedures to accomplish our targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, my problem is that I'm not satisfied withthe forecast. If we stick to these targets, we end up with virtuallyno growth for the fourth year in a row and unemployment of 9 percentor above. I think that's politically very dangerous. We're courtinga lot of trouble for the Congress, the Administration, and theAmerican people [if we try] to hold unemployment at 9-1/2 percent. Wesaid we were going to review these targets. We set tentative targetsand that has turned out in my mind to be a major mistake because weare setting targets for the subsequent year when we're right in themidst of the formulation of fiscal policy for that year on the Hill.And then we don't have the courage to change them. I don't want toplay around with the base because I think that is too difficult toexplain.We ought to look at this and ask: What gives us anacceptable level of real growth and some decline in the unemploymentrate next year? And that leads me to say that we should go at leastto last year's M1 target of 3 to 6 percent. The target proveddisastrous and we undershot it. Instead of doing all this horsingaround with the base, we should [set the ranges] straightforwardly theway John Balles has suggested and widen the difference between the M1and M2 ranges, and then try to stay with that. Even with 3 to 62/1-2/82percent, if we come out at the upper limit, we are not going to have arobust economy next year. But at least we might get some decline inthe unemployment rate and in interest rates and I think that's whatwe're here for. Our major responsibility is to provide a healthyeconomy. We are getting considerable forecasts, at least, of areduction in inflation; and if it turns out that we're wrong, maybe wecan change the ranges again in midyear and do it in an honest wayrather than just always have this problem of perception. One of theproblems with sticking with the ranges that we have is that if wedon't come within them, then we have an enormous credibility problemstarting the end of the year. We can push, but there's just so muchwe can do with this. Sooner or later we have to face up to whether wemade it within our ranges or we didn't. We go into an enormous amountof explanation to try to explain why we didn't. We may push off thatcredibility problem, but we don't avoid it. So, I would suggestraising the ranges on all of the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think there is still a verygood chance that we will see in 1982 some of the downward shift indemand for holding M1 that we saw in 1981, and I don't think we shouldbe mesmerized by a January bulge. We also should not be the least bitunhappy about coming in anywhere within the range and we shouldn'teven be thinking in terms of midpoints given the shifting nature ofthese demands. We may very well come in at the upper end of the M1range if we don't get a significant or even partial repetition of whatwe saw in 1981. But I have no reason to assume that we won't getthat. In addition to money moving into money market funds and thesubstitution effect, we may also get a significant movement in thedevelopment of automatic sweep accounts, which also will tend toreduce the demand for M1 balances. Therefore, my instinct would be tostay with the ranges because it's not clear to me that we have aslittle room as the January bulge would indicate. Not only is therethe possibility that part of it is temporary but there's also thisother point that I just made. So, I'd be inclined to stick with [thetentative ranges].As far as M2 goes, even this last year I was a little unhappyabout the tightness of the M2 range. I pretty much come out the waySteve does in that I believe it's very likely that we are going tohave less of a problem coming within the 9 percent [upper limit],although I agree with Chuck that we're probably likely to be at thehigh end of that range. On the other hand, it wouldn't bother me atall if we came out at the low end of one range and the high end ofanother. I think the midpoint stuff is absolutely nonsense in thisimprecise world we're living in.So, on balance, if I were presenting the targets, I wouldpoint out to the Congress and the country that we may very well comein at the upper end of the range for M1, given the strong growth inJanuary, if that doesn't prove to be as temporary as it might be. Butit's also true that if we get the kind of innovation and structuralchanges that we got in 1981 in M1, we could very easily come in towardthe lower end of the range. And I think the M2 relationship tonominal GNP is close enough; I don't think one can read too much fromthat 0.3 percentage point movement. It's still very close and,2/1-2/82therefore, it seems to me that we could come in on that. So that'swhy I would stay [with the tentative ranges].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're running late, but I think we are farenough advanced here that we may as well get this preliminary go-around out of the way. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I still feel that we're in aperiod now where we can no longer measure transactions accounts. Andthe problem, as Tony indicated, is going to get more difficult ratherthan less difficult in the future. If you look at what happened in'81, we had a reasonably predictable performance in terms of M2, M3,and bank credit relative to nominal GNP. But the real outlier was M1;the M1 number came in much lower than anyone would have forecast.It's very clear from the earlier discussion at this very meeting thatwe really don't understand what the devil is going on with M1. So, Istill feel that we should abandon the M1 target and go with M2, M3,and bank credit. Beyond that, we ought to take a fresh look at howwe're managing monetary policy because I think this whole concept of atransactions account, which is really the way the public focuses onwhat we're doing, is obsolete. The monetary aggregates are obsolete.We have to get some new models on the floor or the Japanese are goingto take us over!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We seem to have contrasting views on whatto do with M1: Leave it alone or throw it out.MR. SCHULTZ. We ought to put Messrs. Morris and Roos in thecenter of the table and let them go at it!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would agree withthose who have spoken about the uncertainty that might come about bytrying to rebase or to fool around otherwise with the numbers. As aresult, I come out on the side of taking the ranges as we set them inJuly and trying to decide whether or not we want to increase ordecrease those ranges, as the case may be. Let me just say that it'sstriking to me that one month's money growth--which we have talkedabout and the bulge that took place is totally unexplainable--hasprompted this Committee to talk for another hour and a half or so asto how we should change the ranges for the period. That's a dramaticchange, it seems to me, from what we talked about just one month agoat our December meeting. I mention that to make the point thatbecause of the uncertainty that I suspect rests within everybody'smind and the unexplanability of the January numbers it doesn't seem tome to be very logical to start talking about rebasing or doinganything else with those numbers. There's only one [month of data].As a result, I would reestablish what we set in July and agreed uponagain in December without taking any formal action on it.There's one potential [change] that has been mentioned beforethat might be acceptable as far as I'm concerned, and that is themovement of the lower end of M1 from the 2-1/2 percent that weoriginally set to 3 percent. And that is only because the Januarybulge probably has rendered that 2-1/2 percent lower limit ineffectiveunless we get some very big negative numbers in the next couple ofmonths. And if moving the lower band from 2-1/2 to 3 percent would2/1-2/82serve the Chairman's purpose when he testifies before theCongressional Committees to give a view that we are going to be a bitmore expansive in 1982 than what we achieved in 1981, then I would optto increase the bottom end of that M1 range from 2-1/2 to 3 percent.That produces a midpoint, if anybody worries about midpoints, of 4-1/4percent as opposed to 4 percent, and that's some 2 percentage pointsmore than we achieved in 1981. It tells a pretty good story.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, it's getting on toward cocktail timewisdom and I wouldn't want to stand in the way of that, so I'll bebrief. Rebasing strikes me as gimmicky and I feel that we ought notdo that. I don't think we've done it in the past; we ought to driftup or down and go from the real base. I think we ought to stay withthe 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range for M1. Roger is probably right thatthe 2-1/2 percent end is obsolete but I don't see any reason to cutinto our flexibility. I think we ought to be happy to be anywherewithin that range, given the imprecision. There is a case ontechnical grounds to raise M2 for reasons we discussed last time.Some of the points that Chuck made are valid, so I would be amenableto that kind of adjustment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice and Mr. Winn haven't saidanything. Do either of you want to add a quick word?MR. RICE. Well, just quickly, my instinct is to agree withFred Schultz, largely on the basis that to change the targets for theaggregates at this point would probably damage our credibility. Irecognize the point that Nancy made that we have somewhat of aconflict here in that if we don't make the ranges again, that's abasis for reducing our credibility. But, on balance, I think we domore damage if we change the ranges or fiddle around with the base atthis point than we do if we just stick with the current ranges. Asyou know, I've been one of the people who have been worried about thefact that the money supply, up until this month, has not grown fastenough. To me the ranges are basically cosmetic. This is what wetell the public we want to do. If we come in at the upper end of therange for M1 and if we exceed the range for M2 slightly, I for onewill not be too worried about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, against the background of thebehavior [of M1] in January, I think any changes we make would besubject to a misinterpretation regarding what our intentions are.Second, I'm really concerned about the thing we call M1 because it'sgoing to become less and less of a measure of transaction balances. Iwatch [banks] in our District as they tool up for [changes in] cashmanagement, and there are big, big, numbers here that don't show up atall as M1 numbers. The sweep accounts also are being tooled up in abig way and that's going to affect behavior, so I think we have a realcase [for not changing the ranges] in terms of the changes that areoccurring in the aggregates themselves in this period alone. Ourconcern should be to get a better feel for what these numbers reallyare than on this [unintelligible] that we play out here. I'd alsofocus on the ranges and not the midpoints because the midpointoveremphasizes our precision and our ability to achieve these things.-46-2/1-2/82 -47-Third, it seems to me, with this uncertain economic background, thatwe can't just stay with this willy-nilly. And we ought to factor thatinto the report that is made at this time, saying that as thingschange, we too will reexamine what we're trying to achieve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am tempted to make some observations butI think I'll let them go until the morning, considering the hour.[Meeting recessed]2/1-2/82February 2, 1982--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a considerable go-around yesterdayon the long-term ranges. There were some differences of viewexpressed, I think more on M2 than on M1. I don't believe we shouldtry to settle this issue right at the moment until after we look atthe short term because the two are interrelated in some respects.We'll go to the short-term [policy discussion] and then come back tothe long-term [decision].Let me just say in general terms, so far as the long term isconcerned, that I am aware of and sensitive to all the concerns aboutconfusion and market interpretations of what we say and of credibilityand all that. More basic than that is that we ought to be doing whatwe think is appropriate, and we can live through the credibilityproblems. In the end, our credibility will be related more to makingthe right decision than to worrying too much about what the marketsays about it in the short run. Having said all that, I think we'rein a peculiarly uncertain period simply because of this big jump [inM1 growth] in January. If this growth were going to carry through, itwould begin to suggest that something is going on here that we haven'tfully been aware of in NOW accounts or otherwise. If it were semi-permanent in some sense, given how little growth that leaves [withinthe tentative range] for the rest of the year, I would questionwhether we are not being too tight. But I think a very strong casecan be made that that judgment is premature; we just don't know.Things will look quite different if we get a decline in M1 inFebruary. My expectations are not the greatest in the world; I don'tthink anybody else's are. My [intuitive] expectations weren't verygood at the last meeting, I'm sure, and they may not be any better atthis meeting. But one would think with the kind of velocity decreaseswe're getting now, and particularly a velocity decrease with the kindof interest rate movement we have had very recently, that it justdoesn't seem to hang together all that well unless there is somethingvery peculiar occurring in NOW accounts. So, there's a pretty goodchance of some relapse from that January M1 movement. If there is arelapse, then this box that we appear to be in will disappear ordissipate--to a very considerably extent anyway.If we are going to change anything--and I thought about thisfor a considerable amount of time--I would argue that the advantagesof rebasing rather than changing the targets are quite clear. I saythat for two reasons. First of all, changing the targets in responseto a sudden jump of the kind we have experienced--a short-termdeviation or maybe a long-term deviation--may give the wrongimpression. It could be interpreted easily as our not beinginterested in bringing down the money supply growth over a period oftime and it could have implications for 1983 and 1984, which we do notwant. Somehow, just psychologically, [it would appear that] we wereoff on a course of increasing the money supply. More important thanthat, it doesn't really go to what I conceive of as the problem. Theproblem is that we have a bulge right at the moment, which puts M1above the target. We can change the target, but [under any reasonabletarget] we would still be above the target by a [considerable] amount,as we were before. And, if we leave the base the same, all thepsychological and market freight of being above the target will besitting there just as it is now, whether or not we change the rangefor the year as a whole.2/1-2/82If we move the base up, what we will be doing is recognizingthat we are starting from the higher point and we will be immediatelyback much more within the range of where we want to be in terms of thetargets without changing those numbers. I am constantly aggravated--maybe other people are less so--by the amount of importance put on thethree months that happen to be the final three months of the year. Ilook at what happens over a longer period of time. I meant to bringthe figures in, but Steve may have them. Starting where we'restarting, unless we get a very significant decline in February orMarch, we're going to have a higher year-to-year growth in the moneysupply than we had last year, certainly if you look at the shift-adjusted numbers. If you don't look at the shift-adjusted figures itwon't be true because we had a 7 percent growth I think year-to-yearon the non shift-adjusted last year. That growth reflected the bulgeof NOW accounts at the beginning of the year. So, if you look at thenonadjusted figures, we started high and that produced a high yearlyaverage growth of the money supply for the year as a whole even thoughthe fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter growth was not very high. Thecontour was a high [rate of growth] in the beginning of the year andthen it leveled off for the rest of the year. I think that gave afalse reading because of the shifts into NOW accounts that producedthe bulge. If you look at the shift-adjusted numbers, what was it ona yearly average basis last year, Steve?MR. PARTEE. 4.7 percent.MR. AXILROD. 4.7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks now that we would be no lowerthan 4.7 percent in 1982 and in all probability higher simply becausewe're starting high. Consistent with the present targets and growthanywhere in those targets except at the very low end and [in theabsence of] a sharp early decline, we are going to have more monetarygrowth this year, looking at the period as a whole with the presenttarget, than we had last year, if "reality" is a shift-adjustednumber, without changing the target. And, of course, we would havemore growth on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, too. So, wehave [more growth] both ways.MS. TEETERS. Are you assuming a decline at any point?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm assuming it doesn't go down verysharply. That comment may not be correct. If we had a very sharpdecline--and by very sharp I mean more than a $5 billion decline inFebruary--MS. TEETERS. Or over a couple of months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we would have to have a fairlysizable decline for a month or two for the yearly average to have anyreasonable chance of not being significantly higher than it was lastyear. I can't predict every month but, just [extrapolating] on astraight-line basis, which may be unfair, it is equivalent on allthese short-term alternatives except alternative A to ending up with 5to 6 percent growth--I'm just going by memory, Steve--in the yearlyaverage for 1982.2/1-2/82MR. AXILROD. That's right. If you hit the upper limit, itwould be around 6 percent; at the midpoint it would be around 5percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That assumes that we don't have a greatbig decline in the short run. But, one of the peculiarities is this:Suppose October weren't there and suppose this increase had happenedone month earlier. The fourth quarter would be very close to thefourth-quarter base and nobody would be arguing that that wasn't theappropriate thing to start with. [The bulge] comes a month later andresults in a $5 billion difference in the base. Should that type ofthing affect us? That's the kind of consideration that I've beenstruggling with. I have gone up and down on this, not knowing what isgoing to happen in the next 6 weeks. My feeling is that we willpretty much know the story then, although we never know for surebecause there's always another week out there. But at least in 4 or 5or 6 weeks, we will have a much better feel as to whether some of thishas washed out or not. If it has, the current targets may not beperfect but, given the problems of fiddling around with them, theywould look entirely appropriate to me. If that did not happen, I'dhave a very serious question as to whether we were not being tootight--that something more basic and continuing may be going on here.That would imply, as a matter of judgment, given what is going on inthe economy, what is going on in interest rates, and what is going onin the money supply, that we would have to think seriously aboutproviding a little more relief. My tentative judgment is that that isa very hard decision to make right now and that maybe we should justsay we are not prepared to make that judgment but will keep the matterunder review and if we have to change it, we will change it. And wewill change it as soon as [the situation] becomes more solidlyapparent than it is today.MR. ROOS. Do we assume that it is impossible to pinch offthis bulge through our open market operations? In other words, we didit in the middle of last year. What if we decided, instead of waitingto see what happens in a month or two or six weeks ahead, that we weregoing to instruct the Desk to sell securities out of our open marketaccount in the amount necessary to pull down this bulge that hasoccurred. And, if that goes too far, then we'd reverse thatperformance. Can't we be the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are raising the questiondirectly that I want to go to now Larry, and that is: What should wedo in the short run? The issue on the table is how aggressively wewant to move to, in effect, pinch the bulge off, as you put it. I'dlike to turn to that now, but before we do, let's ask Peter to give usthe normal background. But I think that is precisely the issue beforeus. The only thing I would note is that in the last week,inadvertently, we already have moved more strongly to pinch it offthan we really intended. We moved some distance in that direction.So, why don't you talk, Peter, and then we'll go right to that pointand then come back to the longer-run decision.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. ROOS. Peter, may I ask a question? In the Bluebook thestaff usually gives us several alternatives for the short-run targetsand also indicates an implied fed funds range for each of those2/1-2/82alternatives. If my memory serves me, in the past as well as in thiscurrent Bluebook the most expansive alternative usually reflects lowerfed funds rate projections and the more restrictive money growthprojections are accompanied by higher fed funds ranges. Now, at ourlast meeting, if we actually had set targets for money growth thatwere what has happened--money growth exploded--would you feel thatnormally that would have resulted in a lower fed funds rate or ahigher one? It seems--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if the Committee had set the kind ofmoney growth rates that actually transpired over the past month, itwould have accommodated what has happened without getting the rise inborrowing and the rise in the funds rate that has occurred.MR. ROOS. What I'm trying in a clumsy way to get to is this:Is it not possible that our whole concept of how the fed funds ratereacts to the aggregate targets we set is exactly the reverse of whatreally happens? When money explodes, it seems to me that the fedfunds rates and interest rates rise, as they are presently. Is thatnot true? And if that is true, why do you continue under thealternatives that are suggested to imply lower fed funds ranges withaggregates that show a higher money growth?MR. PARTEE. Do you mean we ought to reduce the funds raterange in order to choke off the money supply?MR. ROOS. No sir. I'm suggesting that the relationshipbetween money growth and the fed funds ranges is just the opposite ofwhat our Bluebook shows us. The Bluebook usually shows a lower rangeof fed funds when we opt for the more expansive alternative and ahigher fed funds range under the alternative where money grows moreslowly, implying that that will bring rates up. And that's exactlythe opposite of what happened, Chuck.MR. PARTEE. Yes, but I think--MR. WALLICH. It depends on supply and demand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Will you defend the Bluebook, Mr. Axilrod?MR. WALLICH. One has to distinguish whether a movement isthe result of a shift in the demand function or a shift in the supplyfunction. We assume the demand is constant and, therefore, anincrease in the supply of money--just as of potatoes--increases supplyand reduces the price. Now, if it's the demand function that changeswhile the supply function is constant, then price--that is, theinterest rate--and quantity move in the same direction. That is whatyou've observed and what you commented on. But the Bluebook targetsare based on the assumption of constant demand and a change in thesupply function.MR. ROOS. Regardless of the theory that relates one to theother, Henry, if we see over and over again that when money grows thefed funds rate moves up, we're getting our theory--MR. WALLICH. If the price of potatoes goes up and you knowthat there has been no change in supply, it must have been because ofa change in demand. These markets work just the same as every market-51-2/1-2/82in the economy and one has to distinguish what is the source of themovement.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. I don't quite understand this, but I gatherthat the argument is whether interest rates are the price of money orthe price of credit. You are arguing that it's the price of money,and I have to agree with that; I think Larry's Reserve Bank wouldargue that it's the price of credit that's--MR. ROOS. Fred, all I'm trying to argue is that if--MR. WALLICH. Is that not accurate?MR. ROOS. If you look at what happens today when money growsmore rapidly than people anticipated, these rates move up. It's justexactly the opposite of the circumstances formerly, before we hadinflationary expectations.MR. SCHULTZ. But what Henry is trying to say is that if thatis because the demand for money increased, then it takes place thatway. If it's because the supply of money increases, it has quite adifferent result.MR. AXILROD. President Roos, may I just make a comment?When you observe in the market that there is an increase in money andshort-term rates go up, it is not in my opinion because people believethat there's going to be more inflation. In my opinion--and this iswhat is predicted in the Bluebook--it is because the market believesthat the Federal Reserve is going to hit its longer-run targets and,therefore, will take action to restrain the growth in money that hasbulged in the short run because of the [increased] demand. And withdemand high relative to the supply, the price, as Governor Wallichsays, goes up. And the price of money is the interest rate.Therefore, they realize that interest rates are going to go up in theshort run and short-term interest rates are what we're dealing with.MR. ROOS. But, Steve, regardless of what causes this--I'llbuy any theory and I know you're both right--when money grows, ratesgo up. So it is just the opposite of the way we project these thingsin our thinking in the Bluebook.MR. WALLICH. Well, all that says is that supply is prettystable and demand is the source of most changes. This is what I andothers normally say about the money supply and money demand. It's thedemand that is the more unstable variable. And that's why we getmovement of prices and quantities in the same direction.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If one were putting this is non-jargon, the way to explain it was just the way I think Peter startedto do. When we project a more expansive money supply, the reason weproject that rates will go lower is that we are assuming we willsupply the reserves. But when it happens not because we're supplyingthe reserves but because the demand is going up, we don't supply thosereserves because it's not in our path. Then, of course, we get adifferent kind of reaction. The rates go up instead of down.2/1-2/82MR. ROOS. But Tony if that's so--and I'll agree with youthat it may be--still if we have an alternative that implies a higherrate of money growth, then we should project, regardless of the reasonfor it, a higher range for fed funds than if we're setting a lowerrate of money growth. That is my point regardless of why.MR. WALLICH. But, Larry, we're the controllers of supply;we're not the controllers of the demand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think perhaps all of this will be made alittle more concrete by examining what we want to do in the short runagainst all these alternatives, which have various demand and supplyassumptions implicit in them. But we can have any questions about themarket and dispose of those.MS. TEETERS. I have a tentative question for Peter. I'm notsure I'm totally correct but if I add up roughly [the figures in] thefootnotes in appendix 2 [in the Bluebook], you took $540 million outin the multiplier adjustment, which is greater than I've ever seenbefore. That must mean that you had a very unstable multiplierrelationship in your initial projections that you were constantlyadjusting. That also suggests to me that reserves were shiftingbetween categories at a greater degree than is normal. When all thereserves went out last summer, they sort of disappeared. During thisperiod did you have a shift of reserves from low reserve depositcategories to high reserve deposit categories?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't remember. It was a relatively largeamount; whether that was a record amount of those technicaladjustments. I'm just not sure.MR. AXILROD. In large part, Governor Teeters, the [OCDs]were a lot weaker than we had allowed for in the path. So, if wehadn't taken out the reserves that had been allowed to support them,of course, they would have supported even more money growth. And forsimilar reasons, if we had left the reserves in, they would havesupported more total deposits. Those were the essential multiplieradjustments, and they were larger than they normally are.MS. TEETERS. Essentially, we had a reverse of the situationthat prevailed over the summer? In a very technical sense, we had areversal of that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably right, isn't it?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, we had to adjust upward, then, for the[OCD] growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. I don't know for sure, Peter, whether you orSteve ought to handle this question. I just wondered if you had givenany thought to possibly changing this automatic reaction mechanism.The rule of thumb you have, when you force the banking system toborrow any total reserves above path, is on a one-to-one basis. Haveyou considered other combinations? Looking at this period, one wouldthink running borrowing up from $300 million to $1.7 billion [in themost recent week], with the target of $1.5 billion, would be a whale-53-2/1-2/82of a move. Still, the money supply did spurt. Have you monkeyed withthe idea of maybe changing that automatic part?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I said, some of the move up was amore or less automatic fallout of a strengthening in demand forreserves. We did, well along into the period, make a discretionarydownward adjustment in the nonborrowed path of $190 million, I thinkit was, which added to that borrowing gap. There is continualconsideration given to the size of those adjustments. And the factorsbearing on it on this occasion had to do partly with trying to reachjudgments about how lasting this bulge would be. If there had been asense that this bulge was likely to be more lasting, and particularlyif there had been a sense that it was occurring against a backgroundof a strengthening economy instead of a still weakening economy, myview is that there probably would have been more of a discretionarydownward adjustment made to build up that borrowing gap even further.MR. BLACK. Well, you actually made two ad hoc adjustments,if I understand it. One was on the 4th of January and then one was onthe 15th. What I was talking about, really, was not those ad hocadjustments but whether you had considered making the automatic[response] a little stronger or weaker. I just wondered what you--MR. AXILROD. One point, President Black--and this issomewhat subjective because I don't have the data laid out--is that weknow for sure that, for one reason or another, the relation betweenborrowing and the funds rate has become a lot looser over the lastyear or two than it had been. Often we get a level of borrowingwithout as much pressure associated with it in the funds market as onemight have expected. It could be that in this period when things areconfused by year-end [pressures] and all that, and in addition it isearly in a period of pressure on bank reserve positions--that is, ithas only been three or four weeks or so of which the first week or twoare uncertain, because it was the year-end period--it may simply takemore time for those pressures to build up. The function may besomewhat asymmetric or something. The banks may have to be in debtfor a longer period before we get as marked a reaction as we mighthave expected ahead of time. So, if they have these kinds ofpressures for a more sustained period, we might see a more promptreaction in market conditions than when they first get in debt by $1billion or so.MR. BLACK. Well, I think that's reasonable; I certainlycan't suggest anything--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This situation has also been complicatedby the fact that in January we had some reserve misses that went in arather perverse way. We didn't tighten up de facto as much as wethought we were doing earlier in January simply because we had morereserves in there than we thought we had. And then this past week itreversed. And while the market didn't tighten up particularly untilthe market [players] saw the figures, when they saw the figures theyexaggerated how much we had tightened up. It gives us a bit of aproblem; maybe it does or maybe it doesn't, depending upon what thefuture brings. But, statistically, we had much more but latertightening than we intended simply because of the way the reservefactors went.54-2/1-2/82MR. BLACK. And the way we construct the path, the timing ofthe first indication of the overrun determines the pattern ofborrowing for the whole period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ran over in reserves and short inborrowings and then had the reverse. That's--MR. BLACK. Well, I was just expressing some hope that maybesomebody had some ideas on how we could try an automatic mechanismthat might work a little better than this had. But I guess that'sprobably expecting too much.MR. PARTEE. Go to contemporaneous [reserve accounting] andclose the window.MR. BLACK. Well, that's one way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's one way of doing it; then we'd geta very strong one. Anybody else?MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I'd just like to ask Peter how he thinksthe market would react to either an increase in the surcharge or anincrease in the discount rate.MR. STERNLIGHT. Given the events of the last week or so, itwouldn't come as a total surprise, but I don't think there's apreponderant expectation of a move either. I think there would besome reaction to either of those, probably less so if a move wereconfined just to the surcharge. It hasn't been fully discounted; somepeople would say that they don't expect such a move because they stilldon't see the turnaround in the economy that they think would be partof the background of such a move.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions. Arethere any other technical questions?MS. TEETERS. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will ratify them andturn to the immediate problem before us. In terms of what we werejust talking about, Mr. Axilrod, is it fair to ask if all youralternatives, A, B, C, and D assume no great change in the demand formoney? You're assuming that the money created is in there and it'snot going to relapse on its own accord?MR. AXILROD. We have assumed a sharp deceleration in moneydemand in all of the alternatives in that we don't think the highdouble-digit growth rates of the past three months on average willpersist. We have not assumed in any of them a contraction in theoutstanding amount of money over a two-month period. We could have a1 percent [annualized rate of] increase--say, a -7 percent [annualgrowth rate one month] and a +9 percent [in the next month] orsomething. That is possible, but we have not assumed a contractionover a two-month period in any of the alternatives unless action istaken to make market instruments more attractive, which in effectmeans interest rates rising, which is the assumption of alternative A.2/1-2/82That is, we believe that a contraction could be attained but withinterest rates rising substantially. Alternatives B, C, and D suggestmuch slower growth rates than we have had and alternatives B and Cwould hit the upper limit of the present long-run [range] later.Alternative D remains outside [the range] if the Committee were tovote for a continuation of the [previously set] growth rates over therest of the year.I might add, Mr. Chairman, that because of this problem wedid suggest a second alternative in the Bluebook for the directivelanguage on the thought that the Committee may not wish to squeeze theeconomy further in order to attain the contraction but might find sucha contraction highly welcome if it were to develop without squeezingthe economy further. The second of the two alternative languagespresented, while it need not be different in the substance of thenumbers, is somewhat different in the public posture it portrays aboutthe Committee decision. It is meant to provide an alternative whichwould in effect welcome a sharp drop [in money growth], provided thatthe drop could be attained without squeezing the economy further.MR. ROOS. Well, how would the economy be squeezed? What doyou mean by that?MR. AXILROD. I meant that if the Committee targeted on adrop of 7 percent, our suggestion would be that to attain that we'dneed borrowing to start as high as $3 billion. But suppose theCommittee said no, we don't believe that; our thought would still bethat if you targeted on a drop as low as 7 percent and even if youstarted with borrowings where they are now, the required reserveswould immediately come in higher than is consistent with that drop.And borrowing would tend to rise very sharply, so that you would get asharp rise in short-term rates because the immediate demands for moneywould be in excess of the -7 percent that was targeted. If we'rewrong about that--and we may very well be--then we would not get thisrise in interest rates. So, what I meant by squeezing the economy wasthat the Committee may choose not to target on such a thing on thegrounds that it runs greater risks of raising interest rates in themiddle of a recession. But it may wish to target on somethinginvolving a slower deceleration into the long-run targets--a moregradual slowing on the grounds that that minimizes the chances ofrising rates. On the other hand, the Committee might be quite willingto accept a sharp decline if that could be attained without furtherupward pressure on short rates at this time.MR. ROOS. But the most--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you want to say anything in a moreorderly way, Mr. Axilrod, without my asking you a leading question?MR. AXILROD. Well, I've just given the substance of thecomments I had written out, Mr. Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, since we don't know theJanuary figures--and we have done this before--why aren't we basingfrom December to March rather than from January to March?MR. AXILROD. Well, one could base it from December to March.The first alternative left that blank in case the Committee wished to2/1-2/82retain November or December or whatever. The second alternative wasdesigned just to make it clear that the Committee wants a decelerationfrom the very recent growth rates, which was January essentially.That was what was carrying the Committee beyond its tolerance point,so it just seemed natural to base it on January. We have full datathrough the 20th of January and partial data through the 27th; sothere may be a change in the base but not as substantial a change asit appeared we would have in December because we had quite a bit lessdata for December when the Committee met last time.MR. PARTEE. Page 10 has November to March.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I saw that, and I didn'tunderstand why we would do November to March.MR. AXILROD. That's what your base was before.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but to me [a December base] justseems a little more logical, since we really know only 2/3 of Januaryand we do know December. And the numbers look more moderate if we gofrom December.MR. AXILROD. The December-to-March numbers consistent withalternatives B and C, President Solomon, are 8 percent and 9 percentfor M1. That's why in alternative I [of the draft directive language]we left it for the Committee to fill in whichever base it felt mostcomfortable with. Alternative II suggests simply [to base on]January, to make clear that with January behind us the Committeewishes to get money growth moving back toward the range. That's theessential reason for that approach.MS. TEETERS. Steve, did you say what the borrowingassociated with alternative A was?MR. AXILROD. In our judgment, it could go as high as $3billion because we believe that we can't get that kind of reductionfor two months without a further rise in the funds rate, even thoughthe economy is as weak as it seems. But I have a certain degree ofuncertainty about that because our quarterly model does suggest, ifyou believe it, that given the amount of money that has already beenproduced and given the weakness of the economy, that that amount ofmoney isn't in effect needed for transactions associated with GNP inthe first quarter. But it might be needed for precautionary purposes,so you have to force interest rates up to get it out of there.MS. TEETERS. The $3 billion on borrowing that you'retentatively estimating for "A" could go as high as $5 billion?MR. AXILROD. Oh, it could go a bit higher; that's correct.We assumed that was consistent with a fairly high funds rate. But itcould be anything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could go as high as what?MR. AXILROD. It depends on how hard you want to fight it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me try a common-sense interpretationof this--I hope.-57-2/1-2/82MR. FORD. Of what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of A, B, C, and D.MR. FORD. I thought you were going to do alternatives I andII.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll suggest a possible approach as afocus for discussion. I think you're saying, Steve, that eitherbecause of transactions balances alone or transactions plusprecautionary balances--depending upon what model you look at--thedemand should not continue to rise at the rate it has been rising, butit is going to rise a little anyway, or hold stable perhaps.Therefore, if we're going to get [M growth] down, we have to takesome action to tighten up--well, for borrowings to be about where theyare or higher, up to $3 billion. That's the number you just gave interms of borrowing. Alternative A says, against the presumption whichmay be wrong--it may just relapse on its own--that if we really wantto retrace January, we have to be aggressive in tightening up themarket. And that's going to push the funds rate way up because ofthis demand factor. Alternative B says, if we stay more or less wherewe think we are--lower than where we were in practice last week andmaybe this week, but where we were aiming--that we would get aleveling off, but that's it. Alternative C says, if we're a littleeasier in terms of pressure on reserve positions, measured by $1billion worth of borrowing, that we probably would get a smallincrease in the money supply but we certainly cannot retrace theincrease we had. And "D," of course, moves further in that direction.It says that even if we were quite easy on reserve positions, wewouldn't get much of an increase in the money supply compared to whatwe have had, but we would certainly add to what we have had.MR. PARTEE. Because it has already occurred.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because it has already occurred, that'sright. Now, the question is what we want to do. If we get anysignificant increase from where we are, I am suggesting that we haveto resist it. I would accept that as a starting proposition. I thinkthere is some chance it could happen by itself. But who knows?Tentatively, anyway, I reject something like alternative A, [whichimplies] that we're just going to whack off a big amount in an effortto get a quick reversal that we feel we otherwise would not get. Onecan take the view that it would tighten up the market verysubstantially in the middle of a recession. I am not proposing that.I do think we have to show some resistance, which means a tightermarket than we now have, if the figures carry us up significantly fromwhere we are. And I interpret something like "B" or "C"--either oneor someplace in between--as saying we can ride along and we would besatisfied. It is not the happiest situation in the world, but wewould be satisfied at riding along if we have to be someplace aroundwhere we are in terms--MR. PARTEE. By "where we are" do you mean the level of themoney supply?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --of the money supply, yes.MR. PARTEE. Not the rate of increase, but the level?2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the level. We would be willing toride along with that level without tightening the market further. Wewill wait longer and make another decision, obviously, in 6 or 8 weeksor whenever we meet again. But, in balancing off all theseconsiderations, we would be content to see an eventual unwindingwithout any substantial changes in the level of the money supply withmoney market conditions more or less where we intended them to be,which is somewhat easier than they in fact are at the moment in termsof federal funds rates and borrowing levels. We are talking aboutsomething around $1.5 billion in borrowing, which is lower than it hasbeen for the last 10 days. That seems to me a reasonable approach.But I would feel rather strongly about the caveat expressedin that second version of the directive: That if the assumption ofessentially unchanged demand for money proves to be wrong and, withthat amount of pressure on the market, the money supply relapses, Iwould be delighted. I would not say that at that point we would putin money in order to keep the money supply at an unchanged level or a+1 or +2-1/2 percent or whatever. In other words, if we couldaccomplish that--. This may give too much weight to what we do in theshort run, but if the dynamics of the marketplace produced a relapsein the money supply downward consistent with unchanged or even areduced level of borrowing, we should just accept that and count ourblessings and wait for the next meeting. If it doesn't happen, ifmaintaining these pressures produced a result like "B," let's say, wewould be content with the situation. If the tendency of the moneysupply were to rise further, we'd have to act against it. And thatwould send the level of borrowings still higher--maybe not higher thanit is now, but higher than what our target is at the moment. So, thatis the approach that seems to me to make sense. And we wouldincorporate--I don't know what the precise numbers would be--somethinglike 0 to 2 percent or whatever number we wanted to put in there forM1 for the next couple of months with a borrowing level where it is,or maybe even a little lower than that, depending upon what weight wewanted to put on the possibility of a decline arising spontaneously.And if M1 does decline, we would let it decline as a welcome reversalof what we had [in January].MR. ROOS. I'd like to ask Steve to verify whether thefollowing reasoning or these facts are right or wrong: If M1 remainsat its current level of about $450 billion throughout the firstquarter of 1982, would the estimated growth rate for the first quarterbe about 12 percent? Is that correct?MR. AXILROD. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That 12 percent assumes M1 is unchangedfrom now on.MR. ROOS. Then if money grows at this 12 percent rate overthe first quarter, if we do what the Chairman suggested and stay wherewe are, what does that imply for the growth of M1 over the rest of'82? In other words, if M1 growth in the last quarter of last yearwas 6 percent and in the first quarter of this year is 12 percent,doesn't that imply, if we're going to stay within the long-term rangethat we have been talking about, something like a 3 percent growthrate for the next two quarters?2/1-2/82MR. AXILROD. Yes, in general, it's right in that order ofmagnitude.MR. ROOS. Okay. If we had a 9 percent average growth for M1over the last two quarters and we're forced to seek a 3 percent growthrate of M1 for the next two quarters, wouldn't that have a verytraumatic effect on output late in the year?MR. AXILROD. Well, our thought at the moment is thatsomething like what you described will develop more or less givendemands at something like current interest rates. That is, we willget a sharp deceleration in money growth to a 1 to 2 percent monthlygrowth rate over the next couple of months--it's implicit in that--anda moderate rate of growth over the second quarter. Where we would seemore of a sharp effect on output would be if that pattern requiredhigher interest rates because there were bigger demands for money thanare implicit there. Then we would see much sharper effects on output.But our projection for GNP is based on a pattern somewhat like whatyou were describing, on the thought that that will not be accompaniedby substantially different interest rates than we now have.MR. ROOS. Steve, your most expansive case, alternative D--and I promise I'll shut up soon, Mr. Chairman--has the lowest fedfunds range of these four alternatives. Yet, with the explosion ofmoney growth that we have experienced in the last few weeks, the fedfunds rate is already above the top of that alternative D range. Whatmakes you think that we aren't going to have increasing fed fundsrates even if we go the more expansive route? That's what worries meabout this whole thing.MR. AXILROD. It all depends, President Roos, on one'sassessment of the demand for money relative to the amount theCommittee is willing to supply.MR. ROOS. Can anyone accurately forecast the demand formoney?MR. AXILROD. It's very difficult.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've got us on that one!MR. ROOS. The prosecution rests!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The kind of consideration that you raise,Mr. Roos, is what I have in mind. If the demand were so strong thatit turned out, let's say, that with the amount of pressure we nowhave, we were continuing to get increases in the money supply, I'dbegin wondering very seriously about our targets for the year, becausethey wouldn't seem to hang together with what we know about theeconomy and all the rest. Now, we'd have to evaluate the economicsituation, but just sitting here now it doesn't seem to hang togetherif the demand for money were that strong. But we don't know that yet.Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I understood whatyou said earlier, the only quarrel I might have with you is what sideof "B" we ought to end up on. You are on the right; I'd go a bit tothe left.-60-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure. Let me just clarifythat for a moment. As I sit here gazing at these numbers again, we'reessentially talking about how we are going to act between now and thenext meeting, of course. And given the great bulge that we've had,I'm not sure it's the right thing to say--we can have anotherdiscussion about what the borrowing assumption would be--but in termsof the right posture, maybe the right number to put in there is zero:The breaking point for us on whether to tighten or ease is whether weget any further growth beyond this great big bulge that we've had.What we would be doing is expressing some unhappiness with and someresistance to any growth above the elevated level that we now have.MR. FORD. And that puts you between "B" and "A," not between"B" and "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it's almost to "B." Of course, it isbetween "B" and "A" but it's a trivial distance from "B."MR. GUFFEY. It's on the left side of "B." It's almost thesame.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just looks to me a little funny, nowthat I look at it, to say we want 1 percent growth. That's just afine [line] after this bulge. What's so magic about one percent?We're willing to accept, if we have to, what we already have but wewouldn't like to see it going up any further. [Zero] may make alittle common sense.MR. GUFFEY. That's coupled with the thought you alsoexpressed that we would move against any evidence above zero and wouldtolerate or accept and be grateful for anything below zero.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. Precisely.MR. GUFFEY. I think that's precisely what I'd like to seehappen.MS. TEETERS. We could fall off the cliff on the other side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, this is about degree. I'm saying wedon't move very hastily if M1 begins falling. If we got a couple ofweeks of decline--let's say in a few weeks it fell off $6 billion justto pick that number out of the air--the market would be easing becausewe would be quite satisfied with that and could afford to be somewhatmore relaxed about it. I'm not making a fine judgment as to how muchto let borrowing go down. I'm saying we wouldn't at the very leastbegin making discretionary adjustments and we wouldn't begin pumpingmore money in than the path said with a fairly sizable decline in M1.We'd say we were happy about that. We might let the automatic[response] that Bob Black was referring to work, but we wouldn't begintaking aggressive action to keep [borrowing] up while [M1] declined by$5 or $6 billion. We'd be delighted. If it began declining further,we might well [respond]. Now, just where the number is, I don't know.I have some figures that may not be out of the ballpark. Thepreliminary figures have been very poor in terms of indicators, butsuppose it came out [as a decline of] more than $2 billion--say,$2-1/2 billion, which it could easily do. And suppose we had anotherdecline of that magnitude the following week. One can always hope.-61-2/1-2/82We would then have a $5 billion decline and a sizable decline may bein train for February and I think we just ought to be delighted. Ifthat continued, then we would expect to see some easing in the market,but would not be aggressive in trying to offset the decline duringthis 2- or 3-week period. We'd welcome the decline.MR. RICE. If we saw an increase of, say, 2 percent over theperiod, would you rush to resist that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think "rush" is the right word butwe would resist, yes.MR. PARTEE. We would let borrowings go up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would certainly let borrowings go up atleast, in accord with the automatic [mechanism]. And we might have todo a little more than that.MS. TEETERS. We have already signalled our displeasure tothe market. We are at 15-1/2 percent [on the funds rate] and $2billion in borrowing. When we say "stay where we are," are we talkingabout staying at $2 billion or $2-1/2 billion or $3 billion?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, a billion and a half dollars. I don'tknow how soon it would develop--we will want to discuss thatexplicitly--but I am talking no higher than $1.5 billion of borrowing,which presumably means an easier market than we have now even withzero [M1 growth]. Just to be explicit, on the borrowing one couldargue that maybe it should be even lower. It depends on what kind ofchances one wants to take.MR. PARTEE. What were we seeking? I lost track.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A billion and a half dollars as I recall.MR. AXILROD. Right.MR. PARTEE. It got up from $1.2 billion to $1.5 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Essentially, what I am suggesting isretaining that with a zero number [for the M1 growth rate]. If itbegan rising above zero, we would go above that. If for a while itdeclined below that, we wouldn't be very quick about moving; if itdeclined enough, obviously, we'd move; but we wouldn't be very quickabout it on the down side.MR. PARTEE. It's hard to imagine a negative between now andthe next meeting that would be so large that we would think it was anexcessive washout of the bulge. I guess there is such a number--25 or30 percent--but it has to be awfully big because it was a 22 percentincrease.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we would not be in too bad shapeby the end of the quarter, or we'd still be high. But that's comparedto where we are now. I don't think we should assume that we couldn'tget a $5 billion decline in the money supply between now and March.And then if March were stable, we'd look in not too bad shape. Wewould still be high [relative to the long-term target].-62-2/1-2/82MS. TEETERS. We more than washed out last April in the spaceof what--3 months?MR. PARTEE. By the end of three months some of us weregetting concerned.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we get the washing out startingearly in February, I don't think any of us has a problem. If itdoesn't work out like that, though, it seems to me that we might wantto build in a little extra protection by setting the initial borrowingassumption at, say, $1.3 billion rather than at $1.5 billion becauseotherwise we're going to get a rise in rates, I think. If we startwith $1.5 billion for borrowing and don't get a decline, there's agreater risk that we're going to get a rise in interest rates. Wewould give ourselves a little margin if we start with $1.3 billion.MR. SCHULTZ. Why would we do that if borrowing is alreadyrunning above $1.5 billion right now? If we start out setting it at$1.3 billion, which is a considerable drop from where we are at thispoint, and even $1.5 billion is a drop from where we are--SPEAKER(?). No, it isn't.MR. SCHULTZ. Yes. Borrowing is running--MR. STERNLIGHT. $1.5 billion is what we have been aimingfor; the actual came in at $2.3 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One has to distinguish between the aim andthe actual.MR. SCHULTZ. Between the aim and the actual?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're talking about the aim.MR. STERNLIGHT. This week borrowing is [averaging] $1.7billion so far.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The nonborrowed reserve path rightnow is based on the assumption of aiming for borrowing of $1.5billion. At the moment I'm assuming that we don't want to see a15-1/2 percent fed funds rate. I'm assuming that we're talking moreabout what we had hoped. which was that $1.5 billion in borrowingwould produce a fed funds rate of closer to 14 or 15 percentMR. STERNLIGHT. I would have said about 14-1/2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, about 14-1/2 percent. So, itseems to me--MR. CORRIGAN. But doesn't that argue that if we stay withthe $1.5 billion, we're going to get lower interest rates anyway?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, my instinct is based on ourdiscussions in New York, to the effect that the psychology in themarkets is such that if we aim at $1.5 billion and don't get anydecline [in M1], we're probably going to end up with a higher fundsrate than 14-1/2 percent. And, therefore, I think there's some2/1-2/82advantage to starting with a modest safety margin in case we don't getthe decline.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon what safety marginwe're talking about. I view the difference between $1.3 and $1.5billion as no big deal. But you're talking about a safety margin interms of market reactions. Other people may think of the safetymargin in terms of what happens to the money supply, so it depends onwhere you're looking for the safety. And that's what we're--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, but if we're living with theJanuary bulge, and I certainly agree that that makes sense, we're nottrying to correct it in the very, very short run. If we start offwith $1.3 billion, basically what we're saying is that if all of theprojections worked out exactly as projected, we would get back to theupper end of the target halfway between June and September. Now, ifwe start with $1.5 billion, what we're saying based on the staff'sanalysis is that we would get back to the upper end by June.MR. SCHULTZ. I'm a little confused.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we get off on this question, let meask in general whether anybody is radically out of the ballpark Isuggested. If people are, let's put it on the table and then disposeof that issue and then come back to the fine-tuning. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Well, I think it's obvious that we ought to dowhat we did last year and pinch out this bulge. If you recall, we hadalmost the same experience in the middle of last year; and when wetook the action we did in April of last year, the fed funds rate didrise from about 13 to 19 percent. It stayed there a couple of months.But then it came down again and we were in a much more favorableposition after we had taken the remedial action. So, that's obviouslymy point of view. I think we ought to do something sooner.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's just put this on the table anddispose of it or not. You are just an advocate of an aggressive moveat the moment in the hope and expectation that that will help in thelong run. And you would take all the implications that that may havefor substantially higher interest rates in the very short run.MR. PARTEE. I just might point out, Larry, that when wemoved in April, we moved in the context of the strongest quarter inGNP that we had seen for a long time--the first quarter. Now we wouldbe moving in a context of the weakest quarter in GNP that we've seensince the spring of 1980. The economic circumstances are quite a lotdifferent than they were then.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is clearly an aggressive viewon the table. It's a legitimate view. Does anybody want to supportit?MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think what you have more or lesssuggested is an excellent fallback position, and if it developed inthat way I'd be just tickled pink about it. But looking at pastexperience, these trends that develop are so like runs in stockings:They sometimes keep going on. It's like trying to drive on the ice,as I have been recently. If you don't correct until you're way off2/1-2/82toward the ditch, you sometimes have to make a pretty big correction.We have looked at this as carefully as we could and tried to find outwhether this burst was an aberration or permanent, and I don't thinkwe know the answer to that. So, I think it's safer to minimize therisk by assuming for the time being--though we may be dead wrong--thatthe bulge is permanent, and I would be inclined to move more stronglyagainst it now, along the lines of what Larry was saying. But by thesame token, if it comes out the other way, which is probably justabout as likely, then we ought to be prepared to let the federal fundsrate come down and use the whole range for it if [M1] comes in overlyweak.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's hard to see it overly weak in my wayof thinking, but I--MR. BLACK. I don't think we could get that in one month, butif that persisted for a while it could cause--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, if it persisted for a while--MR. BLACK. Until recently, I thought the economy was goingto be much weaker than I now think it is. I've begun to wonder if itmight not be bottoming out, which is something I never thought I wouldthink at this point. But if you look at what happened at the bottomof the previous two recessions, the [M1] growth was not unlike whatwe've had, so I don't think we can rule that out. I don't know whatprobability we should attach to it, but I just believe that's thecourse of lesser risk, because I think further growth now is a littlemore dangerous than moving the rates up temporarily to try to bring M1growth down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these are difficult matters ofjudgment. The only thing I would say on the other side--withoutsaying this view is wrong because we won't know until afterwards--isthat we have had a pretty big tightening move in the market alreadyand we haven't had much chance to see [the response] because it wasdelayed; in fact, to exaggerate, the market got no message at allalmost until very recently. We haven't had a chance to see what kindof reaction that will bring. One can argue that being as aggressiveas you're talking about, particularly against the business backgroundthat exists, takes too many risks. That's what I feel.MR. BLACK. I think that's a good point, and it does addstrong support to what you're suggesting. The only thing that keepsme from doing that is remembering that it is so darn hard to hit theseshort-term targets. And we have missed them so often, despite ourbest efforts, that I just shift a little in the other direction. ButI think your position is a perfectly reasonably one and I would expectmost people would think that's the better one to follow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've had some expression of view onthe more aggressive side. I guess the next logic is to ask: Doesanybody want to be considerably less aggressive? Let's get that viewon the table if it has any support. Not hearing any, I think we'redown to fine-tuning. Just to repeat the specificity so that we havesomething to fine-tune, the proposal is to use a zero in there for theM1 number and I guess we can leave the M2 number where it is [in-65-2/1-2/82alternative B]. And we have a $1.5 billion and a $1.3 billionborrowing assumption advanced so far. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I would opt for the $1.5 billion. Althoughwe've been above that over the past week or two, it seems to me thatthings are moving in the right direction. I believe Peter said thatwe had a $600 or $700 million [run-off] last week and a potential atleast of some run-off again this week, which would bring the borrowinglevel back to about $1.5 or $1.4 billion. That seems to me to be theright place to start with a zero [M1] growth in the intermeetingperiod.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. I'm reasonably close to where you are, if Iunderstand you correctly--that is, "B" with a slight tilt to "A,"which would say--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say a purely cosmetic one. Thatzero somehow looks more defensible than one percent in terms of whathas happened.MR. SCHULTZ. Now, wait a minute. I don't think "B" with aslight tilt toward "A" is accurate because that's January to March.The Chairman is suggesting zero [M1 growth] from now until the nextCommittee meeting. I think that's a different animal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, no, I meant it to be the same.MR. FORD. I understood it to be the same.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I meant it to be the same. I think thatroughly is until the next Committee meeting.MR. FORD. I would lean a bit toward the tighter end of whatyou're describing by saying that we ought to assume $1.5 billion onborrowing, especially given that the funds rate today, as it wasyesterday, is coming in close to the upper end of this band and weought to continue with the common sense notion of bracketing the fundsrange around where it is when we leave this room and allowing someleeway on the upper end of that range. I know that's not going to bereal--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't mention that but myinstincts are against taking the last 2 days on the federal funds rateas the rate to bracket. I would say the 14 percent is probably whatwe ought to bracket on those assumptions.MR. FORD. Alternative A shows 3 percentage points [of leewayboth above and below the midpoint of the range]; the others show 2points. If you are saying that you want to peg the fed funds and nothit 16--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't say that. I said I would worryif the federal funds rate were 16 percent now. I surely would.MR. FORD. I can understand on an intra-day basis and it hasbeen 16 percent or right---66-2/1-2/82MR. STERNLIGHT. It touched 16 percent yesterday. Theeffective rate yesterday was 15.68 percent or something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we're not talking about an intra-daytouching.MR. FORD. Still, I'd go along with "B" and the zero growthrate for M1 and something like the [alternative B] M2 figure, but I'dwant to give ourselves a little room to breathe on where the fundsrate goes.MR. PARTEE. I think we ought to do away with the funds raterange. I think this is the perfect meeting just to do away with it.MR. BLACK. I second that.MR. FORD. All right. I think that's a great idea.MR. BALLES. I'd agree.MR. FORD. We say we're shooting for zero growth in M1 and norate restrictions.MR. BOEHNE. Why is this a perfect meeting to do it?MR. PARTEE. It's the first meeting of the year. We'retotally at sea. We have a very simple suggestion from the Chairman,which is that we target for zero [M1] growth and we accept anyshortfall. And we take the rate that comes up.MR. GRAMLEY. As long as we're going to put out extremes,I'll suggest throwing out M1.MR. PARTEE. So we throw out zero and we come up--MR. WALLICH. Not using a funds range makes a lot of sensebecause that range is always misunderstood in the market. They allbelieve that it cannot be breeched, but actually it is a checkpoint atwhich consultation begins. I think we'd do ourselves a lot of good byremoving it.MS. TEETERS. You're willing to remove the bottom as well asthe top?MR. PARTEE. Sure. We opt to take it out; we don't want it.MR. WALLICH. That doesn't mean that we can't consult underany circumstances, I take it.MR. MORRIS. Well, I would be very upset if, without anyevidence that the economy has bottomed out--I think the only evidencesuggests the economy is still going down--we threw out any constrainton interest rates on the up side, as Mr. Partee suggests.MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that there are lot of people outthere who think we're going nuts in the direction of the money supplyanyway, and if we just throw out any restraint on the funds rate,-67-2/1-2/82given the economy where it is, it's going to convey the notion thatwe've lost our sense of balance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can even leave off the "of balance" inthat statement!MR. GRAMLEY. And I don't think we ought to have a hiddenconsultation rate that we don't tell the public about. It seems to mewe owe the public [information on] the way we're looking at things andthe way we're operating and how that works. If we're going to use a16 percent and 12 percent as the upper and lower limits for purposesof consultation, we should tell the public that.MR. PARTEE. Well, I have great faith in the conservatism ofour management.MR. WALLICH. Now, if we use a borrowing assumption, which wedon't publish, and which is a much more operationally important thingthan the consultation ranges--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us defer this particular argument andsettle on the other dimensions. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. I have just one little anecdote here. We talkabout all these statistics all the time, and I would note for therecord that many of the people who are always telling us what to dotell us we should look at the monetary base. If you look at themonetary base for 1981, it's actually quite stable on a quarterlybasis. But the most interesting thing is that the growth rate of themonetary base was slowest in the fourth quarter when the growth of themoney supply was fastest. And I think there's a little message there.As to the substance of the short-run decision that we will bemaking, I personally would have quite a strong preference for havingsomething like the second alternative directive [shown in theBluebook] as our basic marching order, with M1 at zero and M2 at 9percent. I would be very comfortable with a funds rate range of 12 to16 percent. I for one would feel very, very strongly that we shouldmaintain a band on the federal funds rate for some of the reasons thathave already been stated. I don't think there is a great deal ofmisunderstanding in the marketplace as to what that band means rightnow; most people know exactly what it means. So, I would be veryuncomfortable getting away from having a federal funds rate band, andI would fix it at 12 to 16 percent. On the borrowings, again, I wouldfeel fairly strongly that we should start at $1.5 billion. At leastas I read the Bluebook and look at what has happened even since thisBluebook was written, I would interpret the staff's analysis as sayingthat over the intermeeting period as a whole a borrowing level of $1.5billion should be compatible, from where we are right now, with bothlower interest rates and a lower actual level of borrowing. That'show I would look at it, Mr. Chairman.MR. ROOS. Mr. Corrigan, may I please just correct one thing,sir? The monetary base has grown much more quickly in the lastquarter of--MR. CORRIGAN. On a quarterly average basis, I think it isthe slowest growth rate of the year.2/1-2/82MR. PARTEE. It was in the Bluebook.MR. ROOS. No, not according to us. We'll have to put you onour mailing list.MR. WALLICH. There's a different base in St.Louis; we knowthat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I'm about where Jerry is. I like your generalballpark specifications, Mr. Chairman. Zero seems right to me for M1and 8 or 9 percent is acceptable for M2. I feel strongly that weought to keep the fed funds range of 12 to 16 percent and $1.5 billionon borrowing. And I like the alternative II specification of thedirective. I think that captures my sense of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You pointed out something. I misspokewhen I said 9 percent for M2. I was looking at the numbers down belowwhich were for November to March. I just meant the same number as wasin alternative B, which is 8 percent and not 9 percent.MR. BOEHNE. Well, 8 or 9 percent would be acceptable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's critical but I was justreading off a piece of paper and I read the wrong number. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, philosophically, I'm very close to what Edhas just suggested. I'd feel far more comfortable with alternative B.I would like a directive that would emphasize that we're trying tomaintain the current level as opposed to being slavish to anyparticular number. I would be comfortable with the borrowing level of$1.5 billion. I would feel very strongly that we should not eliminatethe fed funds range. I'd be in favor of maintaining that at 12 to 16percent; given the current rate, that seems reasonable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I'm very much with Jerry and Ed and Si on thespecs. And I'm there because I am deeply worried about what wouldhappen to the economy if interest rates go up again. I think BobBlack said, perhaps inadvertently, that we can't rule out a recovery.But we can't rule out the possibility that there won't be a recovery.I'm particularly worried about what may be happening to business fixedinvestment. I think that all the risks are on the down side asregards capital formation and that any inadvertent increase ininterest rates now, with the aim of pinching this bulge in the moneystock, would be a grave mistake.I want to note what we're doing here around the table as weset specs for the short run. We say that we'll take M1 of zero andthat for M2, well, maybe there's something to that aggregate but wedon't really care much [about it]. I do care and I care a lot.That's because I think we're looking at a world in which M1-B or M1--or what we use for M1 now with other checkable deposits in it--isshowing an enormous variation in response to changes in interest ratesthat very much parallels what has been going on for several years insavings deposits. If you look, for example, at the recent period2/1-2/82you'll find that other checkable deposits had a turnaround; in termsof annualized percentage rates their growth was around 26-1/2 percentfrom October to December. Savings deposits had a turnaround in termsof annualized growth rates of roughly 32 percent. I think the parkingargument is very much the reason for it. People are using theirsavings deposits as a vehicle for temporarily depositing funds thatthey're going to put back into other forms of financial assets later,and they're beginning to use their other checkable deposits for thesame purpose. We're going to see a tremendous amount of variation inMl, I think, in response to changes in monetary policy and in responseto changes in the economy that affect interest rates that we will notsee in the nontransactions component of M2 to anywhere near the samedegree. I think we get a more stable response to changes in policy,therefore, in a larger aggregate like M2 than we do in M1. I wouldn'tpush this to the point where Frank Morris is of throwing out all theaggregates altogether; I could perhaps be persuaded if you twisted myarm, Frank. But I do think it means that we ought to give moreattention to what is happening to M2, not just for this meeting butmore importantly for the longer term.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want any remarks of mine that you mayhave interpreted the other way stricken from the record because Iagree with what you're saying. I just misread the M2 figures. It'snot that I don't think it's--MR. PARTEE. Well, M2 growth in January anyway was 11.2percent, or that's the estimate.MR. GRAMLEY. But what does that mean about thenontransactions component of M2?MR. PARTEE. Well, do you believe that the parked money isgoing to move entirely out of the Ms? I think a lot of it will shiftfrom M1-B or M1 into M2 components and, therefore, if we set an 8percent limit, we would have a pretty tough policy.MR. GRAMLEY. If you're that concerned, Chuck, about parkedmoney moving from one component of [M2] to another, then focusing onthe broader aggregate seems a way of dealing with that. If you lookat the monthly growth rates in terms of the billions of dollars ofnontransactions components in M2, there was a big bulge in November,but September, October, December and January were all very much thesame order of magnitude. We did not have this tremendous burst, and acontinuation of that burst, in the nontransactions components of M2.That's exactly my point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest this. We're going to havea little time problem here; I'm going to have to do a little workduring intermission. The German mark has been very weak and there's aquestion of whether we should intervene or not. I don't have anyfixed view on this, but I want to talk to [the German officials]. AndI have to talk to a few people here. So, I would like to wind up thisportion of our discussion fairly promptly, if that's possible. Let'ssee where we are.MR. SCHULTZ. I'm ready to vote on it, Mr. Chairman. I don'thave anything to add to the discussion. I think we've settled inhere. There seems to be a very general consensus.2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to make sure that that's whatwe have. Mrs. Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, I don't object to starting at $1.5billion on borrowings because that's coming down from where we are.My only difference from the specifications suggested so far is that Ithink we should be prepared to move toward $1.3 billion. The languagehere does that, but I think it should be put on the table that we'renot going to be rigidly stuck at $1.5 billion of borrowing if things--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if things really turn around. Ifind it very difficult to specify just where we would be, but I mightbe very reluctant on that first $3 or $4 billion [decline in M1] tomake much change. If it went beyond that, some gradual response wouldbegin to--MS. TEETERS. The point I'm making is that we went from $300million to $2 billion [on borrowings] in the last six-week period.So, if we're going to be that flexible going that way, we should beprepared to be equally flexible when we get--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, certainly if this January [M1 bulge]washed out, borrowing would be down. There's no question about that.If it really washed out--I don't expect that to happen in that extremeform, but who knows, it might--MR. PARTEE. Well, I think the only question Nancy is askingis: Will you let the usual arithmetic relationship show through inlower borrowings if in fact there is weakness below zero in the moneysupply?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I hate to get very specific aboutthis, but I guess what I am saying is that I'm not sure I would reactto the first $3 billion below zero. Beyond that, yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way Nancy formulated it, it'sbasically a discretionary decision. It seems to me that the advantageof starting with $1.3 billion as against $1.5 billion is that then wehave a carry-through during the entire period of the lower base.That's because we make the adjustments and the amount of change thatresults from the reality of the situation doesn't affect the startingpoint. So, you get the carry-through effect of the $200 millionincrease in the initial nonborrowed reserve path by starting withborrowings of $1.3 rather than $1.5 billion. I will live with $1.5billion--in every other respect I agree with what has been putforward--but I'm just not sure that at $1.5 billion we will get 14 oreven 14-1/2 percent [on the funds rate]. I certainly don't think 14percent is what it is likely to produce; it probably will be 14-1/2percent at best. And given the psychology of the market, we may notget that. I just wanted to have a safety margin to start with. If wedon't build it in to start with, Nancy, then it becomes simply adiscretionary decision at a later time. And I don't see that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it doesn't have to be completelydiscretionary. Even in that first little margin we could take theposition that we at least will let it go through to whatever extent itautomatically shows through, which wouldn't be very much, unless we'vegot a big decline, right?-71-2/1-2/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, there--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, I skipped you completely.MR. BALLES. Well, just very quickly, since we are still in arecession, I would go along with your proposal, Mr. Chairman, but witha strong plea or caveat as the case may be that we take such actionsas are necessary to avoid the big overshoots that we had on the[monetary growth] paths we set at the November meeting and theDecember meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wish I knew how to do that.MR. BALLES. I wish I did too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would be in agreement with the way youspecified it and with the second alternative on the language of thedirective.MR. RICE. I'd go along with your proposal, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any comments?MR. WALLICH. I have nothing to add. I would go along withzero and 8 percent. I prefer not to mention the funds range, notbecause I think interest rates are unimportant, but because I thinkit's misleading. But 12 to 16 percent is fine as is $1.5 billion onborrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else? Let me try to repeat it andmaybe we can vote on it. What happens during this coming period willreflect on our longer-range strategy, but leaving that aside, whatwe're talking about is zero for M1, 8 percent for M2, and $1.5 billionas the initial borrowing assumption. Allowing for Governor Teeters'and Mr. Solomon's comment, let me modify what I said and say we wouldlet [an M1 decline] show through in the purely automatic way but wewould be reluctant to make any discretionary adjustment without areally big decline. However, whatever presumably rather smalladjustment comes through by itself, if we do begin getting anydeclines here, we let them show through. It's a slight modificationfrom what I said before. And the funds rate range is 12 to 16percent. Frankly, I feel rather strongly that 12 to 16 percent is ashigh as I want to go on that funds range. If we were going to goabove 16 percent on the federal funds rate--maybe we'd do it--I'd wantto scratch my head and have the opportunity to scratch my head prettydarn hard. I'd scratch my head at 15-1/2 percent, I tell you. At 15percent, it's--MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in view of what you said earlierabout being very anxious that we not go above that rate, would youwant it to be purely automatic if we did get a continued spurt orwould you want some discretionary adjustment in the nonborrowed path?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If M1 goes above the zero?MR. BLACK. Yes.-72-2/1-2/82MR. PARTEE. I think we might well have an adjustment.MR. BLACK. Would you want that to be an automaticadjustment?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd certainly do the automaticadjustment and we might have to do a discretionary one if M1 really isrising. It would call into question this federal funds range and ifand as it does, we'd have a consultation. I'd be much more quick tomake a discretionary adjustment on the up side, if we have to, than onthe down side.MR. BLACK. I thought that's what you meant, but I justwanted to clarify it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that clear enough?MR. BLACK. That's fine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might as well vote on this and have arecess.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesUnanimous.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a recess and return tothe other regulatory exchange.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to go to Mr. Cross atthis stage and dispose of his report. It's particularly relevant inview of the question about intervention. I will just bring you up todate. The mark, of course, has gotten quite weak, with our interestrates going up; other currencies have moved to a lesser degree in thesame direction; the mark had gotten to a rather high level. [TheGermans] have pretty much given up doing anything. They made a greator semi-great stand two or three weeks ago. but they think this[weakness] so much reflects interest rates and the uncertainty aboutwhat is going on [in the United States], that it's hard for them to doanything through intervention alone. That's probably a correctjudgment. We have come to a conclusion with the Treasury that if themark did weaken this afternoon or tomorrow when they probably will beannouncing some economic expansionary measures--the latest movement ofthe mark has been toward some strengthening--we would look kindly uponan intervention gesture. We are not talking about huge amounts but-73-2/1-2/82about moving in the direction that indicates some interest on ourpart. They probably have an interest, too, but they didn't want to doanything alone. And that's the way it stands at the moment.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would be interpreted in themarket as dissatisfaction with the level, not as countering adisorderly or a very volatile market, I think. Wouldn't you agreethat that's the way the market would see it to some degree?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think some mixture.MR. WALLICH. I think we could do this on the grounds thatthere is an element of disorder when the market pays little attentionto fundamentals like inflation and--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that still comes back to a viewabout the level. I'm not unhappy about this because it's a beautiful[chance] to finally get a change and a perception of a change in theSprinkel policy. I do think, though, that the market will be a littleconfused because when we've had these disorderly or volatile markets[before] we have not intervened and all of a sudden we are interveningin a situation--and this is a big movement--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not talking about doing it on a reallytrivial movement; I'm not talking about a couple of pfennigs anyway.MR. WALLICH. But we have never said anything other than thatwe would fight disorder. Now, disorder is in the eye of the beholder.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the beholdee.MR. WALLICH. I think we can make our point in the marketwithout giving away the statement that we do it for disorder.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think we give that away to anyextent.MR. BOEHNE. Does this reflect a slight movement towardpragmatism on the part of the Treasury people?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe.SPEAKER(?). Maybe.MR. GRAMLEY. Where will this all end--this pragmatism overthere?MR. SCHULTZ. Good common sense. We can't have that!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that background, why don't yougo ahead, Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, that comes close to theconclusion of what I was going to say. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments?-74-2/1-2/82MR. WALLICH. Sam, do you observe that the yen is moresensitive to interest rate differentials now than it has been in thepast?MR. CROSS. It seems to have followed pretty closely, atleast during these recent weeks, the changes in the interest ratedifferentials. I haven't looked back to compare that very thoroughlywith earlier periods, but it does seem to have happened in thisperiod. Mr. Chairman, I also do have a recommendation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Proceed.MR. CROSS. [Secretary's note: Text of Mr. Cross'srecommendation not extant. Staff notes indicate that he recommended a$1/4 billion increase to $3-1/4 billion in the informal limit onholdings of German marks and an increase of the same amount to $4-3/4billion on the limit of holdings of all foreign currencies to allowfor the accrual of interest on mark balances.]MS. TEETERS. If you're going to be intervening, aren'tthese two--MR. CROSS. If we intervene, then we will need to modify thatfurther.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it would be prudent toincrease that [informal limit] by even more than [the $1/4 billionthat] Sam is recommending.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we could live with--MR. SCHULTZ. That gives us a little problem. There arethree of us on the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and I'm leaving.MR. CROSS. It's an informal agreement, I believe.MR. SCHULTZ. Oh, I see. Okay, fine.MR. TRUMAN. Maybe the Secretary can correct me, but in thepast we haven't dealt with this in terms of a formal vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't require a vote of theCommittee. This is purely an informal understanding. I think we canjust leave it the way you are proposing, Sam, and understand that ifwe do intervene, you are not going to exceed this [new limit] rightaway anyway.MR. CROSS. We're very close to the [current] limit at themoment.MR. PARTEE. [The leeway] is only $12 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only $12 million at the moment?MR. CROSS. Yes, $12 million.MS. TEETERS. With $200 million of interest [earnings to beadded] in there.-75-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When does that $200 million--MR. CROSS. If you raise it now, then we have that much scopeand we will be receiving those interest receipts over the next fivemonths.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. We can do it any way we wantto, but I don't feel hard pressed [to change it]. If we say this[increase from $3 billion to] $3-1/4 billion is generally acceptable,the understanding would be that if we intervene [the limit] is goingto have to be more. And the Foreign Currency Subcommittee wouldpresumably review that. Maybe we can [raise] it $1/2 billion, if youwant to do that.MR. CROSS. The present overall limit is $4-1/2 billion. TheCommittee could raise it to $5 billion, which would give us a littlescope just in case.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we ought to [raise] it $1/2billion because sometimes the situation moves fast. And it does seemto me that there is no issue of principle here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any big issue oneway or the other. Which do you feel more comfortable with?MR. CROSS. I would recommend [raising the overall informallimit to] $5 billion and raising [the informal mark limit] by $1/2billion [to $3-1/2 billion].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that acceptable? With thatunderstanding, we will proceed.Now we can return to our long-run ranges in the light of thedecision we just made. Let me describe one variable that if I weredoing it today I'd do differently than I did a few weeks ago. Iagreed to testify on February 10th, which isn't very far off. Iwanted to do that in part because I just don't like the idea of a longlapse between our decision and the time that it's announced. I thinkwe should try to get it out of the way as soon as possible. Thenthere's a recess of the Congress, long in this context, for Lincoln'sbirthday and Washington's birthday. The alternative, if I don'ttestify on the 10th or 11th, is that I can't do it until the 23rd orsomething like that. At this point, if I hadn't semi-committed myselfotherwise, I'd just as soon wait until the 23rd and see what happensto these numbers over the next three weeks. I note that because it'snot impossible to go back and change that if we want to. There's nopoint in changing it if everybody is happy with the decision today.But if there were a view that minds could be swayed strongly one wayor another by what happened to the money supply over the next--. Wewould have three weeks more of data, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. Pardon?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I didn't testify until [later]--is Mr.Winn here?MR. AXILROD. The 23rd would be the alternate date.2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 23rd is the alternate date, which is aTuesday, isn't it? We would know--MR. AXILROD. We would have partial data for the 17th and the3rd and 10th would be published.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 23rd is Tuesday. So we would havepartial data for the 17th. What do we have now: partial data for the3rd? So we would [know] two more weeks' data.MR. AXILROD. Tomorrow we'll have partial data for the 3rd.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have partial data for the 3rdyet? So, we'd have three more weeks' data if we waited.MR. AXILROD. That's right.MS. TEETERS. There's also the delay in the [President's]economic report and the budget.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd use that as part of the excusefor delaying. I wouldn't delay unless there were a strong feelingthat it would add a great deal. Before you respond to that, I'd notethat in a more general way, as I suggested earlier--based upon what weknow now and a feeling that there is some reasonable chance, though Idon't know where I would put those odds, that a considerable amount ofthis January surge in particular will wash out--I would feelcomfortable with essentially the same targets we announced before withthe same base. I think that would minimize the difficulties allaround. What I would be inclined to say is that we would feel quitecomfortable as we see things now--I am issuing a nuance statement--[with growth] in the upper part of the range, if that's the way thingscame about on M1. That's not quite the same as saying we would aimthere deliberately. I don't think we can aim that finely a year awaybut we could say that we find that quite acceptable based uponeverything we know now. I think that is consistent with what I saidovertly before--but I don't remember precisely the reason we put in abottom [for the range] as low as [2-1/2] percent--that the onlypurpose for the lower part of the range was the concern that atechnological change, such as the rise of money market funds and sweepaccounts and so forth, might have such a depressing effect on M1 thatwe would want to allow for that. It wasn't a policy assertion; ratherthan being a sign of a real policy objective, it was a concern that[M1 behavior might reflect] a technological response. All otherthings being equal, we wouldn't have growth as low as 2-1/2 percent.On M2 we have a set of projections, for what they're worth,that say as I understand them that the range is more or less adequate.In other words, even at the upper end of M1, we'd expect to be withinthe M2 range; that may be a good or a bad judgment. And if we were inthe middle of the M1 range and were presuming implicitly all otherthings equal--technology and everything else--we would expect morelikely than not to be in the upper part of the [M2] range. We wouldcertainly be in the upper part of the range on M2 and maybethreatening the upper limit, which is where we've been all along. AndI would say that. Now, one can obviously argue logically: Why notjust raise the M2 range? I wonder a bit what we would gain by that asagainst the explanation that we have been running slightly above the2/1-2/82upper end of the M2 range for recent years and as a result of that Ithink it's understood in the market that the operative part of thatrange is around the upper limit. One could argue that raising therange puts us nearer the middle, but I'm afraid we might get someinterpretation that the operative part of the range remains the upperpart. So, if we moved, let's say, to 10 percent as the upper end,people might say 10 percent or slightly above is what we're aiming forbecause that's where we've been in terms of that range. And thatwould give us a higher M2 [growth] figure than we have had in anyrecent year. We also have this pattern where we haven't had any realdeclines in M2 [growth rates] for a number of years as I recall. Infact, we've had increases I think. It has been fairly steady forthree years as I remember, but if you go back to the mid-1970s, M2growth was much higher. That was back when we had this largecomponent of fixed deposits. It got high when interest rates wentdown; it got low when interest rates went up. And since basically aflexible rate [has been paid on M2 deposits], M2 has closely trackedGNP very well. I don't know whether that will last, but it has sofar. It has been hanging roughly just above 9-1/2 percent, plus orminus every year for those three years. Now we have the staff tellingus--for what it's worth and I assume it's worth a lot--that M2 growthshould be lower, consistent, of course, with the lower nominal GNPthat is being projected.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the staff's view is that the datawould have suggested there were stronger arguments for raising therange for M2 in the previous two years than there are this year, givenour [GNP] projections.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that was reflected earlier when wewere at this position. The staff told us we'd be threatening theupper end quite clearly and maybe would exceed it. That's notimpossible this year, but as I interpret it you feel more comfortableabout the range this year than you felt at any time in the past twoyears anyway.MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, there are these arguments that werepresented yesterday, which I think have a degree of theoreticalvalidity. There were two that I recall: One was that if we get moresavings, we may get more M2 because that's a savings vehicle forindividuals; the second is that if the IRA/Keogh accounts pull moneyout of what is [not] now encompassed in M2, we would get an upwardbias--assuming that we continue to count IRA/Keogh deposits in M2,which is a doubtful proposition. But we'd have the opposite problemof a downward bias if we took [those deposits] out. I was thinkingabout that just last night and maybe somebody can confirm my off-handjudgment that either of those events would involve literally tenths[of a percentage point] because we're not talking about the wholeincrease in IRA/Keogh but only about the part pulled out of marketinstruments and into M2. If the saving rate went up 1 percentagepoint, let's say, it doesn't mean a one percentage point increase inM2 [growth] by the wildest stretch. The saving rate is first of allcalculated against disposable income, which is much lower than GNP. Aone percentage point increase in the saving rate isn't one percentagepoint against GNP, which is where we are measuring this. And it's notall going to go into M2-type deposits. It can go into housing equity2/1-2/82or into many other things. So, I think we're talking about tenths ineither of those things, although they probably work in that directionand they're theoretically correct observations as near as I can see.But it has struck me that they are not the kind of thing--and I'm justgetting a staff comment on this--that would have a really large impacton M2, although, if they happen, they would tend to go in thatdirection. I don't know if there is any equally clear offset. Onecould argue that on technical grounds, but we'd be arguing about anadjustment in the nature of 1/2 percent or something of that kind toallow for those things. That is my feel for it, but I don't knowwhether the staff has any other view. Of course, the staff made anestimate. I don't know to what extent you consciously took thesethings into account.MR. AXILROD. Not very consciously at all, Mr. Chairman. Idon't know what one would say. One percent on M1 is about $18billion, which is probably as reasonable an estimate as one might makeif you consider 10 million people at a $2,000 maximum per person.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we're not going to get that. Idon't know what your estimate is for IRA/Keogh deposits, but certainlya large proportion of what goes into IRAs and Keoghs already wouldhave been in M2 anyway.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. I'm saying as an upperlimit I would think 1 percentage point is not unreasonable. So, itwould be small in practice.MR. PARTEE. The saving rate could be more influentialbecause presumably this would be money that otherwise would have beengoing into consumption. I don't know what a 1 percentage pointincrease in the saving rate would be--MR. CORRIGAN. $25 billion?MR. GRAMLEY. It would be about $20 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but how much of that would appear inM2?MR. PARTEE. Most of it. I should think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why?MR. PARTEE. Well, you said more equity in housing. Thatseems to me extremely unlikely this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People just don't borrow. We know onething, which is that borrowing is going to be low in that area. I'mnot sure I've thought this all through, but I think the major changethere is how much new mortgage [financing] somebody puts on inexchanging houses and so forth.MR. PARTEE. Housing is nonexistent.MR. FORD. That's one way it would show up, but I would-79-2/1-2/82MR. PARTEE. But housing is not a personal consumptionexpenditure. Housing investment is an investment expenditure, not aconsumption expenditure.MR. FORD. That's not what he's talking about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When one increases the equity in one'shouse, it shows up in the saving rate, right?MS. TEETERS. We're not adding housing next year anyway whenwe have a 17 percent mortgage rate, so why worry about it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I'm saying. I don'tthink this is a year in which people are going to be consuming byborrowing on mortgages and in effect running down the equity in theirhouses and building up consumption. They're going to be paying offthose mortgages because they're stuck with them. And that shows upwith an increased saving rate, I think. Right, Mr. Zeisel?MR. ZEISEL. We were involved [in a side conversation] here.The answer, I think, is yes. If people don't spend money onconsumption items, it shows up in the saving rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the form in which that savings islodged if one is paying off mortgage debt? It's a decline inindebtedness rather than an increase in--MR. PARTEE. I think that's true. As Jerry said, if onetakes cash income and pays off mortgage debt, then obviously that cashincome isn't used to consume and, therefore, it raises the savingrate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I'm saying it's not unlikely thatthat's going to happen because ordinarily we get some new borrowing,which people in effect can use for consumption. This year we're notgoing to get the new borrowing side of the equation.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we really didn't have it last yeareither.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MR. PARTEE. We didn't have any.MR. GRAMLEY. The issue is that if there's some deliberatedecision to consume less and save more, the logical disposition of theproceeds is to pay off debt or increase financial asset holdings. AndI would think that for the average homeowner who has a mortgage wellbelow 16 or 17 percent or whatever he could earn on money marketmutual funds, he's not going to pay off his debt, he's going to add tofinancial assets. So, the counterpart of the consumer balance sheetwould be an increase in financial asset holdings and it would likelygo into M2--not the whole thing, but maybe 3/4 of [it].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some portion of it. We're just talkingabout the magnitude of this effect.-80-2/1-2/82MR. GRAMLEY. It seems to me that the bigger [issue withrespect to] what we want to do with M2 is not the fact that we have anadditional bias or lack thereof this year relative to last year butthat last year we were well over the upper end, or several tenthsover. If what we want is an increase in nominal GNP of, let us say,between 8 and 9 percent, then we ought to be choosing a range for M2,given the recent velocity figures, that has a midpoint between 8 and 9percent. And if we put out another 6 to 9 percent range, particularlyif, as I hope, we will be giving increased stress to M2 this yearrelative to M1, then we would be aiming almost certainly at a targetthat we will tend to violate on the up side unless we're not going toget that kind of economic performance.MR. PARTEE. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are to the presentationalquestion: Is it worth it? If we were going to aim at the midpoint asyou say, does that follow the record? I don't think that's the way itwill be interpreted because people see that growth has been around thetop of the range. And it just looks as if we're raising the target.I think we would have to say that we expect [M2 growth] to be towardor at the upper end of that range. I have no problem with thatbecause it has been there for three years.MS. TEETERS. But we used [the upper end] at least once as aconstraint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying we wouldn't use it as aconstraint again. I'm not saying we will ignore M2. The relevantissue is where it becomes a constraint. I'm saying a constraint issomeplace in the neighborhood of 9 percent. I'm not saying it's aconstraint at the logical midpoint, which is 7-1/2 percent. I'm notsaying that. And then we have a presentational problem.MR. PARTEE. I would emphasize the incremental possibilitiesmore than Lyle would. I think M2 has about an even velocity, whichwould suggest 8-1/2 percent. But then there probably is a bias on theside of getting a little larger increase. So, I think it's verypossible that we will be over 9 percent this year. Now, if you say tome that you don't care if it's over by a few tenths, because it wasover by a few tenths last year and the year before, then you'retelling me that it's not a binding range. And then I don't care wherewe put it; we can put it at 3 to 5 percent or whatever!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not saying that. There's adifference between being at 9.3 percent and being at 10.5 percent.That is a difference.MS. TEETERS. Not if the range goes up to 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. If the range goes up to 10 percent, Ithink it will be read that 10.5 percent [growth] is okay. And that'sthe issue. Obviously, we can we raise the range and say cross ourhearts, hope to die, we're going to stay in it; we won't be [above]it. That's the alternative.MR. BALLES. I'll vote for that.-81-2/1-2/82MR. WALLICH. M2 is very hard to control in a direct sense;we can control it by controlling GNP essentially. Savings is afunction of GNP and in that sense, if we get a good M2, we have done agood job on GNP. But I would not get too firmly ensconced on an M2target precisely for that reason.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Given the imprecision of the numbers,it seems to me that we all ought to agree with the general propositionthat we are doing our job well if we come in anywhere within theranges. We should not give the impression that we are aiming formidpoints.MR. PARTEE. I agree with that.SPEAKER(?). I agree.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Therefore, I think there is aconsiderable disadvantage in raising the range for M2 because then [itwould seem that] what we are really trying to do is to come in closerto the midpoint and we would be disturbed with coming in around theupper end of the range. So, in addition to the staff predictions thatwe probably will be more comfortable with the M2 range this year thanin the previous two years, it seems to me that there is a prettystrong case for not raising the M2 range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we elaborate any more on M2, let mejust complete my story and go back to the [presentation] problem. AsI said earlier. I would feel very uncomfortable with this M1 target ifI thought that this bulge were semi-permanently built in. I do nothave the evidence for that now, but if we just go ahead with ourtargets on the same base, I would be inclined to say--and it is not avery easy thing to say and get it just right--that if it turned outthat this bulge more or less stayed in, this Committee would beprepared to review that target rather promptly, particularly in termsof this basing problem that we have. And we would report back evenbefore the normal midyear review if we have sufficient evidence thatthis is a more permanent kind of--MR. PARTEE. Shift in [demand].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A shift that we did not anticipate. Withthe passage of, say, a couple of months, one way of looking at itwould be that on balance we would conclude that coming up to lastyear's target range right at the end of the year was a more meaningful[event] than the earlier declines, in terms of the basic outlookregarding the need for money. I'd just lay that out on the table andsay that if that is the kind of evidence we get in the ensuing coupleof months, we are prepared to review that target. We are not makingthat assumption with regard to the target right now, and that is whywe are sticking with the convention.Now, one thing we could do is to delay the testimony; itwould give us three more weeks and maybe we would have a little moreevidence one way or another. I guess everybody would feel morecomfortable if [M1 in] those next three weeks showed a decline; thenthis target would look much more reasonable. If it showed no declineover those three weeks, I would feel more uncomfortable with it than Ido today. We still would not know. It might decline in March,2/1-2/82 -83-obviously, but I would have substantially more uneasy feelings that weare too low on the range. So, we could play around for another threeweeks before making a judgment if you thought that added something.But the alternative--this is just the way I feel--is to go ahead onthe present schedule but just say reasonably clearly that this is ourfeeling at the time based upon a feeling that there is a temporaryelement in that figure and that it does not reflect a lasting[phenomenon]. I don't think I would use the term "shift in demand"but some English that reflected that. And I'd say that if it does notwash out with the degree of pressure in effect that we judge is rightin the market, we would sense that something more fundamental is goingon here, which would suggest that we may be using the wrong base forthis year's target. And we would be prepared, as I said, to reportthat.MS. TEETERS. Does no one share my concern that the forecastis too low? If all our temporary problems get [unintelligible] inessence that we are negating the President's program. I find myselfin the odd position of being the only supporter of President Reagan inthe room here. Basically, [the staff is] projecting a major continuedrecession at very low rates of [activity]. And the overall policy maybe too tight. Whether we have problems with the base or any of therest of it, we are just making monetary policy too restrictive to getthe sort of recovery that I think all of us want.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, these questions areinterrelated, and you raise the issue in a more fundamental way. Letme just say that, mechanically, the impact of changing the base isjust a little over a 1 percentage point [increase] in the targets. Interms of the end of the year, the contour is different than raisingthe target, but mechanically it gives us the result of being up 1percent at the end of the year, because we are up 1 percent at thebeginning of the year and it just carries through.MR. ROOS. If Mr. Meese's comment this morning that thePresident would want to consult with you turns out to be meaningful,would that have any effect on the timing or on any aspect of thisscenario that you are talking about?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I do not know. I did not hear him,and I do not know what to answer to that question.MR. FORD. He said--I saw him--that he is going to beconsulting with you very shortly.MR. PARTEE. Who, Meese?MR. FORD. Yes, on the Today show, I think it was.MR. ROOS. I just meant could that have an effect on yourtiming in--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the timing question, you seem tofeel that there are no disadvantages, particularly, in delaying forthree weeks.2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, there is a disadvantage in that wewould have to change something that has been announced. I think thatis a disadvantage.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see. I just wanted to be sure.MS. TEETERS. I think there is a disadvantage in going [totestify] as early as the 10th because [Congress] might come back andsay that we did not give a proper evaluation of [the Administration's]economic policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not think that is the excuse we woulduse.MS. TEETERS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure how credible it is becausethey assume we know what it is anyway.MR. GRAMLEY. When you say that something would have to bechanged that was announced, are you talking about the date of yourtestimony?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. Or the decision itself?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the date of my [testimony].MR. GRAMLEY. Allegedly, no one knows that we are making adecision on long-run targets today. That is always a big deep secretthat is reported in the newspapers, but no one really knows for sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am saying that if we delayed thetestimony, what I would do is attempt to arrive at a very cleartentative decision today but we would then confirm it [later].MR. GRAMLEY. So there would not be any question of a leakbecause we would not have made any final decisions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right; we would not have made thefinal decision.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It is worth pointing out on the otherside that there is an advantage in testifying on the scheduled daybecause then we would begin to accustom the committee, the Congress,and the public [to the idea] that we are willing, when there aretechnical or structural shifts, to be more flexible on midyear--or Ishould say intra-year--adjustments. If we wait the three weeks thenyou are somewhat less likely to put forward that point of view. So,it seems to me that there are arguments on both sides.MR. PARTEE. I agree with that.MS. TEETERS. We have been so flexible!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have not. And that is why weshould begin, when we have a good reason to support it such as when2/1-2/82these technological changes and innovations result in shifts, to getpeople accustomed to our being flexible within the year.MS. TEETERS. I learned 25 years ago that monetary policy wasa flexible policy instrument, and we have been rigid for 2-1/2 yearsnow, which is ridiculous.MR. SCHULTZ. The world is a little different than it was 25years ago.MS. TEETERS. No, not that different.MR. SCHULTZ. But I do agree very much with Tony Solomon thatif indeed we do want to be a bit more flexible in the future, then theway to do it is to go ahead and testify--we have the best opportunitywe are ever going to have--along the lines that the Chairman has justput forth.MR. GRAMLEY. The counterargument is that if we are notwilling to be flexible from July to early February, what makes anyonethink that suddenly we are going to resolve to be flexible between nowand, let's say, March?MR. SCHULTZ. Because we say so. We say it and that doesnot--MR. GRAMLEY. If we can agree that we are going to beflexible, let us start flexing. Let's not postpone this by notifyingthe public that we are flexible.MR. ROOS. Of course, certain market participants areallegedly upset because we have been flexible--if you want to use thatword--or volatile. They say that we have not really been able tostick with, on a rather inflexible basis, a set program. One can lookat it either way. Does the press know the date that you are presentlyscheduled [to testify]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presume they must. I do not think thereis much public discussion, but--SPEAKER(?). They may not.MR. ROOS. Because there could be dangers in misinterpretinga delay as--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they must know about it. I assumethat if we change the date, it will be known that we have changed it.MR. COYNE. Yes, they do.MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, what do you think couldreally happen between now and the next few weeks that would cause anytentative decisions today on ranges for the whole year to be changed?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to give an extreme view: If I saw acontinuing tendency for the money supply to rise despite the actionsthat we have taken to reverse it. It is hard to predict everythingelse that could go on, but if I see no sign of liveliness in the2/1-2/82economy and we have rising interest rates and a rising money supplyover the next three weeks, I'd be ready to change.SEVERAL. Which way?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would rebase.MR. PARTEE. You would add the 1.2 percent that rebases it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right.MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems to me that if one is uncertainand later may have to say that we need flexibility because things haveturned out differently, then one would strengthen one's position byshowing this uncertainty a little earlier rather than coming in[firmly] early and then having to backtrack. I think we would have aharder time making that change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not saying that. If we go aheadright now and I testify on the 10th and then the same thing happensthat I have just described, I wouldn't change it right then. I wouldwait another month or so, having already been on record, before Iwould make the change. But I might be prepared to make it if we hadannounced nothing at that point.Let me just say, too, that there was some comment yesterdayabout rebasing being hard to explain. I do not think it is at allhard to explain. The explanation just flows as smooth as silk. Ormaybe I am overestimating my capacities to explain. But I distinguishthat very sharply from the market reactions and suspicions we wouldget. They would understand what we are doing; I do not think there isany problem with that. And we do have a logical explanation for it.That does not mean that there are not going to be people in the marketwho will say that we used this particular technique in order to ease[policy]. That is what they would say, but they would understand.MR. BALLES. Have we ever rebased before? I am trying torecall.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, that is the problem.MR. MORRIS. We have always had overshoots in the past.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But this has always been discussed as apossibility and then we have not done it. So it is not a new concept.MR. BALLES. It is not a good idea.MR. GRAMLEY. Look, how many times have we been accused ofbase drift? We hear "You people always have base drift," to which weare going to say now "By Jove, no more!"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The criticism that we would get is that wedid not adjust for the base drift when we had it on the up side butnow when we have it on the down side we are adjusting for it.SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible] be the other way.2/1-2/82 -87-MR. FORD. That is right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is not that they would not understand;it is that they would say there is a bias.MR. FORD. They would say it is a one-way deal and we arefaking it. It comes across as being dishonest.MR. CORRIGAN. This is a reversal of Nancy's problem.SPEAKER(?). Imagery.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some people will say dishonest, but theexplanation is--MR. PARTEE. Visually.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When we set these targets, we say weexpect [growth] to come in around the bottom of the [range]. We justsay we would like to be around the bottom and that's what we'reassuming. That is what we assumed when we set the target and we didnot change our mind. That is what we say.MR. FORD. Well, of the two approaches you have described, Iwould very strongly prefer the one you described when you startedtalking a few minutes ago of implicitly leaving the base unchanged theway we have been doing and taking the hit on the [range]. Then, if weneed to come back, I'd overtly state what we are doing, which is thatwe have decided for good and sufficient reasons to raise the band.I'd be up front with [it].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even there, my inclination would not be toraise the band. It would be to change the base and say we think weare operating off the wrong base.MR. FORD. Well, I would say change the band. We would bedoing the same thing either way. It is just a question of which is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it is [the same]. That ismy point. If we raise the band, we are saying that from now on wewant a higher growth rate. If we change the base, we are saying we donot want a higher growth rate from now on; we have forgiven whathappened. I think that is saying two different things.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MS. TEETERS. It comes to the same thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It comes to the same thing for the numberat the end of this year.MS. TEETERS. That is right. And either way it is an easingof monetary policy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is a difference in theimplication for 1983.MR. GRAMLEY. That is the important point.2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is right. It is theimplication for the trend that we are on, not the--MR. GRAMLEY. Only the expansionists want to change therange.MR. FORD. It is not going to do much for our credibility.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. After all, the short-run decisionthat we just made early this morning does logically lead to what Paulsaid. I don't think it will happen, but if we find that the moneysupply is strong in February, then we have to do something to giveourselves more room. As I say, I don't think that is going to happen,but it does seem to me that we are better off sticking with thescheduled date for testimony and going on record and preparing peoplethe way you indicated. I would point out that the uncertainty alsoexists because of the question of whether the innovations that we sawin 1981, which tended to depress demand, will continue in 1982. Thereis uncertainty not simply on the up side but also on the down side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To exaggerate a bit, it may be that whatthe Federal Reserve Board does on sweep accounts for money marketfunds and what the DIDC does on a new short-term instrument may havemore to do with what M1 does this year than any decision we make.SPEAKER(?). Sure.SPEAKER(?). I would second that.MR. GRAMLEY. Unfortunately, if we are not careful, we willend up with targets so low that we really have no option as aregulatory body but to permit sweep accounts to save the economy! Iam not entirely joking. I just don't think that we can possibly haveanything like a well performing economy unless two things happen: Oneis that this bulge proves to be very temporary; and the second is thatwe have more innovations that are pushing down the money demandfunction. That is built into the staff forecast. And if both ofthose do not come along, we are going to be in tough shape.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There has been an element of that in ourtargets right along, because that kind of change has led to thispersisting increase in velocity. And we are assuming it is going tocontinue.MS. TEETERS. Have you thought through the implication ofthese interest rates for the savings and loans institutions? [Theirrepresentatives] were here the other day asking us if we weredeliberately putting them out of business. And I would say that, yes,we are deliberately putting them out of business.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I want to reject that. I think theimplications for savings and loans are very important, but it is notall that clear--I will join Mr. Roos to some extent here--whether thesavings and loans would be better off by greater or lesser expansionin the money supply and what that means for interest rates over aperiod of time. That is a dilemma we are fighting all the time. Ifwe literally believe the savings and loans that it takes a bill rateof 8 or 9 percent to save them--I do not know about that but we will2/1-2/82have to redo these estimates--then the only way to save them is byputting the economy in a real--MR. PARTEE. Well, it is a question of how many we want tosave. I think then--MS. TEETERS. Or how many we want to put out of business.MR. PARTEE. I think we may lose another few hundred as aresult of policy, but we would not lose them all. On the other hand,I cannot think of any way we could save them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [How to] save them, that is the problem.SPEAKER(?). When the FDIC--MR. PARTEE. I would say they are one of the many casualtiesof monetary policy, but we did not intend it.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I'm not sure I agree with that either. Istill contend that long-term interest rates are the key. And they arenot going to come down until the deficit comes down. I think GovernorGramley is making the assumption that we by monetary policy are goingto make these changes in what happens to the economy. I do not happento believe that that is the case because if we give up, then theinflation problem is just going to explode again and the economy willbe in terrible shape. We are in a box. I do not think we have theopportunity to move. We have to stay where we are and do our job. Wecannot control the economy; we cannot control what the Administrationdoes. You say, [Nancy], that you are supporting the President. Itseems to me that the President has to support his program, which he isnot doing right now.MS. TEETERS. But he is.MR. PARTEE. Well, I do not think the key to the thrifts islong rates; I think it is short rates. But in general I agree withwhat you have said.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make one other rather psychologicalobservation: Bill Ford raised it yesterday. If we are going to rebase--and I do not think we would do this--it would look nicer if werebased both M2 and M3. M2 does not make that much difference, but ithappens to go in a direction that a lot of people are uneasy aboutanyway. It is only what--a .4 difference? That is not terriblyimportant; it would not be important except for the concern ofovershooting there anyway. And since that concern exists, it isimportant. That would make it more logical in some sense.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But then we would tighten the M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, slightly.MR. PARTEE. But we are talking about liberalizing the M2range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know; that is what I am saying. Peopleare concerned about whether it is too tight to start with, so it runs2/1-2/82against that grain. And that is why we presumably would not do iteven though it looks better.MS. TEETERS. We could rebase the top.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we would rebase at the top of therange; that is what to do. But even rebasing at the top of the rangecosts .4 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we offset the tightening byraising the M2 range--MR. PARTEE. Because we were above the range.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --and we rebase M1, we are in realdanger of getting a major reaction by the market, the press, and thepublic that we are definitely easing monetary policy verysignificantly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will make one more comment and then getsome other comments. All this worry about our credibility is there,but at some point if we think we should change, we have to change. Wedo not build up credibility for the sake of building up morecredibility. We build up credibility to get the flexibility to dowhat we think is necessary. If I were convinced now--more convincedthan I am that this change is appropriate--I would say the heck withthat point. My trouble is that I am not convinced [the bulge] isgoing to stay. And if we rebase and then find [M1] falling on us, wewould have [allowed for] quite a lot of growth--too much in myjudgment--between now and the end of the year. We would have apossibility of growth of a little over 6-1/2 percent, which seems alittle too much to me, if M1 declines [and the bulge is washed out].And since I think there is a good chance it will decline, I would hateto present that now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I am saying--I think you aremisunderstanding me--is that I think we could get away with rebasingM1. But to rebase M2 and then offset it by raising the target rangeanother 1/2 point I think is overkill.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I agree with you on that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We are better off, if we are forcedinto rebasing M1, not to rebase M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I agree.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And there are some arguments on whyit does not have to be symmetrical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not disagree with that.MR. SCHULTZ. I disagree with your comments on credibility.I think there is an enormous sense out there that we are still theonly game in town in the fight against inflation. If we do somethingto change that, we are going to do something very important. To methat credibility question is really critical. We are right back inthe situation we have been in before, particularly now that the2/1-2/82President will not do anything about the deficits. We are in thisuncomfortable, improper, nasty situation that we have to deal with,which is that the central bank of the United States has far moreresponsibility than it ought to have. But the fact of the matter isthat we have it because of the way the political system works. Andthis credibility question is just absolutely vital. We have not yetchanged those inflation expectations because everybody thinks that weare going to cave in to the political pressure that is going to be onus. They do not understand all these nuances about demand shifts andlinkages and all this other stuff; all they see is that the Fed is theonly inflation fighter we have in the country. If we give anindication that we are caving in and if we start making some changes,there are some really serious costs in terms of credibility, Paul. Ithink that credibility factor is more important than you just gave itcredit for.MR. WALLICH. The central banks that have the mostcredibility, such as the Swiss National Bank and the Bundesbank, arepretty relaxed with respect to their targets. Sometimes one of themeven abandons its targets. And yet they do not lose credibilitybecause there is that basic belief that they will achieve betterstability.MS. TEETERS. More people perceive that we have 15-1/2percent interest rates and 17 percent mortgage rates than whether weare [fostering growth of] the money supply at 1 percent or 2 percentor 3 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The trouble is that everything we sayhere is true.MS. TEETERS. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even when we say different things.MR. MORRIS. Fred Schultz's comments suggest that we shouldnot make a change unless it is clear that if we don't, we are going tobe following a policy that we really do not believe in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I believe that.MR. MORRIS. That would lead to not making a change untilmidyear. If we find that we have to, fine, we ought to change thetargets at midyear.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, it could be earlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon how things go, but I couldwell see circumstances where we would want to do it before midyear.MR. MORRIS. Well, that could be.MR. ROOS. You will be subjected, I am sure, to furtherquestioning about our procedures and whether we just assume that weare doing this in the most satisfactory way, technique wise. That iswhere we are going to get some flak, I think. I assume that nobodyaround this table really would welcome or advocate any major changes,such as targeting on total reserves or taking the step that we have-91-2/1-2/82heard over and over again, which is going to contemporaneous reserveaccounting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the contemporaneous reserveaccounting issue is going to be on our desks very quickly. I willtell you my view of contemporaneous reserve accounting very simply. Ido not think it is going to make a lot of difference in and of itself.There is a certain logic in doing it. And if we were living onNeptune, I would do it because I think there is a certain logic justin terms of being consistent with our present techniques. My concernis that people will read into it more than it is worth and we wouldget more flak rather than less. But that is a psychological point andnot a technical point. They will say: "Now that you havecontemporaneous reserve accounting why isn't everything perfect?" Andsince I do not think it is going to change things very much, we mayend up even more on the defensive. Now, that may not be persuasive asa reason for not doing it because just looked at as a purely technicalmatter it may well be desirable but marginal. So, my main concern indoing it is only that it will get over-interpreted. If we do that andcombine it with some other things, such as closing up the discountwindow, that would be an entirely different kettle of fish. I am justprepared to argue against that.MR. PARTEE. Well, at least change the conditions [for accessto the discount window]. We do not let them close it altogether.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To make it very much tighter. Yes,obviously, it is [an] extreme view to say close it altogether.MS. TEETERS. I would say to Larry Roos that having gone tothe reserve targeting and monetary aggregates targeting with a greatdeal of reluctance and skepticism, and having all the troubles andcriticism that we have had, I am getting more and more to the pointthat I do not think it is the right way to [conduct policy]. We oughtto be moving back toward interest rate targeting combined withaggregates targeting, knowing that we are not going to achieve eitherperfectly, but we would have a better monetary policy than we have hadand a better economy. We have bounced this economy all over the matfor three years with no growth.MR. ROOS. Of course, Nancy, what disturbs me--and I say thiswith humility--is that I fear that what is being done may not producethe results we sought. Procedurally, I don't think we really aredoing what ought to be done to conduct monetary policy in the way thatthose who wanted to target on reserve targets had sought initially.What I think will happen in the real world--I am not going to bearound--is that this will not work. And everybody, broad-brush, willsay that the monetarist approach failed when I really do not thinkthat we have conducted a true monetaristic experiment here. But wecould argue that for forever and a day.MS. TEETERS. I have a much more practical point. I do notlike what we have done to the economy in the past three years. I donot like 9 percent unemployment rates and I do not like interest ratesin the 17 to 20 percent range.MR. ROOS. But, Nancy, I think a lot of people could say theydid not like what happened when we were concentrating on controlling2/1-2/82interest rates. That record is a very poor one and probably led tothese high rates. Anyway, I do not mean to be cantankerous.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we are not going to resolve thatproblem this morning.Let me just put this question on the table and dispose of itone way or another: Do we want to try to delay the testimony anddelay the decision? Do people think that is going to help them enoughso that it is worth whatever public question that arouses?MR. BOYKIN. I vote no.SEVERAL. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Let us dispose of that optionthen. We are left with making a decision today, essentially. What Iwould put on the table is what I said earlier--we can skip to thefine-tuning--that the basic decision would be to keep the targets thesame as we already said, or very close to that, with a statement thatwe are prepared to relook at this, particularly M1. in the relativelynear-term future, meaning probably a couple of months, in the light ofthe concerns I expressed.MR. CORRIGAN. With it being clear that if something were tochange, we would be making the base adjustment?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We do not actually have to commitourselves to that, but I would throw that out as the logicalpossibility without committing us to it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You would do it in an even-handed wayin the sense that you would mention the possibility of a shift indemand due to the innovations and to technology? If so,--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would not do it in an even-handedway in that I do not visualize any possibility that I would say wewould come back in two months and lower the [ranges].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand that. But youwould mention that there is this--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would distinguish between twothings. In describing the range, I would say that the lower part ofthe range is basically designed to take care of the innovations thatmight appear and that we would not be at all unhappy, as we now seethings, to be in the upper part of the M1 range and, indeed, we wouldexpect to be toward the upper part of the M2 range. Okay, thatfinishes that discussion. Then I would go on to say that if this[bulge] in M1 is more permanent than we think, we would come back toCongress with a new M1 range--presumably rebased, but not committingourselves to that--in the space of a couple of months. If it becameclear on the basis of the evidence that accumulated over this period,that the November-December-January spurt was more indicative of theunderlying demand relationship than the August, September, and Octoberlow levels--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would vote yes.-93-2/1-2/82MR. BOYKIN. I would be in agreement with that, providedthat--. Well, you said something about the ranges as specified orclose to it. Do you mean as specified?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am leaving that question until weget to the precise part. I presume we are going to have a [detaileddiscussion] on exactly what those numbers will be, so I am justtalking generally about something the same as or very like what wehave. That is the next thing I will take up.MR. BALLES. I would be concerned, Mr. Chairman, about theboomerang effects of creating that [specter] of further possiblechange and all the uncertainty that may [foster]. The Fed watcherswill be going right up the wall and looking at us every minute insteadof every hour. If, when we first talk about those ranges, we say theymay be subject to near-term change, somehow that does not strike me asa very stabilizing influence in terms of expectations.MR. PARTEE. I do not think we are saying that the rangewould be subject to change, John. What we would do is rebase therange. In a way we would consider January a part of last year to adegree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is a--MR. WALLICH. We have rebased every year through base driftonly we do it nondeliberately rather than in this way.MR. MORRIS. Using the Federal Reserve calendar rather thanthe standard calendar!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whatever we say other than thatthese are the ranges and come hell or high water we are going to bewithin them, we are going to raise some questions in some people'sminds. There is no question that people will be talking about it, fortwo weeks anyway, if we say anything but that. But the problem is:Do we want to say that? We also may get ourselves in so deep that wecan never change the darn things and we may be doing thingssubstantively that we do not want to do. So, we have to balance thatoff. The fact is that there are going to be a lot of people out therewho would heave a sigh of relief if we said that, because a lot ofpeople think policy is too tight.MR. GRAMLEY. May I question what it is we are assuming aboutthe behavior of M1 from here on out which would give rise to a changein the targets? Do we, for example, decide that if what we have votedon this morning for our short-run targets materializes, which wouldget us essentially zero growth between now and March, that we canbreathe a big sigh of relief and live within our targets? Making somevery rough calculations, that seems to me to imply at most a 3 percentannual rate of growth from March on out to get within the upper limitof the range. So, are we going to say then that we made it and now wecan supply 3 percent money growth and that will be enough?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that depends on what has happened.You cannot just give me the figure on money growth. What is happeningin the markets? What is happening in the economy?-94-2/1-2/82MR. GRAMLEY. Well, let's say the economy begins to showsigns of a modest recovery along the lines that the staff hasforecast. But the staff forecast was built on the assumption thatthere was going to be a big drop in M1 during the course of the firstquarter. Given the policy targets that we set this morning, we aresaying that is not happening; we are saying it is going to stay level.So, from March on we are going to be applying a tighter monetarypolicy than was built into the forecast, which means that if we wantto stay within the range, we will be opting for a weaker economy. Dowe want less than 1.3 percent real growth from the fourth quarter tothe fourth quarter?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I cannot answer your question precisely.But if you say zero growth from now on and that is accompanied byinterest rates as high as we have them now and a weak economy, yes, Iwould question whether we might not want to ease up on the range. Iwould begin getting pushed on that. I already have the question, andI would have more questions then.MR. GRAMLEY. I would opt to wait a couple of weeks, if Ithought I could get anyone else to go along with me, on loosening thereins. But I doubt very much--no matter what happens over the nexttwo weeks--that this Committee is going to be willing to loosen up theranges. Maybe they are, but I suspect that your suggestion has appealbecause I do not think this Committee realizes yet how harsh amonetary policy it is imposing on the economy with the kind of targetswe are looking at now, given what I think is going to happen to money.Maybe we will be lucky and money growth will turn negative and we willhave a lot of room from then on. But I doubt it. So, I think we arelooking at a situation, if we are not awfully careful and if we do notstay really flexible, where we are going to be opting for a stillworse economy than what the staff is forecasting.MR. AXILROD. Governor Gramley, if I might say, believable ornot, the staff forecast is based on the scenario you described--thatis, virtually no growth in money over the next couple of months andthen three quarters of growth averaging 1.3 or 1.4 percent quarterly.And as you have pointed out, that requires, if you believe the models,a resumption of the downward drift in so-called money demands afterthis quarter at a rate almost as rapid, but not quite, as we had allof last year. So, if that does not develop, then we would get muchhigher interest rates, at least in the short run.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is certainly true in your assumptionof velocity. But let me put it the other way around. If I understandthose staff forecasts as best judgments, if in fact we sat here nowand said we were content with being in the upper part of that M1range, we would have a better business outlook than you have.MR. AXILROD. That is right, on that assumption of a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With all the other assumptions you aremaking. And that is reflected in these alternatives that you give.It is scenario 2 instead of scenario 1. We would get a 1 percent orwhatever it is higher nominal GNP.MR. AXILROD. That is right, but with some further downwardshifts in [unintelligible].-95-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know. That assumption may gowrong, but just holding that assumption.MR. CORRIGAN. But if we have Governor Gramley's situationnow and we did end up rebasing, say, in March or something like that,the combination of rebasing and being in the upper part of that M1range produces a couple of percentage points at least in terms of themoney growth that is implied just by looking at the midpoint for theperiod from March through December.MR. BLACK. Well, we must not forget that that forecastimplies a certain assumption about inflation. If we are lucky enoughto do better on that, we can do still more on the real side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you were going to say if we areunlucky enough to do worse, we would have a bigger problem.MR. BLACK. Well, I agree with that too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Both statements are true.MR. BLACK. Expectations of which way that will go depend onwhat we decide to do, presumably.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At the risk of being mischievous, mayI point out that this process or line of presentation--namely, gettinga decision sequentially on this particular issue--[may prejudice thedecision]. You are asking for a decision on that and saying that youare going to inform the [Congressional] committee and prepare theground that under these conditions we might be willing to make anadjustment and that it would be logical to do it in the form ofrebasing. If you get an affirmative decision from this Committee nowon that and then go on to ask if we should fine-tune on the targetranges, then the answer I think becomes clearly no. We will looksilly, it seems to me, if we make minor adjustments in M1 or M2 even,and then on top of that say we are prepared to take another look atthis and do some rebasing. So, if you do not want to prejudice thedecision on the last point, it seems to me that you really have to askfor a decision on both.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will get to it in good time.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see. I am just pointing out whereit logically leads.MR. PARTEE. Well, we are only talking about rebasing M1, Ibelieve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think so, yes.MR. GRAMLEY. I wonder how we lose credibility the fastest:By saying, in effect, that we are going to go back to the base we hadfor the fourth quarter of 1980 and use the same target range that wehad for 1981 and now a lower target range for M1 for 1982, explainingin the footnotes what the numbers are; or by going out in March orApril or thereabouts and saying we give up, money is running too fastand we cannot hold it within those targets, so we are going to raisethem and retroactively change the base. My feeling is that we are2/1-2/82less likely to upset the public and give rise to those concerns FredSchultz was talking about, if we tell them right now that money growthvery recently has been rapid but the fourth quarter was very, very lowand, therefore, we are taking a longer-range point of view and stillreducing the growth of M1 but basing it from the fourth quarter of1980. I think we could sell that point of view.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think we could sell it. Theproblem is that it may be the wrong decision. We would have committedourselves, then, to the decision. I have no problem with that if this[bulge] is going to be semi-permanent. But suppose it does wash outin February and March? Then I think we have too high a target.MR. GRAMLEY. With 2-1/2 percent as the lower end?MS. TEETERS. With 9 percent unemployed?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People would be looking at the upper ends.MR. GRAMLEY. Taking the 1.2 percent or so that we areraising it by the implied base shift, then we are talking about 3.7percent growth in M1 after this shift. And that is not likely to giverise to a new wave of inflation.MR. ROOS. Whatever adjustment is made in March or April,especially if you have a meeting with the President, anything that canbe construed as being more expansionary at that time of the year willbe interpreted immediately as the Fed caving in to political pressurein view of the November elections. They are going to be watching us.The question I hear is: Are you fellows going to be able to stand theheat from the politicians during an election year? And I think wehave to be awfully careful that we do not fall into that trap and dosomething that may be better but that will be interpreted, in effect,as our climbing into bed with this Administration or any other--MR. SCHULTZ. I think we have that problem right now, Larry.MR. ROOS. Even now I think we do.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think Larry is right: It will be worsein the spring.MR. ROOS. It will be worse in the spring.MR. GRAMLEY. It will be worse if, in fact, the quotationfrom Mr. Meese that Bill Ford mentioned is correct--that the Presidentis going to pull you over for a little conference. We have not heardthat officially yet. We would be better off as a Committee to makeour decisions before that occurs.MR. BALLES. Absolutely.MS. TEETERS. Exactly.MR. BLACK. Did Meese say he or the President?MR. GRAMLEY. I did not see it.2/1-2/82MR. ROOS. It was just a passing remark in which he said hefelt that the President was going to get together with [the FederalReserve Chairman]--MR. GUFFEY. --for the purpose of coordinating monetary andfiscal policy.MR. RICE. It really was not an announcement; it was just apassing remark.MR. BLACK. I thought it was Meese who was going to do thetalking.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It probably is going to happen anyway.Senator Baker has been saying it is going to be done all along. So,there is going to be a natural response to that. I would not readanything more into that than when people like Senator Baker are allover the paper saying it should be done. I see him sometimes anywayand there is going to be a certain amount of hullabaloo about it.MR. SCHULTZ. We have real costs in terms of credibility ifwe change the targets. We ought to change them only if we have good,strong reasons. And I disagree with Larry Roos; I think if we havegood strong reasons to change them, we are better off changing them inMarch or April than right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the problems that Larry mentioned are,of course, there. It just depends upon the setting. If we came outof the clear blue sky and said we are going to change them, that isone thing. If people saw the economy in bad shape, interest rates at18 percent and so on, we have a different setting. It is awfully hardto predict these things.MS. TEETERS. What are the consequences of being--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ordinarily I would agree with you that itis better now. But then, better now in which way?MS. TEETERS. The political consequences of being the solecause of a continuing 9 percent rate of unemployment can be greaterthan anybody is talking about around this table.MR. SCHULTZ. But I do not believe that at all. I just donot believe that the monetary policy that we have carried out has beenthe sole cause or even the primary cause. I think this country was infor some real economic problems. Inflation was just shooting up likecrazy. And I do not think that we can be held responsible for all ofthis. It is clear that if we are going to change inflation, we haveto go through a painful period. There was never an easy way out ofthis. I refuse to accept the view that monetary policy has to takecredit and I do not think it is correct to say that if we changemonetary policy, everything is going to get better all of a sudden. Ijust do not believe that that is going to be the case.SPEAKER(?). Hear, hear!MR. WALLICH. It seems to be a pretty widespread view that itis the budget that is responsible.2/1-2/82MS. TEETERS. Not this year. Our problem is 1983; it is notthis year.MR. WALLICH. I think the market looks ahead; and interestrates went up for no particular reason other than the budget.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me come back and see whether wecan resolve this. We have a proposal on how to present this on thetable. There obviously are pros and cons. There are problems withit, as expressed by Larry Roos and others; they are clearly there.There are also, obviously, some advantages. If we contemplate thatapproach, to some degree it is going to affect how people look at theprecise decision, which I want to get to next. Do we proceed on thebasis of making that decision against that kind of background or not?What is the consensus?MR. PARTEE. What are the options?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The issue is] whether we open thepossibility of coming back at midyear or before and in effect confessthat we have some question in our mind about whether the range is tootight on M1.MR. PARTEE. Or whether we rebase now?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whether we rebase or not, we justexclude that point and we do not express any doubt about our target.That is the only question on that. Then we get into an argument aboutwhether to rebase now or not.MR. ROOS. Paul, would it be possible, without tipping ourhand, to say that we might come back if it were tight? Can't youbuild a case that there are a lot of imponderables and that it may benecessary to change the targets without saying in which direction--just signalling that we are always flexible.MR. PARTEE. Our record shows that.MR. SCHULTZ. We are always flexible; we just haven't flexedyet.MR. WALLICH. We do expose ourselves to [heavy] pressure ifwe say we are flexible. And one has to take that into account. Ireally prefer the flexibility, provided we can resist [the pressure].MR. BALLES. Our problems remind me of a definition Irecently heard of diplomacy: It is usually the choice between theundesirable and the unacceptable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is, I think, precisely where we are.I am just asking for people's judgment on this. One is going to beaffected by the next question, so all we can do is ask for apreliminary view on whether that generally makes sense and whether forthe moment that is the way we want to approach the other decision.MR. GRAMLEY. I am not sure what the other decision is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where the target should be precisely.-99-2/1-2/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are two alternatives: One isrebasing; the other is just to stick with the targets.MS. TEETERS. Or change them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or we can change them. We have threealternatives; that is right. Can we pass on to that decision,operating on the presumption for the moment that there will be in thestatement something to the effect that upon further examination ofthis recent bulge and depending upon developments, we would be willingto consider the possibility that the M1 target might be too low?MR. CORRIGAN. And it would be rebased.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably. I am not committing ourselvesto that, but I would refer to the base question.MR. WALLICH. The target is not too low; the base is toohigh.MR. PARTEE. You want to be pretty specific about it, becausethe way you just stated it, it sounds as if we have flinched.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Well, I just did not want toprejudge the Committee. I am willing to state it as the target, withthe base the [fundamental] question.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that is the analytic argument.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I prefer to rebase now, but I do notthink I have much [support]; not too many people are with me.MS. TEETERS. I would prefer to rebase now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am sure some have that preference,but I take it that it is not the prevailing preference. So, let's goto the targets. We have 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent [for M1], 6 to 9percent [for M2], and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent [for M3]. I must sayregarding that 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent: What is your projection fornext year?MR. AXILROD. For M3? For M3 we would have growth of around9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And there we probably have the clearesttechnical reason for saying something; there's just more [financing]running through the banking system. Why were bank credit and M3 sodivergent this past year?MR. AXILROD. Well, we have in M3 many things that are not inbank credit, such as the money market funds and Eurodollars heldoverseas. I think that is a good part of the reason.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a big differential between M3 andM2, and one would think that that would reflect the banking component.100-2/1-2/82MR. AXILROD. That would be the large CDs, the long-term RPs,and Eurodollars other than overnight--those maturing in more than oneday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I know what it is statistically.Why are large CDs, Eurodollars maturing more than overnight and soforth going up so much more rapidly than bank credit?MR. AXILROD. I stand corrected on the Eurodollars, which arein L.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, there are a number of factorsinvolved here. Arithmetically and I think analytically, one is theway the banks financed their asset growth. It was much more throughthe issuance of large time deposits and much less through Eurodollarborrowings and the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is what I assumed was theanswer, as a matter of fact.MR. PRELL. That is one factor. Another factor--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eurodollar borrowings are not in M3,right?MR. PRELL. That is right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they went down, in effect, or roseslowly. That is the answer, I guess.MR. PRELL. The money market funds are another factorcontributing to the divergence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What are your latest data on L?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have already said this but just to getother responses, assuming what I took as the consensus: The argumentseems to me pretty strong not to horse around with the figures.MR. PARTEE. That is one view. There is a minority--MR. BALLES. Well, some of us had a different view yesterday.I have not changed my mind, but obviously those of us who felt thatway appear to be in a minority.MR. PARTEE. I don't know; there were quite a number on M2, Ithink. I did not distinguish between voting members and otherpresidents.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there was a majority for notchanging it, but there was quite a difference. A number of people didsuggest changing it; that is true. At least five of the whole groupand some [voting members] did not address themselves to it directly.MR. SCHULTZ. Why don't you have a show of hands?-101-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's just take the whole proposition thatwe say we do not change any of the targets. Who would have apreference for that?MR. PARTEE. That we are not going to change anything?MR. ROOS. Voting members or everybody?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's take voting members first.Six. This is all against the background of admitting that we mightchange later. I do not know how the nonvoting members feel about it.That adds a little weight here when we--MR. ROOS. If we went with the present M1 target, would youconsider saying that we would seek something at the upper [end of the]range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I prefer not to say it in terms ofseeking that, which just implies a degree of fine-tuning that I thinkis beyond this. I have no trouble saying that the upper end isperfectly acceptable and that it may well come out that way, as we seethings at the moment. It is just a subtle distinction from saying weactually will aim at the upper end. But I have no problem at allsaying that as we now see things the upper part of that range would beperfectly acceptable. I think the open question may be what argumentspeople want to make for changes and we'll see whether that can commandany more people than we now have. What would be the nature of [anyproposed] change in the ranges for M1 or M2 or M3?MS. TEETERS. Well, I have stated my argument before. I donot like the outlook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want them all higher?MS. TEETERS. I want to change the ranges and I want to givemore opportunity for growth and some opportunity to reduce theunemployment rate, some opportunity to reduce the interest rates, andsome help to the savings and loan and the housing industries.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No matter what we say about the future,you want to increase everything?MS. TEETERS. Yes. I think monetary policy is much too tightfor the state of the economy.MR. GRAMLEY. I would like to argue the case for raising therange for M2. Given the fact that we are postponing any decision onrebasing, changing the range for M1 would make no sense at all. Wewould lose any credibility that we might otherwise hold by stickingwith this postponement. But for M2 the most persuasive case seems tobe the fact that in the past two years growth has been running overthe upper end of the target range. I grant that there may be somearguments to the effect that that problem will be a little less in thefuture. But, as Governor Partee pointed out, we do not know whatthese IRA accounts are going to do to the magnitude of M2; and moreimportantly we do not know what will happen to M2 growth if in fact weget a one point or thereabouts increase in the saving rate. Thatcould add [to M2] considerably. And I would much prefer a target-102-2/1-2/82range that had some realistic hope of being realized within thecontext of a growth in nominal GNP in the 8 to 9 percent range.Therefore, I think a persuasive case could be made for raising the M2range to 7 to 10 percent.MR. BOEHNE. I second Governor Gramley's comment.MR. BALLES. I third it.MR. PARTEE. I fourth it. I think we could [present] this,Paul, as being consistent with the President's program. The Presidentis after more savings and more investment, and we have major changesin tax policy that are designed to bring that about. Therefore, weanticipate that we might have a somewhat higher M2 because that is theform in which it would show up. In addition, we have been high on M2anyway because it is so closely related to the nominal [GNP] increaseand expenditures in the economy and, therefore, we are raising it.MR. MORRIS. Wouldn't it make more sense to take the IRAaccounts out of M2?MR. PARTEE. Well, that is going to be very hard to do I'mafraid. They are in a bunch of different deposit forms. They are notjust in--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to get statistics on it,though.MR. PARTEE. I anticipate real difficulty.MR. MORRIS. But they are not liquid assets. Are you sayingwe cannot identify them?MR. PARTEE. A lot of them are in small saver certificatesand--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We cannot identify them, as I understandit, without collecting more statistics.MR. AXILROD. We will be collecting data to the end ofgetting the aggregate instead of just the various subcomponents thatwe now have.MR. MORRIS. But an IRA is not a liquid asset unless one is59-1/2 years old or older.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a good logical argument fortaking them out. But, of course, then we have the opposite problem.I think one could say flatly that in taking them out there would bemore distortion in the trend--but we could adjust for it--than inleaving them in. But it moves in the opposite direction.MS. TEETERS. I received a solicitation this weekend fromSears to establish an IRA account.MR. PARTEE. That probably would not be in M2. If you wereprepared to say that we would take account of growth in IRAs and Keoghaccounts and any change in the saving rate that occurred in response-103-2/1-2/82to the President's program, then I guess I could live with 6 to 9percent, because I think that would be saying that we would acceptsomething higher than that.MS. TEETERS. How would you feed back the change in thesaving rate?MR. PARTEE. Just take account of it. All we do is concludethat it would be higher if we say--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Chuck's suggestion opens upan interesting area of compromise.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, from my standpoint, I am inclined to givemore explicit weight to M2. I do not regard that as a--MR. PARTEE. It is very fuzzy.MR. GRAMLEY. It is very fuzzy and it says, in effect, thatwe really do not give a damn what M2 does; we are really concentratingon M1. It says: If M2 goes up above the upper end, so what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is an implicit tradeoff in yourproposal, as nearly as I can understand it. You want a little highernumber but you would make it more rigid, in effect, than it has been.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. I would like to pay more attention to M2.I think it is important for us not just to do that internally but tocommunicate that because I believe the volatility of M1 is giving riseto a great deal of misunderstanding--and indeed misunderstanding onour part as to the effects on interest rates and the economy of ourdecisions, which I think is unfortunate. We have to be more tranquilabout these short-run movements in M1. And if we do not develop thatattitude ourselves, we are going to be building increasing problemsfor the future.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know; frankly, I am very troubled atthe prospect of opening up this rebasing issue and changing the M2target. I think Governor Schultz is right on the mark on thisquestion. The issue, as Governor Teeters suggests, is gettingunemployment down and all the rest, but not for a quarter or two. Theissue in some sense is trying to be supportive of a sound approach tofiscal policy. But we are sitting here looking at a fiscal situationthat is just untenable. And one of the concerns I have--and maybe itis tilting at our windmills a little--is that if the perception isthat we really are easing, any prospect of being able to do better onthe fiscal side is weakened as well because that creates theimpression that we are going to sit here and monetize all that debt.I am under no illusion that we are going to have a magic wand comeover fiscal policy in the next six months; but if we are perceived aseasing, I think fiscal policy will go in the direction of further easerather than the other way around. So, I must say I would be troubledat the prospect of doing both of these things, because for the longterm it does not produce the result of lower unemployment andhealthier thrifts and all the rest. I think it works the other way.MR. BOEHNE. I wonder if there is a common ground here withwhat Chuck Partee has proposed. It seems to me that the allowances he1042/1-2/82has spelled out do give us some flexibility on the up side. I thinkthere is some merit in that in terms of bridging the gap here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with that. Maybe thatis the practical alternative on the table. Let me leave M3 and bankcredit aside for the moment. Let's not get into those; whatever we dowith them is literally almost insignificant. I think what I haveheard, obviously with the exception of Nancy Teeters, is that if wehave this note of reservation, nobody wants to argue about fiddlingaround with the M1 range. Do I hear that correctly? I will proceedon that assumption.Quite clearly, there are people who want to raise the M2range. Let me give you two alternatives that I see now. One,consistent with this idea that we open up the possibility of rebasingand review, is that we stick to the targets we now have with thecomment that Governor Partee made about M2. What concerns a lot ofpeople about fooling around with any of these is whether we are goingto rebase. The alternative is to go ahead and change M2 and not makethe comments about rebasing. Would anybody prefer that? Let me putit this way: We stick basically with the M1 range; we raise the M2range by 1 percentage point; and we do not say anything about thepossibility of rebasing. Does that seem preferable to anybody?MR. ROOS. That is a lesser of the two--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I saw three people saying yes; I did notsee any others.MR. GUFFEY. I would join those three to make it four.MR. RICE. I would too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.MR. MORRIS. Not saying anything about rebasing, I think,would be the sensible thing. That raises the imagery of manipulation.It might cause some people to remember that we have not rebased in thepast and this selective rebasing charge could be [unintelligible]. Itseems to me if we are going to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not going to do anything about ittoday. We never do anything about it because we never consider ituntil we get there. But what we do now seems to me rather silly,frankly. We do it all the time because we get trapped into it; I justregurgitate every time we have to put all this emphasis on whathappened in a particular three months of the year. We get locked intothat. We say: Well, that is what we did before, so we have to do itagain. But that is where we are. There is some sentiment, though Ido not detect a consensus, to go that way, which is a possibility.That leaves me with the degree of consensus we have on the other[alternative], which is basically leaving these ranges and making aspecific comment about M2 and the savings connection and that we thinkit is quite likely M2 will be near the top of that range. We say thatis perfectly acceptable and, in any event, M2 could be over [therange] if the savings and the IRA and Keogh accounts turned out to besignificant. Thus, we are putting you on due warning. That is whatwe say on M2. On M1, based upon what we know now, we think this range-1052/1-2/82is appropriate. We do not exclude the possibility that, if thisrecent development seemed to be of a more permanent character, whichbears upon the basic demand for money, we would come back to you atmidyear or before and change that. That carries some connotation, butI think it is consistent with the decision that we just made that weare not going to fight tooth and nail to reverse January. We alreadydecided that, so I think it is perfectly consistent with what we havealready decided. What is the degree of consensus as to how acceptablethat is? I want to put it in terms of acceptability at this point.It seems we have the voting members. I guess what I hear is that itsounds pretty acceptable,MR. GRAMLEY. We are doing it with words not deeds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, I do not detect any othercourse that is more acceptable at this point. In the absence of anycomments that [some alternative would be] more acceptable, let me justdescribe it again so there is no doubt in people's minds. This iswhat would appear in the record: We reviewed these targets;considerable concern was expressed about the recent developments in M1which suggest that some relationships could be developing that we didnot anticipate. We think it is too early to make that judgment. Wewant to reaffirm the continuity of policy, but if we get furtherevidence that the presumption upon which we established this target iswrong, particularly considering the fact that we ended up below thetarget last year, we would be prepared to reconsider this matter. Butwe think it is more likely that we will have some relaxation here,which would make the present target appropriate. On M2, we say wethink it is likely and desirable that growth be toward the upper endof the range; it is possible that a higher saving rate combined withthe impact of IRA and Keogh accounts would introduce an element herethat has not been there in recent years, which would change thisrelationship somewhat. If that were a discernable influence on M2, wewould be satisfied with being somewhat above the upper end of thattarget. I think that is about as clearly as I can state it. And wejust leave the M3 range [unchanged]. Does it make any difference toanybody where M3 and bank credit are? What do you have for bankcredit [growth]?MR. AXILROD. 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is your projection?MR. AXILROD. That is our projection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And what is the range you are suggesting?MR. AXILROD. I think the Committee might as well stay withthe range it has of 6 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A very small wrinkle: If people wanted toraise the range for M3 on the very simple argument that we expect morefinancing to be done through the banking system and that affects M3--MR. PARTEE. Then we almost have to raise the range for bankcredit, don't we?-1062/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might raise the bank credit rangeslightly, too, then.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But suppose we get a switch fromlarge CDs to Eurodollar financing?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, nobody pays any attention to thosetargets.MS. TEETERS. We have yet to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess it is not important to meone way or the other.MR. CORRIGAN. Suppose interest rates come down and we getsome bond financing?MR. FORD. Why not drop [those two targets]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not think it hurts anything to have[them]. So, forget about M3 and bank credit; we just take what fallsout. Leaving the ranges unchanged is the preliminary suggestion.MR. AXILROD. We will make the proper adjustment for the bankcredit base because of the IBFs. We either have to go from December-January or the fourth quarter, properly adjusted, because of the IBFshifts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe it would be a good idea justto change the base on that to get in the idea of changing a base.Here we have such a clear technological change that hardly anybodycould question it,MR. AXILROD. It would still be 8 percent [growth] from theDecember-January base. That is how our estimates fell.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It would still be the same target,but we would rebase [bank credit]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, because of the introduction of IBFs.Okay. If there are no other questions, we can vote.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich YesEleven for, one against, Mr. Chairman.107-2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you very much. You wanted to saysomething, Governor Schultz?MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, everybody has heard enough from mealready, and I guess you are going to hear a little more. But just tomake you feel better, I would remind you that this will be the lastday that you will have to do this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might have an emergency shortly.MR. SCHULTZ. I wanted to sing a little swan song today. Youunderstand that swans do not sing very prettily but they generallysing a long time, so you will have to indulge me. Just remember thatI am very shortly going to turn into an ugly duckling!There are a couple of points that I wanted to make before Ileave. You people are going to be under a lot of political pressurethis year and a lot of outside pressure, and I have a little politicaladvice for you. You understand that you have to be careful aboutpolitical advice from a losing politician, and I fall within thatcategory, but that is not always true. It is my belief that over timewhat is right is the best politics. I believe that if you do what isright and you are steadfast and consistent in your policies, thepolitical pressures will ease and you will not be in great danger fromthem.You are also going to have considerable internal pressures.I know I felt enormous internal pressures about whether what we weredoing was right and whether what we were doing was the best way to goabout it. Clearly, there are costs to this technique that we areusing; we have all kinds of problems. But when the question is askedof me: If you were going to do anything differently than you havedone over the past 2-1/2 years what would you do? I say that I didnot like the credit controls and that I think we might have reacted alittle better to the increase in 1980, but I honestly believe that thetechnique we are using now is considerably better than what we weredoing. It is like Winston Churchill's comment about democracy beingthe worst form of government ever devised except for all the others.I think the operative question is not whether this technique we areusing now is better than some other technique in an ideal world butwhether it is better in view of what we have had to face. It justseems clear to me that it has enabled us in a time of great volatilityto adjust interest rates more quickly and to adjust them far enough tohave some market impact. I am with Tony Solomon on this. I do notknow what these linkages are; they are getting looser and the demandshifts are coming more and more often; I don't know what the heck ismoney; all of these kinds of things are very difficult. But the realquestion is: What alternative do we have at this point in time? Andit seems to me that what we are doing is the alternative that is bestat this point.I read the other day that somebody criticized us for playingto history. I would certainly hope that we do indeed have a sense ofhistory. It strikes me that with the political system we have in thiscountry and an election every two years, it is impossible to take along-range view in the political sphere. We are the only organizationthat seems to have the opportunity and the ability to take a long-range view. Again, I think the pressures are going to be enormous-108-2/1-2/82because, whatever you do. the economy is not just going to get bettervery quickly. And the question that is going to be asked of you is:How much pain are you willing to inflict on the economy? I do nothappen to think that it is [the Federal Reserve] that has beeninflicting the pain on the economy, but that is the question that youare going to get asked. And the answer is: What is the alternative?If you stop now in this fight against inflation, if you do not carryit through, what kind of pain are you going to inflict on the economythen? It is an issue that just has to be faced and I believe it is alot easier to face it now and overcome the problem now than it will belater on.Finally, I would urge you to remember that you have aremarkable degree of support out there. Nobody is going to love acentral bank; and heaven knows, nobody loves high interest rates. Butthe fact is that the Federal Reserve has built up an awful lot ofrespect out there. People in this country want to believe insomething and you are about all there is to believe in at this time.I think there are a lot of people ready to come to your defense; youhave been seeing some comments recently in the news magazines and thenewspapers in response to the current criticism. A lot of people outthere want to support you. I think you really do need to try to keepin contact with those people and marshal that support when it becomesnecessary, because the fact of the matter is that you are still theonly game in town. And good luck to you!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Fred, without prejudging anycomments anybody may want to make later, I think your contribution onthis Committee has been immensely important to all of us and I thinkwe can acknowledge that around this little circle now before we go tolunch where, prejudging it, we can do you a little honor. Weappreciate very much those comments on what has been a variety ofexperiences in your life and your full devotion to this one in thepast 2-1/2 years. We ought to adjourn to lunch but I am reminded thatI have forgotten two things that we ought to do in the nature ofcleaning up.I mentioned Mr. Reuss' proposal to you yesterday and Iunderstood from the reactions that you did all consider that in yourminds and did not choose that as a desirable course. I just want tobe able to report that to him. Can I take that as a--MS. TEETERS. Not me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your position is clear and I can reportthat his proposal was considered and that one person rendered ratherstrong support to his point of view, but it did not command thesupport of the group. I think that is a fair representation of what Ihave heard.The other thing to clean up relates to the short-termdecision. I assumed that what we were talking about was the secondversion of the directive. Mr. Altmann has a slight revision, which Ihave not seen. It says: "...for the January-to-March period nogrowth in M1 and growth in M2 at an annual rate of around 8 percent."That is a slightly different way of saying it.MR. PARTEE. Why don't we say "no further growth"?2/1-2/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "No further growth;" good. Maybe we canjust stick in a phrase "Considering the size of the recent growth, nofurther growth...." Maybe this is better: "Taking account of therecent surge...." And then the next sentence is about as he has it:Some decline in M1 "would be associated with more rapid attainment ofthe longer-run range and would be acceptable in the context ofdeclining market interest rates."MR. PARTEE. Would it be acceptable without declininginterest rates? It would be acceptable period, wouldn't it?MR. GRAMLEY. If this happened to be a movement along thefunction instead of a downward shift in the function, we would getreal trouble. If, for example, the economy started to collapse--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one could catch a nuance here whichmight not be in the sentence; but if it declined in the context ofrising rates, we would presumably ease.MR. PARTEE. It struck me as being an inconsistency.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not know whether there is a technicalword or not. I guess it is not a full description of what we mean.It certainly would be acceptable in the context of rising rates,except then we presumably would move to ease. I do not know whetherthere is a better way to say that. This is basically a phrase we haveused before, isn't it, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, the last time it was used was in December1980. We said "In the light of the rapid growth of money and creditaggregates in recent months, some shortfall [from what had beenspecified] would be acceptable in the near term if that developed inthe context of reduced pressures in the money market." That is whatthe directive said in December 1980.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we say "in the context ofreduced pressure in the money market" instead of "declining interestrates." I think that is a little more polite way of saying it. Okay,then we are agreed and we can go to lunch.MS. TEETERS. Wait a minute, we have the date of the nextmeeting. That is eight weeks away. Do we want to wait that long? Itis a long time.SEVERAL. It is a long time.MR. PARTEE. I think we probably do, but [we can] haveconferences [by telephone].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I would just leave it. Itis a long time, but if we want to have a meeting in between we canobviously do it on the telephone. I do not think we need to decidethis, but if we felt like having a meeting in person four weeks fromnow, would that be welcomed?MS. TEETERS. It is a matter of clearing our calendars orkeeping them open.-1102/1-2/82MR. SCHULTZ. It makes no difference to me!MR. MORRIS. I think eight weeks is a long time in thecontext that we are in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we can do is just pick out adate. Maybe I will send you two dates or something and ask you tomake sure your calendar is clear. We will not call a meeting, but ifwe want to call a meeting, you would have kept a clear calendar.SPEAKER(?). Four weeks would be around March 1st?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably it would be approximatelyfour weeks from now. I will look for some dates about four weeks fromnow if that is desirable, but I do not know what my calendar is.MR. SCHULTZ. I will be in Hawaii.MR. GRAMLEY. You can come back. There is a place for you.We will give you another lunch if you come back!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you look around March 1st. Iwill not call a meeting now, but I will not be allergic to calling oneif it seems at all desirable.MR. BOEHNE. Would you think in terms of a one-day meeting?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I do not know about my own calendar,but I do not see any reason why--MR. ROOS. A meeting on March 1st or coming in then for ameeting on March 2nd?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As close to March 1st as I can make it. Imay say March 1st if it looks all right from my standpoint.MR. BALLES. That happens to be a Monday.MR. PARTEE. March 2nd then.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. March 2nd, I think. When is the nextmeeting?SPEAKER(?). March 30th.MR. AXILROD. If that were an updating meeting, Mr. Chairman,I assume you would not need the full panoply of staff presentations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think we would have a more informalmeeting than usual. More precisely, we would not have the fullpanoply.END OF MEETING-111-