Confidential
(Translation)
MINUTES *
OF THE 235th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 9th MAY 1989 AT 9.30 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Bank of
Greece and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by
Mr. Papademos, Mr. Karamouzis and Mr. Brissimis; the Governor of the Banque
Nationale de Belgique, Mr. Godeaux, accompanied by Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen;
the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank, Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by
Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied
by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Fischer-Erlach; the Governor of the Banco de Espana,
Mr. Rubio, accompanied by Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran; the Governor of the
Banque de France, Mr. de Larosiere, accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and
Mr. Cappanera; the Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle,
accompanied by Mr. O'Grady Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the
Banca d*Italia, Mr. Ciampi, accompanied by Mr. Dini and Mr. Santini; the
President of De Nederlandsche Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr. Szasz
and Mr. Benard; the Governor of the Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira,
accompanied by Mr. Pégo Marques and Mr. Amorim; the Governor of the Bank of
England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by Mr. Crockett and Mr. Price;
the President of the Commission of the European Communities, Mr. Delors,
accompanied by Mr. Costa, Mr. Carré and Mr. Dixon; the Director General of
the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr. Jaans; the Secretary of the Monetary
Committee, Mr. Kees. Also present at the meeting was Mr. Dalgaard, Chairman
of the Group of Experts. The Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli,
his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul, Mr. Scheller and Mr. Giles, and Mr. Bockelmann and
Mr. Dagassan also attended.

In addition, Mr. Lamfalussy, General Manager of the BIS, and
Mr. Gros, Head of the Banking Department of the BIS, took part in the discussion
of item IV of the agenda.

* Final text approved at the meeting on llth July 1989, which incorporates
some drafting changes.
The Chairman opened the meeting by informing the Committee that,
as from the next meeting, the Commission of the European Communities would
be represented either by its President, Mr. Delors or by Mr. Christophersen,

Vice-President with responsibility for Economic and Financial Affairs.

I. Approval of the minutes of the 234th meeting

The Committee approved the minutes of the 234th meeting, on the
understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be incorporated

in the final text.

II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:

- Preparation by the "Dalgaard Group" and discussion by the Committee
of Alternates;

~ Statistical charts and tables

A. Statement by Mr. Dalgaard

The “Monitoring Group" had concentrated on three questions: the
continuing strength of the dollar, the increase in interest rates in Germany
and its repercussions, and the Spanish peseta.

The general feeling was that the foreign exchange markets were
continuing to show remarkable confidence in existing exchange rate relationships
and that capital flows were therefore to a large extent determined by interest
rate differentials.

The dollar had remained at a high level in April and early May,
between 1.85 and 1.89 against the Deutsche Mark, and just recently had even
risen above 1.90. High US interest rates were the key to the dollar's underlying
strength; had it not been for the fear of central bank intervention, it
would probably have risen further. During the first three weeks of April
the dollar had eased slightly in response to the G-7 meeting, together with
intervention by the Bank of Japan and expectations of a slowdown of growth
in the United States and consequently a fall in interest rates. It had
Since strengthened again, reflecting at least partly the markets' belief
that the central banks would not, after all, do much to check the movement;

official US statements that the dollar's current level was satisfactory had

also played a part. The central banks had not in fact done very much to
push the dollar down. Total intervention in April had resulted in some
1/2 billion of net dollar purchases, despite small sales by the Federal
Reserve and some EC central banks. Other central banks, in particular Sveriges
Riksbank, Norges Bank, the Banco de Espana and the Banco de Portugal, had
bought considerable amounts of dollars. In the first week of May net sales
of dollars had totalled some 1.4 billion.
There had been some concerted intervention in late April and
early May, following a standard procedure, whereby the European central
banks would do nothing during the morning but then, when the Federal Reserve
entered the market, if the dollar was rising, it would propose concerted
action, would itself sell, but only moderate amounts, and the European
central banks, often fifteen or sixteen of them, would intervene together,
also fairly modestly. For example, the Deutsche Bundesbank had committed
only about half the amounts spent by the Federal Reserve, and the other
central banks generally symbolic amounts. Moreover, as soon as this intervention
had halted the rise of the dollar, the Federal Reserve would stop. The
"Monitoring Group" had felt that this technique was the worst possible way
of intervening if exchange rates were really to be influenced: not only did
this approach have little effect, it tended to undermine the credibility of
central bank action. It would be better to intervene less often, but at the
right time, namely when the dollar was already falling, and a number of
opportunities of this kind had arisen in the past few weeks. The Federal
Reserve clearly did not take this view; it now seemed willing to take the
initiative and intervene on a larger scale than previously and than the
European central banks, but it maintained a defensive attitude and halted
its intervention as soon as the dollar stopped rising. Its purpose was not
to weaken the dollar, lest the movement should go too far, and to keep the
markets quiet so that the US deficits could continue to be financed smoothly.
Within the EMS, the main feature had been the relative weakness
of the Deutsche Mark, as demonstrated by the very large intervention purchases,
equivalent to US$ 3.7 billion in April and US$ 2.5 billion in the first
week of May. The total so far this year was in excess of US$ 20 billion,
i.e. almost as much as for the whole of 1988 (US$ 27 billion). The Deutsche
Mark was still the strongest currency in the exchange rate mechanism, with
the lowest interest rates in the Community, but it was weak measured against

the strong fundamentals. This could be explained in particular by the fact

- 4 -

that confidence in the present exchange rate relationships within the EMS
was such that interest rate differentials were still sufficient to make
investments in the other currencies attractive. Special factors had also
played a part, for example, in Spain, and also Germany, where political
developments seemed to be weakening the Government, even though the general
elections were not to be held for another year and a half.

Official German rates had been raised by 1/2 percentage point on
24th April, in order to moderate monetary growth, dampen down price increases
and also support the Deutsche Mark. Market rates had risen by only 1/4
percentage point, and only in the case of short-term rates. Long-term rates
had even eased somewhat, perhaps as a result of the decision to abolish the
withholding tax as from lst July 1989. However, this measure and the higher
interest rates had so far had no effect on the Deutsche Mark exchange rate.

Most EC countries had followed the rise in German interest rates.
In some countries it had been necessary to raise official rates, in others,
such as France, market rates had increased sufficiently without a change in
key rates. Overall, there had been little change in interest rate differentials
between the EC countries, and it was therefore not surprising that the
impact on exchange rates had been limited.

The effect of abolishing the withholding tax in Germany might be
felt later. Residents might be waiting for formal abolition, on lst July
1989, or even to be sure that the tax would not be reintroduced in a Community
context. While repatriation of capital would probably be slow, new outflows
should decline, and that, combined with the considerable current-account
surplus, should be sufficient to strengthen the Deutsche Mark.

The experts from the EC central banks had not voiced any criticism
concerning the repercussions of the increase in German interest rates, but
they had felt that it would have been helpful to have been notified of the
decision in advance, as it was important to Germany's partners and had come
as a surprise to all of them.

The other currencies participating in the exchange rate mechanism
had not experienced any particular problems. The French franc had performed
well, supported undoubtedly by the positive fundamentals. The Italian lira

had also been firm, mainly because of high interest rate differentials,

given that the balance of payments and inflation were not developing particularly

well. The stability of the lira showed that not only did the market not

anticipate a realignment, it did not even expect any major changes within
the margin; the lira could at present afford to fall by 5% and still remain
within the margin. The market for the Danish krone was again quiet following
the pressures of late March. In Ireland interest rates had increased more
than in other countries - by 1 percentage point for short-term rates and
1/2 percentage point for long-term rates - because of large-scale capital
outflows, amounting to nearly $1 billion since February. The Central Bank
of Ireland had for a long time hesitated to raise interest rates, as growth
was weak, inflation low and the balance of payments in surplus. In the
Netherlands the recent political tension, which meant that the elections
would be brought forward to September, had temporarily weakened the guilder
slightly. However, a small increase in interest rates had been sufficient
to restore the former exchange rate relationship between the Deutsche Mark
and the guilder.

The fundamental situation in Spain was unchanged; growth was
still strong, no tightening of fiscal policy was expected and therefore
monetary policy had to be very restrictive. High interest rates had attracted
large capital inflows, and to limit them the Banco de Espafia had allowed
the peseta to appreciate, for example, by 10Z against the Deutsche Mark
since the beginning of 1988, and had raised reserve requirements. This had
succeeded in curbing residents’ borrowing abroad, but foreign investors had
turned to massive buying of Spanish Treasury bills. Although the current-
account deficit was growing apace, the market was unperturbed, since it
felt that the deficit could easily be financed by new inflows of capital,
given that investment in pesetas was still very attractive.

Sterling had recently been under some pressure. It had seemed
that higher interest rates might be necessary but up to early May this had
been avoided, mainly because of the publication of better-than-expected
trade figures. Overall, the sterling/Deutsche Mark rate had remained relatively
stable and market interest rates had not moved much.

In Greece and Portugal the policy of gradual, moderate exchange
rate depreciation had been continued, but with the difference that it had
been accompanied by considerable capital outflows in Greece, while in Portugal
there had been substantial capital inflows.

Lastly, it should be noted that, as was mentioned in the monthly
report of the Agent for the EMCF, the first transaction with an Other Holder
of ECUs had taken place in April, when De Nederlandsche Bank had sold ECU
50 million to the Swiss National Bank.

B. Statement by Mr. Papademos

The Alternates had focused their attention on the effectiveness
of recent intervention in the foreign exchange markets, the longer-term
outlook for exchange rate developments, and interest rate policies in the

Community.

1. The interventions carried out recently, especially by the
Federal Reserve, had been judged to be relatively ineffective. They would
have been more effective if they had been larger, if they had been better
concerted, and if they had been reinforcing exchange rate movements rather
than resisting them. It had been pointed out that the Federal Reserve had
been reluctant to pursue such a strategy, for fear of provoking a sharp
fall in the dollar. If recent intervention practices continued, central

banks could lose their credibility in this area.

2. In recent months paradoxical exchange rate relationships had
been observed. The currencies of countries with relatively high inflation
and current-account deficits had been appreciating, while the currencies of
countries with low inflation and current-account surpluses had tended to
depreciate. Two explanations could be offered for this. Firstly, markets
attached greater importance to interest rate differentials than to fundamentals,
partly owing to the perception that the central banks were aiming at nominal
exchange rate stability, and this tended to reduce the exchange rate risks.
Secondly, countries which were experiencing high growth rates and inflationary
pressures were pursuing tight monetary policies that were not adequately
supported by fiscal policies, and this kept interest rates high and induced
capital inflows.

One Alternate had stressed that in view of the increasing integration
of financial markets, the adjustment process had to be seen in a wider
context. The developments observed were symptomatic of a difference in
cyclical positions between the countries concerned. There was an important
trade-off. Countries that were pursuing tighter monetary policies to ease
inflationary pressures had contributed to the convergence of inflation
rates but at the cost of larger divergences in current-account positions.
If current-account imbalances primarily reflected different cyclical positions,
they would have to be accepted temporarily. Intervention and interest rate

policies would not be successful in dealing with situations resulting from

divergent economic performances. It had been suggested that the factors
causing these differences in cyclical positions should be re-examined.

Other Alternates had emphasised the structural nature of recent
developments in the financial markets. The new financial environment, character-
ised by the advent of new financial instruments and large capital movements,
had implications for the conduct of monetary policies. Some felt that the
liberalisation of capital movements might delay rather than facilitate the

adjustment process.

3. The German Alternate had pointed out that the recent increases
in official interest rates had not had a lasting impact on the Deutsche
Mark exchange rate vis-a-vis the major currencies, partly because market
interest rates in other countries had increased by an equal or greater
amount, thus maintaining or even widening interest rate differentials. On
the same subject, another Alternate had observed that, if German monetary
policy was to provide the anchor for price stability in the EMS and the
exchange rate was no longer available as an instrument to curb inflation,
the Bundesbank had to use the remaining instruments, that is interest rates,
to preserve price stability. In addition, in view of the inappropriate
policy mix in the United States and the high level of capacity utilisation,
a dollar depreciation was unlikely to contribute to the adjustment process
but might exacerbate inflationary pressures.

Finally, the Alternates had referred to the recent sharp rise in
Irish interest rates. The limited liberalisation of long-term capital flows
at the beginning of the year had led to capital outflows mainly because
institutional investors had diversified their portfolios. The official
foreign exchange reserves had fallen considerably, which had reinforced the

need to increase interest rates.

C. Discussion by the Committee

The Chairman noted that the appreciation of the dollar despite
some slowdown in economic activity in the United States was surprising and
raised the fundamental question of whether it was a case of the market
"overshooting" and thus a temporary movement or rather a new and lasting
upward trend that called for the Governors' close attention. The Governors
might also look at recent developments in Germany, viz. the interest rate

increases, the abolition of the withholding tax on interest income and the
sharp rise in the current-account surplus (+44% in the first quarter of
1989).

Mr. Pohl offered some comments on a number of points that had
been dealt with in the full and balanced reports of Mr. Dalgaard and
Mr. Papademos.

The raising of German interest rates had three main reasons,
which had already been aired over a number of weeks, in particular within
the Committee, so that there had perhaps been an element of surprise in the
timing, but not in the measure itself. The first reason related to the
stronger-than-expected growth of the German economy, which harboured increased
risks of overheating. Bottlenecks were already appearing in certain sectors,
and the present position was that of a late phase in a cycle of six to
seven years of continued growth. Problems like those affecting other European
countries, such as the United Kingdom, had to be avoided. Moreover, even
though the next wage negotiations would not be taking place until 1990,
there were growing indications that the strength of the economy and other
factors would lead to substantial claims, particularly as the price situation
was not as favourable as usual. Consumer prices were rising at an annual
rate of 3%, which was high by German standards, although account had to be
taken of the impact of the raising of consumption taxes. More worrying was
the rise in import prices, at an annual rate of almost 12%, which resulted
in particular from the increase in oil prices and the deterioration in the
terms of trade.

The second reason for the raising of interest rates was the Deutsche
Mark exchange rate, which was neither conducive to price stability nor
compatible with the current-account surplus. The surplus was growing steadily
and might exceed US$ 50 billion for the year as a whole; it was due in part
to the depreciation of the Deutsche Mark in nominal and real terms vis-a-vis
the dollar and also the yen and other currencies, such as sterling and the
Spanish peseta. The trade surplus had narrowed appreciably in 1988 vis-a-vis
the United States but had widened again since last autumn; more generally,
the surplus reflected the strong demand for manufactures and capital goods
in a number of European countries, particularly those experiencing extremely
buoyant domestic demand and inflationary pressures. Germany's surplus also
had to be seen from the angle of the country's trading partners which,
thanks to the freedom of the market, could absorb and counterbalance domestic
pressures, but when all countries were overheating this equilibrating process

no longer functioned.
Although it was slowing somewhat, monetary growth remained strong
and was overshooting the targets for the third year in succession; this was
the third reason for the tightening of monetary policy. Following the raising
of interest rates in January the market had anticipated further increases
in March, which the Bundesbank had not implemented. When official rates had
been raised on 24th April market rates, which had risen in the meantime,
had hardly moved. Overall, however, they had virtually doubled within eight
months at the short-term end. Long-term rates had changed little; the abolition
of the withholding tax might have contributed to their stability, but an
upward trend had developed recently, probably in connection with the appreciation
of the dollar.

The surprising strength of the US currency was related to the
weakness of the yen and the Deutsche Mark, which was due in part to political
factors but also to other influences, for example the fact that the markets
had grown accustomed to the existing large imbalances and to the idea that
the world could live with them, which was a dangerous attitude. Another
factor, which merited closer examination, could be found in the restrictive
policy long pursued by the Federal Reserve and reflected in particular in
an undershooting of the targets for the monetary aggregates, whereas the
contrary was the case in Japan and a number of European countries.

The central banks! intervention policy had been criticised as
being the worst imaginable. This was true in part; for instance, the Federal
Reserve and the US Treasury were in fact very anxious not to trigger an
uncontrollable fall in the dollar. Apart from this, however, it had to be
stressed that the burden of intervention was essentially being borne by the
Deutsche Bundesbank. Use of the Deutsche Mark had, in fact, grown considerably.
Holdings of that currency were in excess of DM 100 billion in Europe and
the United States alone, not counting holdings elsewhere, on which there
was little information. Within the EMS exchange rate mechanism, where the
Deutsche Mark was naturally the intervention and reserve currency, holdings
amounted to 36 billion, which did not appear excessive; the figure for the
United States was 34 billion. These large purchases had certainly enabled
the Deutsche Mark to remain the strongest EMS currency, despite relatively
low interest rates, but they had not prevented its international weakness.

At all events, consideration had to be given to the possible consequences
of a reversal of the situation, of massive use of these holdings, which

represented approximately 17% of global exchange reserves. Moreover, the
use of the Deutsche Mark in interventions gave rise to money creation, and
thus to an inflation risk depending on the extent to which it was neutralised.
There were therefore limits to intervention, and in these circumstances, if
the dollar continued to rise and the yen and the Deutsche Mark to depreciate,
interest rate differentials would have to be widened, which meant that if

the authorities or the market failed to bring about a fall in rates in the
United States, they would have to be raised further in Europe.

The Bundesbank's decision to raise its rates had caused some
disappointment among its partners because of the lack of prior consultation.
The German central bank was in fact a firm believer in co-operation and in
monetary policy co-ordination, in particular within the exchange rate mechanism,
and had furnished proof of this in the past; however, like its counterparts,
it had constraints of its own, and the example of 24th April showed that,
in the present statutory institutional framework, ex ante co-ordination of
economic and monetary policies had its limits. This example might contribute
to speeding up the establishment of a common decision-making structure in
line with the report of the "Delors Committee".

Mr. de Larosiére thought that the current situation, following
the decision of the Bundesbank to raise its key rates, was paradoxical in
several respects. That action had been taken essentially on domestic grounds,
in response to signs of tensions, but had it been effective? Certainly not
as far as the Deutsche Mark exchange rate was concerned, which had depreciated
vis-a-vis the dollar over the past two weeks. The dollar's strength, however,
had other causes, as had been mentioned, but there was also the fact that
in Europe interest rates had risen following the German decision even in
those countries where official rates had not been increased. Thus there had
been no real change in relative positions. The German measure might have
some impact on domestic demand, but was this intended? As Mr. Pohl had
said, one of the essential elements in the German economic boom was the
strength of exports and thus of domestic demand in Germany's trading partners,
in Europe in particular. For them, the very fact of having followed the
increase in German interest rates meant that there was no fundamental
change in their relative macro-economic positions, and thus no adjustment
of the fundamentals in volume terms such as would enable German exports to
be reduced somewhat.

It therefore seemed clear that the real problem that had to be

examined was one of more concerted management of the European and

international macro-economy. However, such management was faltering at the
global level because it was always difficult to incorporate US policy,
which lay outside the scope of European economic intervention and currently
raised a number of concerns, in particular in the fiscal sphere. The
inflationary pressures observed in several countries could ultimately only
be alleviated if the slowdown in the US economy, of which there were some
preliminary indications, was confirmed. The concerted management of the
macro-economy was also faltering at Community level; in particular, there
was no genuine discussion of the adjustment of relative macro-economic
positions. In this context the Bundesbank could raise its rates following a
surprise decision by its Central Bank Council, a decision which might have
certain effects and no others but which rather indicated that the

EC countries were proceeding blindly. As Mr. Pohl had pointed out, this
example should lead to a reflection on the quality of the decision-making
process and of ex ante concertation within the Community. Such concertation
had been lacking on 24th April, which was regrettable, but it was at least
equally important to establish genuine concertation on the "fundamentals"
than to know whether the Bundesbank was going to raise its rates ona
particular Thursday or fifteen days later.

As far as interventions on the foreign exchange markets were
concerned, Mr. de Larosiére recognised their limits but agreed with the
criticisms expressed by Mr. Dalgaard. For several weeks now interventions
had neither been vigorous enough nor sufficiently well managed. Without
seeking to push the dollar into a new downward cycle, the timing of intervention
during the day could be varied to secure the best effect. It would therefore
be useful to review central banks' intervention techniques and procedures
in the days ahead.

Mr. Ciampi agreed that the markets appeared to be accepting the
large disequilibria which existed both globally and within the EMS, and
that relative macro-economic positions were a major factor behind these
imbalances. This accommodation or resignation on the part of the markets
regarding the disequilibria meant that the authorities had to do everything,
and quickly, to restore equilibrium. Adjustment policies in each country
were therefore essential, and it was very important that they should be
pursued within a framework of co-ordination and concertation of macro-economic
policies.

In Italy the performance of the lira showed that the status quo

had become accepted; although there were clear signs of a worsening of the
- 12 -

economic situation, in terms of inflation and the current-account balance,
there had been no reaction on the foreign exchange markets. On the
contrary, the lira remained firm and had even appreciated in nominal and
real terms vis-a-vis other EMS currencies. While this was clearly welcome
from the point of view of checking inflation, it should not obscure the
fact that the fundamental disequilibria were worrying and difficult to
correct. Although still inadequate, Italian fiscal policy seemed to be
embarking on the right path, and the measures adopted at the end of March
should limit the central government deficit for 1989. Moreover, domestic
demand could be restrained by the bringing forward, from November to June,
of the payment of personal and corporate taxes.

The current problems observed in most countries highlighted the
importance of co-ordination of macro-economic, monetary and exchange rate
policies. Recent developments had shown that, within Europe, interest rate
differentials had not really changed after the German decision, which, for
that reason, had remained largely ineffective.

With regard to interventions on the foreign exchange markets,

Mr. Dalgaard suggested that both the method and the timing could be improved.
It was true that even if they were of limited value, interventions could be
made more effective, for example by operating in a procyclical direction
rather than defensively, when the dollar was rising.

Mr. Duisenberg observed that De Nederlandsche Bank had immedi-
ately followed the increase in interest rates by the Deutsche Bundesbank.
As regards the decision-making process, there was not as powerful a Central
Bank Council in Amsterdam as there was in Frankfurt. Although the German
decision had been surprising, it was quite understandable given the domestic
and external considerations underlying it. Similar reasons had been behind
the Dutch decision. The inflation rate was low - at 0.8% the lowest in
Europe - but it was influenced by the lowering of VAT, which had helped to
dampen inflation. Worrying signs were emerging in other areas. For example,
some acceleration in wage increases was evident; the agreements concluded
recently kept just within the limits of productivity gains, and a number of
agreements were due to expire at the end of the year. In addition, the
duration of the agreements was becoming shorter, which was a reflection of
the tensions on the labour market. In some sectors capacity limits were

being reached, and capacity utilisation overall stood at a record level.

- 13 -

The rise in import prices, in particular of raw materials, was also worrying.
The main concern, however, was monetary growth. After the United Kingdon,

the Netherlands had registered the sharpest growth in M, in 1988 - a rate

of 14% - and it had persisted since the start of the year. In these
circumstances De Nederlandsche Bank, which would not have taken the initiative
to raise its interest rates, had taken the German decision as an opportunity
to do so; it had even gone further in that it had entered into discussions
with the commercial banks to conclude a gentleman's agreement aimed at
moderating money creation.

The Chairman said that the increase in German interest rates had
also persuaded the authorities in Greece to increase interest rates, in
particular on Treasury bills.

Mr. Rubio remarked that in Spain the current difficulties were in
large part due to the mix between monetary policy and fiscal policy. The
aim of fiscal policy was to reduce the public deficit, which was not very
high compared with the other European countries but which was nevertheless
playing an expansionary role at a time when domestic demand, particularly
investment demand, was very strong. It was not very likely that the Government
would be able to change fiscal policy fundamentally in 1989, but certain
measures might soon be taken which might alleviate the monetary policy
dilemma. The peseta had for quite some time been subject to strong upward
pressures and it had appreciated, for example, vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark
by 11% in real terms over the last twelve months. Further appreciation was
not desirable, given that the current-account deficit was increasing con-
siderably; for the year as a whole it was expected to be double its 1988
level, reaching approximately US$ 7 billion, equivalent to more than 2% of
GDP. However, the Banco de Espana had to follow a restrictive monetary
policy and maintain high interest rates to counter domestic demand pressures
and inflationary tensions.

Mr. Hoffmeyer recalled that in April he had argued that the EC
countries should not automatically follow the initiatives of the Deutsche
Bundesbank in respect of interest rates unless conditions really called for
it. In January Danmarks Nationalbank had not followed suit and had been
partly successful, but it was aware, as it had pointed out, that it could
not hold back if there was a further increase in German interest rates.
There had been such an increase, which was not really surprising, and it

was important that some countries had shown that it was not necessary to
- 14 -

follow it. Even if market rates had risen nearly everywhere, there was a
big difference if official rates had not, as they acted as a signal and had
a major impact on expectations. |

Mr. Hoffmeyer remarked that at present the Deutsche Mark was the
strongest currency in the EMS and that the German economy was also expand-
ing rapidly. In these circumstances nothing could be done in a European
context. The problem lay basically in the relationship between the Deutsche
Mark and the dollar. It was, however, likely that any significant decline
of the dollar would give rise to concern. At all events, it seemed that one
could not criticise Germany's growth policy and monetary policy at the same

time.

III. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EC Ministers of Finance
on developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen
countries participating in the concertation procedure during
April and the first few days of May 1989

The Chairman noted the Committee's adoption of the "concertation
report", which would be sent to the EC Ministers of Finance in the usual

way.

IV. Organisation of the ECU clearing: criteria for extension

The Chairman recalled that this question had been touched on in
April but that it had been decided to deal with it in May after further
examination by the Alternates. The Alternates had carried out their examination
the previous day and Mr. Papademos would be giving an account of it. Before

this, however, Mr. Lamfalussy could introduce the subject.

A. Statement by Mr. Lamfalussy

At their April meetings the Committee of Alternates and the Committee
of Governors had discussed the problem raised by the question of accession
of new banks to the private ECU clearing and settlement system. At the
close of these discussions, it had been agreed that the question would be
taken up again in May in order to try to reach a consensus on the desirable

form and degree of EC central bank involvement in this matter.
- 15 -

It should be recalled that in 1986, when the EC Governors and the
BIS Board had decided that the BIS could agree to act as agent for the
clearing and settlement system for the "private" ECU, it had been generally
accepted by the Governors and the Bank, that - in particular during the
system's running-in phase - the rate of increase in the number of clearing
banks, and the number itself, should satisfy two fundamental objectives:

- the rate of increase should be sufficiently slow to enable the
system to absorb new members without creating technical problems
for the efficient operation of the system and without jeopardising
its financial integrity;

- yet, at the same time, it should be sufficiently fast to demonstrate
that the system was not a closed one - i.e. that it was not to be
regarded as one designed to protect the commercial interests of
existing members.

It had been to satisfy these objectives that the BIS had done two
things. On the one hand, it had set a minimum admission criterion of a
balance-sheet total of ECU 30 billion, i.e. six times the minimum level set
by the ECU Banking Association (EBA) itself. On the other hand, the Bank
had made repeated efforts to ensure that the process of admission should
not come to a halt.

It had become apparent from the outset that it would not be easy to
reconcile the two objectives, but it had now become well-nigh impossible. A
number of the existing clearing banks had grown more and more reluctant to
admit new members and to accept a downward revision of the initial ECU 30
BIS billion criterion. They invoked the potential increase in their own
credit risks linked to a further enlargement of the number of members, but
some of them at least might have other considerations in mind. Be that as
it may, the result of their reluctance was likely to be that some quite
respectable banks were left out in the cold. This was why the problem was
being put to the central banks which clearly had an interest in the efficient,
safe but also equitable operation of the system.

There were many difficulties in trying to find a balanced solution,
but two should be mentioned in particular.

The first, which was a problem of procedure, derived from the
fact that the BIS criterion of ECU 30 billion was part of the contractual
arrangements between the BIS as agent and the EBA. This meant that it could
not be altered - relaxed or replaced with another - unilaterally. The EBA
- 16 -

had to approve any such amendment. In the absence of such approval, and
this was precisely how things now stood, the only options left to the BIS
were either to live with the present situation, at the risk of appearing to
sanction the closed nature of the system, or to apply the shock treatment
of withdrawing from the system, something which the agreement allowed but
which neither the BIS, nor, certainly, the central banks, would contemplate
happily.

The second difficulty was more one of substance, and here three
points should be made. From the point of view of the technical operation of
the system, it would no doubt be possible to raise the number of clearing
banks well above the present thirty-three. Secondly, however, one could not
reject as irrelevant the view of those who argued that admitting a large
number of banks might present dangers, in the form of increased credit or
settlement risks, for the participating banks; such risks were inherent in
the way the system worked and existed even with the present number of
participants. Thirdly, at the same time, one could not help but feel that
this argument was also used by some banks in order to protect their commercial
interests. These fundamental difficulties warranted that due consideration
be given to all appropriate measures to prevent any increase in the credit
and settlement risks inherent in the operations of the system, but without
laying it open to the charge of safeguarding vested interests.

In order to carry out such a task, or indeed simply in order to
continue to act as agent within the present framework, the BIS needed the
support of the central banks concerned. As had been clearly understood
right from the beginning, the clearing system should not, and could not,
count on liquidity support from the central banks, and the BIS was naturally
not asking for support of this kind. What it wanted was support to enable
its representatives to act with greater authority in forthcoming discussions
with the EBA regarding the operations of the system and, in particular, the
rules of access to the status of clearing bank. Such moral and technical
support could take different forms, but it was essential if the BIS was to
continue to play a useful role in the private ECU clearing and settlement

system.
- 17 -

B. Statement by Mr. Papademos

The Alternates had discussed at some length the issues relating
to the enlargement of the private ECU clearing and settlement system and
had arrived at the following conclusions.

The Alternates agreed that the Governors could confirm their
commitment to the private ECU clearing and settlement system as an open
system which should develop in accordance with criteria that ensured adequate
participation and promoted operational and prudential soundness. It was
recognised that the BIS needed support in order to enable it to overcome
the present deadlock.

The Governors’ commitment could be expressed as follows:

1. The BIS would be provided with a summary of the Governors' discussion.
The Alternates felt that this summary should contain, in particular, the
following elements:

(a) a reiteration of the principles laid down by the EC central banks
in March 1983 governing the participation of the BIS as Agent for
the ECU clearing system;

(b) a reaffirmation of the desire to see the system evolve in accordance
with well-defined admission criteria which would permit a balanced
expansion of the system;

(c) an expression of the desire that, pending the revision of the
admission criteria, membership of the system should be extended
to include a limited number of banks which were at present excluded
for reasons which could not be justified on either credit or
prudential grounds;

(d) the creation of a technical working group as outlined below.

2. A working group would be created, comprising experts drawn from
the central banks, the Commission of the European Communities and the BIS.
This group would assist the BIS in reviewing the criteria governing admission
to the clearing system in order to bring about a satisfactory expansion of
the membership of the system. The group should also examine the systemic
risks in the clearing mechanism, in particular those related to the netting

of transactions, taking into account the relevant prudential considerations.

3. Finally, the BIS would be called upon to keep the Committee of
Governors regularly informed of progress in its discussions with the ECU

Banking Association.

- 18 -

C. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. de Larosiere said that he had listened to the statements by
Mr. Lamfalussy and Mr. Papademos with great interest and was in complete
agreement with the four points put forward by Mr. Papademos. In fact, the
Governors had already expressed such a view at their April meeting and the
minutes clearly reflected this. The summary and structure proposed by
Mr. Papademos were wholly appropriate, reasonable and balanced; they should
form the decision or the summary of today's discussion by the Governors, so
that Mr. Lamfalussy could act in the way he had indicated.

Mr. Pohl expressed his full agreement with Mr. de Larosiere; the
Governors should support the BIS in opening up the ECU clearing system, as
it was not in their interest to see the system closed. However, it was
perhaps a little too early to decide to set up a new group, as there were
so many already, and this also raised the problem of having to find experts
and send them to all these groups and meetings. For the time being, it
would be sufficient to endorse very clearly what had been said by Mr. Lamfalussy
and to authorise him to inform the banks of this and even to tell them that
there was a serious risk that the BIS would withdraw from the clearing
system.

Mr. Pohl added that he was not in favour of such an outcome but
that the threat could be made. At all events, he thought that the support
given by the central banks should impress the banks in the clearing system
and persuade them to change their minds; if that did not happen, the Governors
could look at the matter again.

Mr. Lamfalussy felt that the support given in this way by the
central banks should be sufficient, provided that the BIS could call for ad
hoc discussions if there were technical problems. A permanent group was
certainly not necessary, but situations might arise in which it would be
very useful to seek the views of the central banks on certain technical
matters.

Mr. de Larosiére suggested that the fourth point made by Mr.
Papademos should be amended to read that, if necessary, an ad hoc group
could be convened to examine the items in question.

The Chairman noted that the Committee was in agreement on the
matter of the ECU clearing system and that the views of the Governors would
be conveyed to the BIS in the form of a letter from the Chairman. A draft

would be drawn up and circulated by the Secretariat; it could be amended
- 19 -

following the written procedure, the final letter then being sent to Mr.

Lamfalussy.

V. Longer-term perspective of changes in the exchange rate structure, on
the basis of a short presentation by Mr. Bockelmann

The Chairman recalled that the usual procedure would have been
for the Alternates to deal with this question first and for their Chairman
to report to the Governors, but owing to lack of time they had not been
able to do so. He proposed, however, that it should be discussed without
waiting for the July meeting, as then the agenda was very likely to include,
in addition to the usual items, the examination of Report No. 35 of the
"Raymond Group” and the annual note on public finances; the latter was on
the agenda of the present meeting, but since the Alternates had not analysed

it, it seemed preferable to postpone discussion of this topic.

A. Statement by Mr. Bockelmann

The full text of this statement, which is annexed to the present

minutes, was distributed to the members after the meeting.

B. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. Ciampi thought that the analysis of effective exchange rates
presented by Mr. Bockelmann was of great interest and that it would in fact
be desirable to broaden the study to obtain a more complete picture and to
elucidate the links with the principal economic variables. With such an
extension of the study in mind, some (essentially statistical) aspects
deserved to be highlighted. Mr. Bockelmann had taken the consumer price
index and unit labour costs as indicators or deflators. Both had their
limitations and imperfections, as did any other benchmark, but one should
try to choose the least bad. The first yardstick, prices, was only an
imperfect indicator of a country's external competitiveness; the second
took no account of the cost of capital and capital goods; moreover,
calculations of unit costs varied appreciably between countries. One might
follow the example of the Banca d'Italia, which had long used the wholesale
prices of manufactured goods. Though not perfect, this benchmark was

perhaps better suited to the

- 20 -

objective in question and gave results situated between the two extremes
obtained on the basis of consumer prices and unit costs.

Finally, it should be noted that the chosen base year, 1979, was
a special year for Italy because a depreciation of the lira had deliberately
been engineered so as to allow it to hold its position within the EMS for a
longer period without realignment. At the time, inflation differentials
with the participants in the exchange rate mechanism had been very high,
and the Banca d'Italia had wanted the lira to enter the grid at a fairly
low level.

Mr. Hoffmeyer observed that it was interesting to review the
development of effective exchange rates over a number of years; he pointed
out that the theory of purchasing power parity held completely only at
times of high inflation. A more subtle analysis should take account of a
number of factors such as services and quality, but it was difficult to
grasp the reality perfectly. Other independent measures, for instance based
on profits and wages, existed and could be used. It had been found, for
example, that in nearly all countries the share of wages had tended to
increase until the early 1970s and had subsequently contracted.

Mr. Doyle shared Mr. Ciampi's and Mr. Hoffmeyer's reservations
regarding the statistics. For instance, in Ireland, the figures based on
consumer prices were very strongly influenced by the high incidence of
indirect taxes, particularly since 1983. The figures calculated on the
basis of unit costs were also affected by the structure of Ireland's economy
and industry. The enormous importance of agriculture was not taken into
account, while a large part of industry was very capital-intensive. Thus
the competitiveness of Irish industry was not measured on the basis of unit
labour costs but more on that of wage rates. In all such international
comparisons, it was more important to compare similar economic and industrial
structures than to undertake rather abstract calculations which gave the
impression of being based on objective criteria but in fact did not have a

common basis.

VI. Exchange of views on recent developments in public finance and policy
implications

The Chairman said he had already mentioned that the Alternates

had not had time to examine the note on developments in public finance and

- 21 -

that he had proposed that the discussion be postponed to the July meeting,
at which the new report of the "Raymond Group" on monetary policies was
also to be examined. Furthermore, Mr. Raymond, who had been unable to come
to Basle this time for health reasons, should be present in July to take

part in the meetings.

VII. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee

There was no other business.

VIII. Date and place of the next meeting

The Committee's next meeting would be held in Basle on Monday,
12th June 1989 at 9.30 a.m., i.e. just before the BIS's Annual General
Meeting. By tradition, the June meeting was confined to a few items only,
such as the approval of the minutes and of the "concertation report", with
the addition, since 1988, of the "monitoring" exercise. The latter would,
as usual, be prepared by the experts, but only via the teleconference which
took place every month on the Friday afternoon preceding the Committee
meeting. So neither the "Monitoring Group" nor the Committee of Alternates
would hold a meeting in June, unless of course circumstances required them
to meet on the Sunday.

The "Concertation Group", on the other hand, would meet on Monday,
12th June 1989 at 8.30 a.m. in order to finalise the report to be adopted

by the Governors.

Committee of Governors of the Annex 9th May 1989
Central Banks of the Member States

of the European Economic Community Confidential

BRIEF REPORT ON
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

APRIL 1989

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of
the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce-
dure! and briefly describes their interventions during April and the first

few days of May 1989.

I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main features of the foreign exchange markets in April 1989
were:

- an easing of the US dollar followed by a renewed strengthening
towards the end of the month;
- the continued decline of the Swiss franc.

After reaching period highs on the first trading day of the
month, the US dollar eased as market participants adopted a more cautious
stance following the Group of Seven meeting and intervention dollar sales
against both the Deutsche Mark and Japanese yen. Although investor
sentiment towards the dollar remained positive, data pointing to a possible
moderation in the pace of US economic growth at times tempered dollar
demand. Late in the month, upward pressure re-emerged amid reports of
persistent corporate and investment demand for dollars. Thus, the dollar

changed little for the month as a whole.

} The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.
In the EMS, exchange rate relations were stable. A moderate
increase in German interest rates towards the end of the month was followed
by most other EMS countries and therefore it had little impact.

The Deutsche Mark strengthened slightly. Its weighted index
vis-a-vis its eighteen most important trading partners (1972=100) rose from
173.8 at end-March to 174.4 at end-April. The strengthening occurred in the
first half of the month and was due in part to the weakening of the dollar
which took place during this period and in part to the debate on the
abolition of the withholding tax. By contrast, the raising of the
Bundesbank's discount and lombard rates on 20th April by 0.5 percentage
point to 4.5% and 6.5%, respectively, had no lasting effect. During the
last days of the month the Deutsche Mark weakened a little.

The French franc continued, on the whole, to hold firm during the
period, benefiting from the publication of positive economic results and
from the favourable orientation of the French bond market. The increase in
the official rates decided by various European countries had only a very
brief impact, notwithstanding the narrowing of the short-term yield
differential resulting therefrom, and the franc recovered by month's end
its initial position in the Community band.

During the month, the Belgian franc remained stable against the
Deutsche Mark. The Banque Nationale de Belgique raised both its discount
rate and its special advances rate by 0.5 percentage point in the wake of a
similar move by the Bundesbank. The Bank acquired foreign currencies during
the period.

The position of the Dutch guilder in the upper part of the EMS
band underwent little change. Following the rise in German interest rates,
effective 2lst April, the Nederlandsche Bank raised both its discount and
lombard rates by 0.5 percentage point to 5.54 and 6.25%, respectively.

The Danish krone remained the weakest currency in the EMS, placed
close to its lower limit. The interest rate differential against the
Deutsche Mark was kept almost unchanged as the Nationalbank raised its main
interest rates by 0.5 percentage point when the Bundesbank raised its
official rates.

The Irish pound remained relatively stable in the upper half of
the EMS band during April. The Central Bank responded initially to
continued net commercial outflows by net sales of foreign currency.
Domestic money-market rates commenced rising from mid-April, and on
27th April the Central Bank increased its short-term facility lending rate
by 1 percentage point to 92%.
The Italian lira was mostly stable in the lower part of the EMS
band. Large capital inflows occurred during the second week of the month
requiring fairly large purchases of Deutsche Mark by the Banca d'Italia.

Adverse press comments triggered a fall in sterling at the
beginning of the month, but it recovered well in the wake of robust
intervention and growing expectations of a further increase in UK interest
rates. When no such increase was forthcoming, sterling became unsettled,
amidst fears of a dock strike and concerns about a disruption to oil
production in the North Sea. Further support was also provided following
the interest rate increases elsewhere in Europe but, helped by the
better-than-expected UK trade figures for March, sterling ended on a
steadier note. The trade-weighted index fell by 0.4% to 95.1 (1985=100).

The Greek drachma remained stable against the US dollar, but
against the ECU it depreciated by 0.7%. The Bank of Greece intervened in
the market several times in implementing the current exchange policy. In
effective terms the drachma depreciated by 0.72.

The Spanish peseta again came under upward pressure, due mainly
to short-term capital inflows driven by the existing interest rate
differential, which resulted in intervention purchases by the Banco de
Espana. It ended 0.4% higher against the ECU and 1.12% higher against the
US dollar. On 25th April the Banco de Espafia raised its three-month
repurchase agreement rate by 0.4 percentage point to 13.752.

In effective terms, the Portuguese escudo depreciated by 0.25% as
a result of considerable intervention purchases in the framework of the
exchange rate policy. Against the US dollar, the escudo rose by 0.262.

Vis-a-vis all important currencies, the value of the Swiss franc
declined further. Against the US dollar, the loss of value amounted to
0.6%, compared with a 1.3% loss against the Deutsche Mark. The
export-weighted index of the franc at the month-end was below the March
level by 0.9%. In the domestic money market, the interest rate increased
once again by roughly 1 percentage point to between 6.75% and 7%. On
13th April the official discount rate was raised by 0.5 percentage point to
4.5% and the lombard rate rose 1 percentage point to 72%.

The reasons for the continued weakness of the franc are not

clearly identifiable. The following causes may be of relevance:

~ The surplus in the balance of payments on the current account
decreased between 1986 and 1988 by roughly 30%. This trend

continues to persist.

- Other currencies, in particular those within the EMS, have made
distinct progress in achieving stability these past few years.
For many investors, the Swiss franc is no longer the outstanding
investment currency, but merely a fair alternative along with the
others. It must now stand up in a competitive way against similar

robust currencies.

- The heavy fall in interest rates in the first quarter of 1988
possibly gave rise here and there to doubts regarding stability
determination. These doubts are unfounded. The monetary course
taken in recent months unequivocally shows that now as before the

price-stability target is given top priority.

The Austrian schilling firmed against the US dollar by 0.7%.
Against the Deutsche Mark it fluctuated by only 0.04%. Effective
21st April, the discount rate was raised from 4.5% to 5% and the lombard
rate from 6% to 6.5%. The rate for short-term open market operations was
increased from 5.75% to 6.25% effective 24th April.

The Norwegian krone strengthened to index values around 111.50
during the first three weeks, but weakened somewhat thereafter, ending the
month 0.3% stronger in effective terms. Despite decreasing interest rate
differentials against the basket currencies, the krone strengthened due to
high oil prices and release of positive economic data.

The Swedish krona continued to strengthen during April due to a
persistent revaluation rumour, speculation about an interest rate hike, and
a favourable interest rate differential. This caused a relatively large
inflow of funds. Effective 28th April the Riksbank raised the discount rate
by 1 percentage point to 9.5% to adjust it to the already prevailing higher
interest rates in the market.

The Finnish markka continued to firm towards the strong end of
its fluctuation range. Short-term interest rates eased by about
0.5 percentage point.

The Japanese yen remained fairly stable against the US dollar
over the period. The yen was supported mainly by fear of concerted
intervention by central banks, while demand for the Japanese unit was
limited in the light of higher oil prices and interest rate differentials
between Japan and the United States. In its effort to support the yen, the
Bank of Japan stepped in the market at the beginning of the month. The yen
depreciated slightly against the ECU.

The Canadian dollar firmed slightly in April in cautious trading
ahead of the federal budget speech on 27th April. The leak and subsequent
early release of the budget on 26th April gave rise to a pronounced, but
brief, period of weakness as participants responded negatively to the news
of a larger-than-expected federal deficit in fiscal year 1989 and the
political uncertainties linked to the circumstances surrounding the leak.

However, in the last few days of the month, the Canadian dollar
strengthened, more than offsetting the weakness on 26th April, as large
commercial and investment related demand emerged for the currency. It

closed the month at US$ 0.8450, slightly up from the end of March.

Il. INTERVENTIONS
A. Interventions in US dollars

Net purchases of US dollars amounted to US$ 0.5 billion, compared
with net sales of US$ 4.4 billion during the month of March. A part of the
dollar sales was made in concerted interventions. The major net sellers of
dollars included the Bank of England, the Federal Reserve, the Bank of
Greece and the Central Bank of Ireland. Sveriges Riksbank, the Banco de

Portugal, the Banco de Espana, and Norges Bank made the largest purchases.

B. Interventions in Community currencies and _ in private ECUs

Interventions in EMS currencies by Community central banks
amounted to the equivalent of US$ 2.3 billion, compared with
US$ 2.9 billion in March. The interventions consisted almost entirely of
purchases of Deutsche Mark by the Banco de Espafia, the Banca d'Italia, the
Banque de France, the Banque Nationale de Belgique and the Central Bank of

Ireland. Also the Sveriges Riksbank made substantial purchases.

III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 5TH MAY

Upward pressure on the dollar persisted in the first few days of
May, tempered by several rounds of concerted central bank intervention. The
dollar firmed amid reports of strong corporate and investor demand for
dollars and a marked absence of dollar sellers. Thin markets, due to
holidays in Europe and Japan, at times exacerbated the effect of large

orders to buy dollars on exchange rate levels.
1A

EVOLUTION OF THE ECU, THE MIDDLE RATE OF THE CURRENCIES
PARTICIPATING IN THE EXCHANGE RATE MECHANISM OF THE EMS, AND THE
CURRENCIES OF THE EEC CENTRAL BANKS WHICH DO NOT PARTICIPATE IN THAT
MECHANISM, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST
DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

-20

« See next page.

§.5.1989

ov

EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS
PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE
RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

4 3.2 10.2 17.2 24.2 3.3 10.3 17.3 24.3 31.3 7.4 14.4 21.4 28.4

1989

* ECU 0,767254; GBP 00,5346; GRO 126,2002; ESP 107,8498; PTE 130,0242; FIM 3,945; CAD
1,302; CHF 1,2775; JPY 121,4501; SEK 5,795; NOK 6,233; ATS 11,129; middle rate of the
currencies participating in the EMS 0,77324. The middle rate of the currencies
participating in the EMS represents the daily average of the exchange rates of those
two currencies which have the largest divergence from their current bilateral central
rates, with a maximum fluctuation of 2.25%.

§.5.1989

1B

ue

- 16

-20

-24
MOVEMENTS IN THE EMS PARITY GRID

1989

§.5.1989

EVOLUTION OF THE DIVERGENCE INDICATOR*
100

75

50

25

-25

- 50

-75

ant Bee es

-100
27.1 3.2 10.2 17.2 24.2 3.3 10.3 17.3 24.3 31.3 7.4 14.4 21.4 28.4

1989

* The divergence indicator provides a uniform measure of a currency's position in
relation to its ECU central rate. The maximum divergence spread is the maximum
percentage by which a currency's market rate against the ECU may appreciate or
depreciate in relation to its ECU central rate; it is expressed as +/-100, the
divergence threshold being +/-75. The data which has been used to draw this graph are
the ECU rates against the different currencies, adjusted to eliminate the effect of
the fluctuation of the Italian lira, the pound sterling and the Greek drachma outside
the 2.5% margin against the other currencies participating in the EMS.

§.5.1989
ot

EVOL
PESET “AND
TA OF TH
D TH RTUG
- UND
a ORT ES
EVAILING ON 31 E5000, THE
1ST BER AS
DECEMBER 198 ®ASIS OF TH sa
7 ae F THE eT
18 oF L neKe ANISH
ite JARKET
meus RATES

-“4
\\ an ~
" / sn? maan
at f 7
ito ed —
| | a —_
— .
a __ GBP | -
7 == = 3R0 |
PI ESP :
_.. PTE |
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
_
I.
|
|
come
—
wt tee :
ee —
| er a ee |
7 women, !
ees poset
|
TOTS
| ~-
-
ao N_
| i
_
| l _
| ~
| 7
, _
po
l >
_ Uwe

. « a . . . A s
. 0 2
3.3
Q.
.3 3 .3
2
. 28
6 ba

§.5.1989

4A

rd
EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS

PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION,

|
}
ween een nero n nena akin,

ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE

RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECu*

* USD 1,30335; CAD 1,69696; CHF 1,66503;

14,5050:

FIM 5,14172.

17.3 24.3
1989
JPY 158,292;

SEK 7,55292;

NOK 8,12378; ATS

§.5.1989

4B

ow

28

24

20

16
Annex

Horst Bockelmann 7th April 1989

Speaking notes for a presentation to the
EEC Governors, on llth April 1989,

on exchange rates in a longer-term perspective

The tenth anniversary of the EMS seems an appropriate
occasion to reflect on longer-term exchange rate devel-
opments, but as the EMS is a regional agreement within a
wider international context, I shall enlarge my perspec-
tive to include all EEC currencies and the two major
currencies outside of the EEC, the US dollar and the

Japanese yen.

Let me explain briefly how I have approached the sub-
ject. Exchange rates as a market phenomenon are bila-
teral by nature. However, when a large number of curren-
cies are being considered, it becomes rather difficult
to keep track of the bilateral relationships, even
though they vary widely in importance. I shall look at
effective exchange rates for the currencies concerned,
based on trade weights calculated from export and import
flows for twenty-one industrialised countries, and also
taking into account third-market competition on the
export side. For some time the BIS has been using its
own method for this calculation which has, however, been
revised recently. The decision to employ our own formula
was taken in view of the fact that no clear “winner” has
emerged so far from among the different approaches. In
the absence of a broad consensus, one has to use one's
own judgement to decide how best to combine the maximum
number of advantages with a minimum of disadvantages.
Our method differs from that of the OECD and the IMF
mainly in its definition of "goods" (which is wider, not
just confined to manufactured goods) and in its
treatment of trade with countries for which effective
rates are not calculated (i.e. LDCs, OPEC and eastern

bloc countries).

Exchange rates are, of course, strongly influenced by
inflation differentials. If inflation differentials are
large and consistent, they will, over time, assume
dimensions which completely dominate exchange rate
developments. As the different inflation performances of
different countries is not our subject we shall look at
real effective exchange rates. Statistically this
implies an additional complication; it necessitates
using the trade weights of the effective exchange rate
also to construct the price indices abroad in order to
obtain an effective inflation differential.

One question in this context, to which there is no
Obvious answer, is whicn price index to use. The two
most commonly used indices are the consumer price index
and the index of unit labour costs, with a slight pref-
erence, it seems, for the latter, even though it is
subject to much greater statistical problems than the
former. The choice has, clearly, to do with the purpose
of the calculation. If one calculates real exchange rate
changes as a guide to changes in competitiveness, the
index of unit labour costs in manufacturing or industry
is obviously the better one, as productivity gains -
which, together with wages, are reflected in unit labour
costs - are of prime importance for competitiveness,
although they do not, by any means, include all cost
elements (interest rates, raw material prices, etc.)..

There is, however, a different way of looking at what
the inflation-adjustment of exchange rates is about. One
can simply use purchaSing power parity as a benchmark,
as Rudiger Dornbusch put it, by which to judge the level
of an exchange rate. Except in rather special circun-
stances, the best indicator for the development of pur-
chasing power is the consumer price index. Deflating

effective exchange rates by relative consumer price
indices best serves the purpose of eliminating inflation
differentials so as to be able to concentrate on the
other elements that contribute to changes in real
exchange rates over time. In fact, most of the not par-
ticularly extensSive discussion of these other elements
in the literature has grouped them under the heading of
"factors explaining deviations from purchasing power
parity". I do not like that way of putting it because it
implicitly assumes that purchaSing power parity prevails
over the longer term, or, to put it in normative terms,
that real effective exchange rates should be stable. As
we shall see, the factual statement proves to be the
exception rather than the rule. The list of reasons for
effective exchange rates not being stable is long and
there are perfectly good reasons alongside less good or
even bad ones. As there is not always a consensus on
what is "good" or “bad" in any particular area, it may
be more useful to distinguish between reasons on the
real side and reasons on the monetary side.

It must suffice for the moment just to indicate a few
reasons for a permanent change in real effective
exchange rates on the real side of the economy. The most
striking reason is obviously higher productivity growth,
which is often linked to higher growth in general and to
a strong export orientation. The next most important
reason may be terms-of-trade changes, particularly for
exporters of raw materials. For other countries it can
be conceptually difficult to distinguish between cause
and effect as changes in real effective exchange rates
themselves have terms-of-trade effects. Perhaps it may
now become clearer why I prefer deflating by the con-
sumer price index rather than by unit labour costs. The
latter method offers more than inflation adjustment, it
also contains an element of productivity adjustment, but
it is done in a somewhat untidy way. From a practical
point of view it may still, in the short run, provide an

acceptable approximation for evaluating changes in com-
petitiveness, but interpretation becomes difficult. I
shall come back to this a little later.

Nobody would argue, though, that the changes in real
effective exchange rates which we observe are predomi-
nantly, or even solely, due to developments on the real
Side of the economy. Particularly in the short run,
exchange market dynamics, such as overshooting, and
influences of monetary and fiscal policy are clearly the
dominant factors. A country that shifts unilaterally in
the direction of tight money must expect a real appreci-
ation, and vice versa. The effect of changes in fiscal
policy is more controversial as the experience of the US
@Giffers from that of other countries. Factors which
influence international portfolio decisions also have a
bearing on real exchange rate changes. Ftirstenberg
argued in 1985 that portfolio holders have a preference
for the currencies of low-inflation countries, which he
found causes these currencies to appreciate. It appears,
however, that this held true only at a time when real
interest rates were low or negative in high-inflation
countries. More recently this has certainly ceased to be
the case. In addition, expectations of stability in
nominal exchange rates seem to have tended to cause a
real depreciation of low-inflation currencies.

May I now ask you to look at Table 1 of the statistics
which I have distributed. The year 1979 has been taken
as the base year (= 100); the data are annual averages.
1979 has been used as the base year not only because it
marks the birth of the EMS, but also because it was a

year when current-account imbalances were on the whole
relatively modest. There can be no perfect base year,

but 1979 seems less imperfect than any other.

Over the period from 1979 to 1988 real effective
exchange rates remained stable only in the case of
Portugal, which may merely demonstrate that the escudo
is managed, presumably on a trade-weighted basis, ina
way not dissimilar to that used for our calculation.
Four of the thirteen currencies appreciated in real
terms over the same period; these are, in descending
order, the currencies of Japan (+ 36 %), Italy i+ 18 %),
Ireland (+ 13 %) and the United Kingdom (+ 4 %). That
leaves eight currencies which depreciated; again, in
descending order, they are the currencies of Belgium

(- 15 %), Germany (- 13 %), Greece (- 11 %), the Nether-
lands (- 9 %), France (- 8 %), Spain (- 7 %), the United
States and Denmark (- 4 %). The fact that the apprecia-

tion rates were higher partly accounts for the asymmetry
between the number of appreciating currencies (four) and
the number of depreciating currencies (eight). (Another
reason is the fact, mentioned earlier, that these effec-
tive exchange rateS are calculated on the basis of
twenty-one countries, aS against only thirteen shown
here; those missing from this table include Canada,
Australia and Switzerland.)

Table 2 gives for comparison the same results for unit
labour costs. AS you can see, they are quite different
for a number of currencies, such as the Irish pound
(which drops from third to twelfth place) and the Portu-
guese escudo (from fifth to eleventh). Strong movements
in the opposite direction can be observed for Germany
and Greece. Otherwise the "league" table is similar,
with Japan in the lead, and United Kingdom and Italy
towards the top and Belgium at the bottom of the list,
but the actual figures are nevertheless quite different.

The interpretation of these differences - as I mentioned
earlier - is not easy. It may be necessary to look at
developments in profits in manufacturing on a country-
by-country basis. The fact that the appreciation of the
yen is lower in CPI terms than it is in terms of unit
labour costs might suggest that profit margins in manu-
facturing in Japan have been reduced. The fact that the
Deutsche Mark is shown to have been stable in unit
labour cost terms but to have depreciated in CPI terms
might well be explained by the restoration of profit
margins. But this is certainly not the whole story, as
the consumer price index does not include export prices
and, indeed, may be dampened by import prices. Price
performance in the export sector and in the rest of the

economy can differ widely.

Table 3 takes the time series for the CPI-deflated real
effective exchange rates of the thirteen currencies back
to 1960, well into the time of the Bretton Woods system.
It would not be surprising to find that changes in real
effective exchange rates turned out to be larger between
1960 and 1973 because of the stickiness of nominal
exchange rates under a fixed exchange rate system. That
was, -~taking the period as a whole - not generally the
case, but it does hold true for quite a number of coun-
tries, including the UK, the Netherlands, Denmark and
Greece, with Germany, Italy, Spain and Portugal on the
border-line. In six countries, the US, Japan, France,
Spain, Denmark, Greece, the direction of change was the
same before and after 1973, in other words: if these
currencies had been depreciating or appreciating in real
terms over the period 1960-73, they continued to do so
over the period 1973-88. Clearly, it would be very
difficult to attribute such a long-term trend to any-
thing other than quite fundamental characteristics of
the economies concerned. Neither speculative capital
movements nor fiscal or monetary policies qualify as
explanations. Things would, no doubt, be different if we
looked at the year-on-year changes, which, however, we

Cannot do here.

Table 4 shows instead the variability of changes in real
effective exchange rates based on the consumer price
index for the periods 1960~73 and 1973-88. There is not
a Single currency whose variability was not sub-
Stantially greater during the latter (floating) period
than in the period before; in some cases the increase is
- J -

dramatic. The smallest increase in the variance of
changes is observed for the currencies of Ireland and
Germany, with multipliers of 1.1 and 1.2. The largest
increase is that of the yen, where the variability of
changes in the real effective exchange rate is three
times what it had been under the Bretton Woods system.
For the US dollar the variability has been multiplied by
2.2; for the currencies of most EEC countries the
increase in variability is smaller.

Even more interesting than the contrast between the two
periods is the actual level of variability in the later
period. Here we can see demonstrated the well-known fact
that real effective exchange rates have fluctuated less
for the currencies of the EEC countries than for the yen
or the US dollar. The currencies of those EEC countries
not participating in the EMS - the United Kingdom,
Spain, Greece and Portugal - have, however, figures for
variability which are close to that for the US dollar,
but still well below that for the Japanese yen.

I should draw your attention to the fact that we have
been looking at the variability of changes from year to
year (based on annual averages). Short-term volatility
from day to day, week to week or month to month has been
left out of account. You all know the verdict on the
floating rate system: that, while high volatility can be
tolerated, severe misalignments cause trouble because of
the wrong signals they imply for investment in capital
goods. Given the increased changes from year to year,
one must conclude that severe misalignments have become
more frequent. Non-misaligned real effective exchange
rates may well have to change over time, but certainly
not by as much as we have observed here. But this is
only a tentative observation. To discover whether any
particular effective exchange rate is “out of line" at a
particular time requires, clearly, a much broader analy-
Sis than one which looks at exchange rates and nothing
but exchange rates.

