Confidential
(Translation)
MINUTES *
OF THE 236th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON MONDAY, 12th JUNE 1989 AT 9.30 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Bank of
Greece and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by Mr. Papademos
and Mr. Karamouzis; the Governor of the Banque Nationale de Belgique, Mr. Godeaux,
accompanied by Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen; the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank,
Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Schlesinger and Mr. Rieke; the
Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio, accompanied by Mr. Linde and
Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France, Mr. de Larosiére, accompanied
by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the Governor of the Central Bank of
Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the
Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi, accompanied by Mr. Dini and
Mr. Santini; the President of De Nederlandsche Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied
by Mr. Muller; the Governor of the Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira,
accompanied by Mr. Pégo Marques and Mr. Amorim; the Governor of the Bank of
England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by Mr. Crockett and Mr. Price;
the Vice-President of the Commission of the European Communities,
Mr. Christophersen, accompanied by Mr. Costa, Mr. Kolte and Mr. Boyd; the
Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr. Jaans. Also
present at the meeting was Mr. Dalgaard, Chairman of the Group of Experts.
The Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul,
Mr. Scheller and Mr. Giles, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan also attended.
The Chairman opened the meeting by welcoming Mr. Christophersen,
Vice-President of the Commission with responsibility for economic and financial
affairs, who was taking part in the Committee's work for the first time; he
recalled that in May Mr. Delors had said that the Commission would in future

be represented either by its President or by Mr. Christophersen, Vice-President,

* Final text, identical to the draft, approved at the meeting on
lith July 1989.

- 2-

with whom the Committee would undoubtedly have the same close and constructive
relations.

The Chairman added that by tradition the June meeting was confined
to a few items only, principally the "monitoring" exercise, but that this
time a special subject was due for discussion, namely the the Governors'
opinion required for the revision of the ECU. This subject was dealt with
within the framework of the Board of Governors of the EMCF (see Minutes of

the 160th meeting).

I. Approval of the minutes of the 235th meeting

In view of the late distribution of the draft the Chairman proposed
that approval of the minutes be held over until the July meeting.

II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EC based on:

- Preparation by the "Dalgaard Group";
- Statistical charts and tables

The Chairman noted that the Alternates had held only a short
meeting that morning devoted entirely to finalising the opinion of the
Board of Governors of the EMCF on the revision of the ECU; the “monitoring"
exercise had therefore been prepared only by the experts and Mr. Dalgaard

would give his customary report.

A. Statement by Mr. Dalgaard

The dollar had risen steeply in the first half of May; between

late April and 20th May it had appreciated by almost 10% despite, firstly,
a continued reduction in interest rate differentials (for example vis-a-vis
the Deutsche Mark, with the 3-month differential narrowing from 4Z% in late
March to 2.5% recently, the lowest level for quite some time) and, secondly,
substantial intervention in particular by the Federal Reserve. However,
during the last two or three weeks the dollar had fluctuated below the
earlier peak. Several factors accounted for this slight easing:

- the narrowing of interest rate differentials had finally had an

impact;

- the markets had expected a further decline in interest rates in
the United States, especially when it had seemed clear that the

Federal Reserve had eased monetary policy somewhat;

- interventions had been continued on a large scale.

Opinions differed as to the impact of these interventions. The
experts from the Deutsche Bundesbank believed that in the present circum-
stances interventions carried out as they had been had no effect on exchange
rates. On the contrary, they had been taken by the market as an opportunity
to purchase dollars without putting pressure on its rate. Generally, the
experts from the other central banks agreed that the interventions should
and could have been conducted more effectively but considered that they had
nonetheless had some impact. In particular the large sales made by the
Federal Reserve had convinced the markets that the US authorities did not
want a stronger dollar, whereas a few weeks ago it had been widely felt
that they were unconcerned about the level of the dollar. It had also been
pointed out that the central banks had now been intervening on the market
for so long that a complete halt might be interpreted as a lack of interest
on their part in exchange rates and would have an undesirable influence on
the markets.

Intervention sales in May had reached a record total of over
US$ 19 billion. Slightly larger interventions had been made in early 1987,
but in the form of purchases. The pattern of interventions was rather unusual
in that the Federal Reserve had accounted for a substantial share with a
record figure of US$ 6.7 billion; the Bank of Japan had sold US$ 5.5 billion,
also a record for it, and the Bundesbank, despite its doubts as to their
effectiveness, had undertaken sales of US$ 1 billion, more than most of the
other EC central banks. It was difficult to say whether the fundamental
trend of the dollar had changed; market sentiment seemed to be somewhat
different, but the international disturbances, for example in China, had
not had any very significant influence.

The yen had continued to weaken not only vis-a-vis the dollar but
also against the European currencies. In February the yen/Deutsche Mark
rate had stood at about 68.53; now, in early June, it was about 73, which
represented a large decline of over 6%. This development reflected the
political scandals in Japan, which were not yet entirely overcome, and

events in China, which had affected the yen more than other currencies.

The situation within the EMS had remained calm. The Deutsche Mark
had still shown a weak trend up to late May, despite a widening of interest
rate differentials and large intervention purchases by central banks. None-
theless, the Deutsche Mark remained the strongest currency in the exchange
rate mechanism and still had the lowest interest rates in the Community; in
late May there had seemed to be signs of a change in favour of the German
currency. The French franc had weakened slightly from early May, primarily
owing to a contraction of interest rate differentials. These had stood at
1 3/4% in late May, compared with 5% a year ago. Though weakening a little,
the French franc still held a position around the middle of the band, which
was a sign of greater strength than during most of the last two years. The
upward trend of the lira had continued until late May; it had then been
subject to a bout of weakness but remained relatively strong. The Banca
d'Italia had therefore not considered it necessary to raise interest rates
to defend the exchange rate, particularly as interest rates were already
fairly high so as to ensure the necessary sales of government securities.

In Ireland, the position of the Irish pound had stabilised after the increase
in interest rates in April. The net capital outflow had ceased. Residents
were continuing to invest abroad following the measures to liberalise capital
movements early this year but, attracted by high interest rates in Ireland,
there had been inflows from non-residents.

Sterling had been weak, primarily as a result of high inflation,
strikes and the unfavourable balance-of-payments position. When the weakening
had become more pronounced the base rate had been raised by 1 percentage
point to 14% on 24th May and some intervention had been undertaken. The
pound had nevertheless continued to weaken and in early June had stood 52%
below the January/February peak. The Spanish peseta had undergone a pronounced
change. In early May it had still been subject to upward pressure; the
Banco de Espafia had countered this with large-scale intervention, which had
held the rate at a ceiling of Pts. 62 to DM 1. The market had finally accepted
that the exchange rate would not rise further and it had begun to soften.
Some fiscal measures might also have contributed to this. Subsequently,
rumours that the peseta would join the exchange rate mechanism led to a
Significant weakening of the Spanish currency as the market believed that
it could not join at too high a level. In early June it had stood at about
Pts. 65 to DM 1. The Spanish Minister of Finance had announced that the
peseta would join the exchange rate mechanism before mid-1990 with the

wider margin of 62.

III. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EC Ministers of Finance
on developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen
countries participating in the concertation procedure during
May and the first few days of June 1989

The Chairman took note of the Committee's adoption of the “concer-
tation report", which would be sent to the EC Ministers of Finance in the

usual way.

IV. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee

There was no other business.

V. Date and place of the next meeting

The Committee's next meeting would be held in Basle on Tuesday,

lith July 1989 at 9.30 a.m.
Annex

Committee of Governors of the 12th June 1989
Central Banks of the Member States

of the European Economic Community Confidential

BRIEF REPORT ON
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

MAY 1989

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of
the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation procedure
and briefly describes their interventions during May and the first few days
of June 1989.

I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main features of the foreign exchange markets in May 1989
were:
- an appreciation of the US dollar, despite heavy interventions;
- a decline of sterling;
- a further weakening of the Swiss franc followed by a strengthening
towards the end of the month.

The US dollar rose sharply during May amid continuing reports
that corporate and investor interests were persistently bidding for dollars
to increase their dollar exposure, either through investments or hedging
operations. News of a smaller US trade deficit during March, as well as
political uncertainty abroad, gave support to the dollar exchange rates.
The dollar reached its period highs of 2.0260 against the Deutsche Mark and
144.00 against the Japanese yen. During the last ten days of the month the
dollar fluctuated below this level. The US and foreign monetary authorities

intervened in substantial amounts to counter the dollar's rise. The dollar

i The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.
closed the month approximately 7.5% higher against the Japanese yen and
5.754: higher against the Deutsche Mark.

There were no tensions within the EMS. The most significant
movement was the appreciation of the Italian lira which reached the upper
part of the narrow band.

The Deutsche Mark strengthened vis-a-vis some currencies but lost
ground against the majority, in particular the US dollar and the Swiss
franc. It remained, however, the strongest EMS currency. The weighted index
of the Deutsche Mark vis-a-vis the eighteen most important trading partners
(1972=100) declined from 174.4 at end-April to 173.1 at end-May despite a
_ rise in market interest rates.

The French franc remained in the middle of the narrow band but
weakened somewhat during the month following a further contraction of
interest rate differentials between France and Germany. |

The position of the Belgian franc was virtually unchanged. In
order to check an excessive narrowing of the interest differential between
the franc and the Deutsche Mark, the Banque Nationale de Belgique raised
its three-month Treasury certificate rate on two occasions (by a total of
0.35 percentage point).

The Dutch guilder firmed slightly against most EMS currencies and
joined the Deutsche Mark at the top of the band. Short-term guilder interest
rates rose less strongly than Deutsche Mark rates. As a result the interest
rate differential between the two currencies narrowed considerably.

The Danish krone was stable but remained the weakest currency in
the EMS band.

In Ireland, following the increase in official interest rates at
the end of April, foreign exchange flows were somewhat more favourable in
May than in earlier months. As a result, the Irish pound appreciated in the
upper half of the EMS band and there were small net purchases of foreign
currency by the Central Bank of Ireland.

The Italian lira appreciated significantly towards EMS currencies,
reaching the upper part of the narrow band. Large capital inflows occurred
during the month. In order to smooth the appreciation of the currency, the
Banca d'Italia made fairly large intervention purchases in the first week
of May. Purchases of Deutsche Mark against US dollars were also carried out
in concerted interventions.

Sentiment towards sterling became very bearish against the back-
ground of growing industrial unrest in the United Kingdom. An unexpected

jump in inflation to the 8% level and the continued weakness of the balance
of payments provoked sharp outflows from sterling. Although base rates were
raised by 1 percentage point to 14% on 24th May and considerable official
support was provided, the weakness persisted. With the market perceiving
some divisions within the Government over economic policy, sterling's trade-
weighted index fell by 3% to 92.3 (1985=100).

The Greek drachma came under some pressure during the month partly
related to the forthcoming national elections. The Bank of Greece intervened
several times, while domestic interest rates firmed. The drachma depreciated
by 5.8% against the US dollar and it remained stable against the ECU. In
effective terms the drachma weakened by 0.5%.

The Spanish peseta was under considerable upward pressure at the
beginning of the month, which was met by substantial purchases of foreign
exchange reserves by the Banco de Espana. Later on, sentiment towards the
peseta changed and the Banco de Espana reversed its intervention with sales
of foreign reserves. It ended 2.5Z lower with respect to the ECU and 8.62%
lower with respect to the US dollar.

The depreciation of the Portuguese escudo in effective terms was
0.25%, in line with the foreign exchange policy defined by the authorities.
Against the US dollar the escudo lost 5.72.

Up to 24th May the Swiss franc weakened against the US dollar by
about 7% and vis-a-vis the EMS currencies by roughly 1%. In the last business
days in May a marked interest rate increase in the domestic money market
resulted in a change in trend and the value of the Swiss franc against all
major currencies rose by 3% to 4%. In the domestic money market the call
money rate went up by 2 percentage points to 8.5%. The euro-franc rate for
investments with maturities of 1 to 12 months increased by 1 to 1.75 per-
centage points to reach 7./5% to 8.25%. The fact that short-term rates rose
more pronouncedly than longer-term rates has led to an inverse interest
rate structure. The interest rate increase is also attributable to the
introduction of the flexible lombard rate, which, with effect from 26th May,
is calculated on a daily basis and on the strength of market developments.
Its rate lies 1 percentage point above the average call money rate of the
two previous working days. The lombard rate is fixed and published every
working day before 9.00 a.m.

The Austrian schilling weakened by 5.72 vis-a-vis the US dollar.
Against the Deutsche Mark it fluctuated by only 0.062.

The continued stability of the Norwegian krone, together with
moderate credit demand and reduced inflation, gave room for a 0.5 percentage
point reduction in Norges Bank's overnight lending rate to 10.5%, effective

Oth May. The interest rate differential versus the basket currencies on
three-month placements is now slightly more than 1 percentage point, the
lowest differential since 1982. On 9th May the Norwegian bond market was
reopened to foreign investors. The krone strengthened somewhat after the
announcements but only temporarily. Norges Bank intervened on several
occasions to stabilise the market. The krone ended the month unchanged in
effective terms.

The Swedish krona remained stable during the first half of the
month but weakened somewhat towards the end of the period when the dollar
strengthened against most currencies.

The Finnish markka remained rather stable in effective terms.
Short-term interest rates fluctuated markedly but on average they were
roughly at the same levels as in April.

The Japanese yen depreciated by 7.2% against the US dollar to
close at 142./0. This was due mainly to the heavy buying of dollars by
speculators and institutional investors worldwide, reflecting the large
interest rate differentials between the United States and Japan. The yen
also depreciated against the ECU. In its effort to support the yen, the
Bank of Japan entered the market at various times throughout the month,
selling US dollars against the Japanese yen. Effective from 3lst May, the
Bank of Japan raised the official discount rate by 0.75 percentage point to
3.25% in order to achieve a continuing sustained growth promoted by domestic
demand while maintaining price stability.

The Canadian dollar closed the month at US$ 0.8284, down 1.82
against the US dollar after trading quietly for most of the period. The
currency weakened in the latter part of the month as the strength of the
US dollar against the major overseas currencies gave rise to short-term

capital outflows from Canada.

II. INTERVENTIONS
A. Interventions in US dollars

Net sales of US dollars amounted to US$ 19.1 billion, compared
with net purchases of US$ 0.5 billion during the month of April. Some of
the dollar sales were made in concerted interventions. The major net sellers
were the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan and, to a lesser extent, the
Bank of England, the Bank of Canada, the Deutsche Bundesbank, the Banco de
Espana and the Swiss National Bank. The Banque de France, Norges Bank, the
Banca d'Italia, the Nederlandsche Bank and the Banque Nationale de Belgique

also made considerable sales. The Banco de Portugal was the largest purchaser.
B. Interventions in Community currencies and in private ECUs

Interventions in EMS currencies and private ECUs by Community
central banks amounted to the equivalent of US$ 3.7 billion, compared with
US$ 2.3 billion in April. The interventions consisted almost entirely of
purchases of Deutsche Mark by the Banco de Espafia, the Banca d'Italia, the
Banque de France, the Banque Nationale de Belgique and the Central Bank of

Ireland. Norges Bank also made substantial purchases.

IIl. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 9TH JUNE

The dollar eased during the first days of June. Weaker-than-expected
US employment data that pointed towards a slowing economy led to expectations
of lower US interest rates and major US banks lowered their prime rates on
5th June from 11.5% to 11%. However, markets remain volatile due to the
political situation in China and, at the end of the week, the dollar firmed
again as a result of the publication of a higher-than-expected producer

price index.
1A

EVOLUTION OF THE ECU, THE MIDDLE RATE OF THE CURRENCIES
PARTICIPATING IN THE EXCHANGE RATE MECHANISM OF THE EMS, AND THE
CURRENCIES OF THE EEC CENTRAL BANKS WHICH DO NOT PARTICIPATE IN THAT
MECHANISM, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST
DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

“94.2 10.3 24.3 7.4 21.4 5.5 19.5 2.6

1989

* See next page.

9.6.1989

oe

1B

EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS
PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE
RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

e
gtet Fel aus

1989

* ECU 0,767254; GBP 0,5346; GRD 126,2002; ESP 107,8498; PTE 130,0242; FIM 3,945; CAD
1,302; CHF 1,2775; JPY 121,4501; SEK 5,795; NOK 6,233; ATS 11,129; middle rate of the
Currencies participating in the EMS 0,77324. The middle rate of the currencies
participating in the EMS represents the daily average of the exchange rates of those
two currencies which have the largest divergence from their current bilateral central

rates, with a maximum fluctuation of 2.25%.

9.6.1989

a?

MOVEMENTS IN THE EMS PARITY GRID

oe

W)

--------- ~~ ee eb

4

a7 ek

-weun*

~~”

~4----p---.-----

"24.2

1989

9.6.1989
EVOLUTION OF THE DIVERGENCE INDICATOR*

24.2 10.3 24.3 7.4 21.4 5.5 19.5 2.6
1989

* The divergence indicator provides a uniform measure of a currency's position in
relation to its ECU central rate. The maximum divergence spread is the maximum
percentage by which a currency's market rate against the ECU may appreciate or
depreciate in relation to its ECU central rate; it is expressed as +/-100, the
divergence threshold being +/-75. The data which has been used to draw this graph are
the ECU rates against the different currencies, adjusted to eliminate the effect of
the fluctuation of the Italian lira, the pound sterling and the Greek drachma outside
the 2.5% margin against the other currencies participating in the EMS.

9.6.1989

4A

EVOLUTION OF THE POUND STERLING, THE GREEK DRACHMA, THE SPANISH
PESETA AND THE PORTUGUESE ESCUDO, ON THE BASIS OF THE MARKET RATES
PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECU*

of

1989

© GBP 0,696793; GRD 164,483; ESP 140,566; PTE 169,467.

9.6.1989
4B

EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS
PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE
RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECU*

1989

* USD 1,30335; CAD 1,69696; CHF 1,66503; JPY 158,292; SEK 7,55292; NOK 8,12378; ATS
14,5050; FIM 5,14172.

9.6.1989
