Confidential

(Translation)

MINUTES *
OF THE 228th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 13th SEPTEMBER et 10 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Banque
Nationale de Belgique and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Godeaux, accompanied
by Mr. Janson, Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen; the Governor of Danmarks
Nationalbank, Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of
the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Rieke;
the Governor of the Bank of Greece, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by Mr. Papademos
and Mr. Karamouzis; the Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio, accompanied
by Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France,
Mr. de Larosiere, accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the
Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady
Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi,
accompanied by Mr. Dini and Mr. Masera; the President of De Nederlandsche
Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr. Szasz and Mr. Boot; the Governor
of the Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo
Marques and Mr. da Costa Pinto; the Governor of the Bank of England,
Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by Mr. Loehnis and Mr. Price; the President
of the Commission of the European Communities, Mr. Delors, accompanied by
Mr. Mingasson and Mr. Dixon; the Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary
Institute, Mr. Jaans. Also present at the meeting were Mr. Raymond and Mr.
Dalgaard, Chairmen of the Groups of Experts. The Secretary General of the
Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul, Mr. Scheller and Mr. Cook,
and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan also attended.

The Chairman opened the meeting by announcing that the meeting of
the Committee chaired by Mr. Delors would begin in the afternoon at 2 p.m.
as planned; the time of the meeting could not be brought forward, but it

should end at 5.30 p.m. to enable the participants to depart as planned.

* Final text approved at the meeting on 8th November 1988, which
incorporates some drafting changes.
I. Approval of the minutes of the 22/th meeting.

The Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 227th meeting,
on the understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be in-

corporated in the final text.

II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:

- Preparation by the "Dalgaard Group'' and discussion by the Committee
of Alternates;

- Statistical charts and tables.

A. Statement by Mr. Dalgaard

The firming of the dollar which had started in May had continued
until mid-August. This appreciation had been due, as before, to strong —
economic growth in the United States, leading in particular to a rise in
interest rates and some improvement in the trade balance.

The Deutsche Bundesbank had attempted to check this movement by
selling dollars, firstly alone, and subsequently together with other central
banks, including the Federal Reserve. These sales had been very considerable:
over $20 billion in the three months June, July and August. At the same
time, interest rates had been raised in Germany and elsewhere. This had
taken the German three-month money market rate from below 3.5% to 4.52%. In
spite of these moves the Deutsche Mark had remained weak, even within the
EMS, owing to large outflows of long-term capital.

August had seen a change of sentiment towards the dollar, doubtless
as a result of the cumulative effect of the very heavy intervention, the
rise in interest rates in many countries and some indications of a slackening
of growth in the United States. The Deutsche Mark had firmed against the
dollar and within the EMS. Money market rates in Germany had, in fact,
begun to fall when the discount rate was raised. It had no longer been
necessary to support the Deutsche Mark with interventions and, indeed, some
central banks had actually begun selling Deutsche Mark in early September.

The yen had moved through different phases, from weakness to
stability and, more recently, firmness.

The situation within the EMS had been calm as long as the dollar
had remained firm. At the end of August/beginning of September some tensions

had surfaced in connection with the firming of the Deutsche Mark, rumours
of a realignment linked with the informal meeting of the ECOFIN Council,

and a number of special factors in certain countries. The tensions had been
most marked in France and in Italy. In France the interest rate differential
vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark had narrowed from 4 points in early June to 2
points at the end of July. Pressure on the French franc had led to an increase
in interest rates, a slipping of the exchange rate within the band and
substantial interventions, totalling approximately $2 billion, around the

end of August/beginning of September.

In Italy the deterioration in the balance of payments had added
to downward pressure on the lira and the Banca d'Italia had also made use
of the three instruments: the fluctuation band, interest rates and interventions.
The interventions had been comparable to those undertaken by the French
authorities, totalling $2 billion. The important capital liberalisation and
deregulation measures scheduled for October did not seem to have contributed
to the pressure on the lira. -

Other participants in the EMS exchange rate mechanism had also
been affected by these movements. The Belgian franc had been subject to the
same influences as the French franc and the Italian lira, but in addition
had suffered the repercussions of the Société Générale affair, i.e. capital
outflows following the inflows of early 1988. The Banque Nationale de Belgique
had raised its interest rates and had intervened regularly from mid-June
onwards, for a total of approximately $2 billion.

The Dutch guilder had been less robust than during the first half
of 1988. The exchange rate had weakened, interest rates had been raised and
fairly regular support interventions had been undertaken for a total amount
of over $2 billion. The interest rate differential vis-a-vis Germany had
returned to its normal level of 0.5 points.

In Denmark capital inflows had been much smaller and the Danish
krone had weakened slightly. The announcement of the abolition of the last
exchange controls as from lst October 1988 had had no effect on the market.

The Irish pound had remained firm even though there had been a
slight narrowing of the interest rate differential vis-a-vis other countries.

In all, the tensions which had surfaced recently within the EMS
appeared to be linked to the fact that interest rate differentials had been
reduced further than the market considered appropriate. The central banks
concerned had coped with these tensions by making use of the three traditional

instruments and had obtained satisfactory results. There were, however,
more fundamental differences between the EMS countries, in particular in
current-account positions, and these could be a factor in keeping certain
tensions alive.

The performance of those currencies not participating in the
exchange rate mechanism had varied. In the United Kingdom interest rates
had been raised chiefly for domestic reasons, and the announcement of a
record trade deficit had caused some nervousness in regard to sterling. Its
rate of exchange had fluctuated somewhat, but it should be noted that since
March it had remained within a fairly limited range of between DM 3.10 and
3.22.

The Spanish peseta had been stable, but since the beginning of
the year it had recorded an 82% appreciation vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark in
spite of intervention purchases in excess of $20 billion. At the end of
August, however, the peseta had weakened in connection with the pressures
on the French franc and the Italian lira, the deterioration in the trade
balance and the narrowing of interest rate differentials vis-a-vis other
countries, and the Banco de Espana had carried out intervention sales.

The Greek drachma and the Portuguese escudo had continued to

depreciate slightly in effective terms.

B. Statement by Mr. Janson

The Alternates' discussion had focused on the following main
points:

1. How were recent developments on the markets, which reflected a
certain nervousness but which could not be called major tensions,
to be interpreted?

2. What could be done to strengthen market confidence in the stability
of exchange rate relations between EMS currencies and thus confirm
the recent important and concurring statements by the German and
French authorities?

3. How were the particular developments observed in the case of the

pound sterling and the Spanish peseta to be evaluated?

1. Market nervousness
Recent conditions on the exchange markets had to be placed in the

context of developments in the fundamentals.

(a) Growth was strong in most European countries, including Germany,
where it had recently accelerated. Since it was considerably stronger still
in a number of other European countries, this was reflected both in the
development of current-account balances within Europe and in Germany's
bilateral trade relations with its partners. From the point of view of the
EMS there was no call for particular concern. Where a current-account deficit
existed, as in France or Italy, it remained at a level which gave no great
cause for concern in itself, particularly as price and cost developments

did not seem to be in any danger of getting out of control.

(bd) On the price front, some Alternates observed that the climate
was in the process of changing slightly. The concern to avoid any depreciation
of the Deutsche Mark was to be seen in this light and in the light of furthering
the adjustment process. The action taken by the German authorities to this
end had been followed by the other EMS member countries, which had made use

of the various mechanisms put in place by the Basle/Nyborg Agreement.

(c) This combined action had somewhat influenced expectations of
stable exchange rates which, together with appropriate interest rate
differentials, had encouraged long-term capital movements and thereby helped
to finance the current payments imbalances. It had been emphasised that, in
some cases, these movements were adequately financing the varying rates of
investment growth in different regions of the Community and augured well
for the positive effects of the liberalisation of capital movements. However,
when there was a resurgence of rumours about exchange rate relationships
between major currencies, simply re-establishing interest differentials was
not necessarily enough to calm market expectations. Moreover, some Alternates
were concerned about the levels interest rates had reached, and saw limits

to any realistic scope for further upward adjustments.

2. The policies to be followed

(a) Some Alternates had expressed the fear that speculative pressures
on the markets could grow. With the rise of the Deutsche Mark to the top of
the EMS and the slight decline of the French franc, market operators were
reminded of the long history of realignments between these two important
EMS currencies in particular. It was therefore essential to give the markets

a clear and convincing signal to quell realignment rumours.

(b) These rumours should be quelled for a number of other reasons:
price-competitiveness relationships were little changed. The trade-account
imbalances in Europe largely reflected the structural advantage of the
German economy, in an upward phase of the cycle, in exports of capital
goods. Moreover, it was important not to shake confidence in the declared
intention to continue efforts towards closer convergence in domestic and
external stability. It was essential, particularly during the present period
of international meetings, that any official statements should help strengthen

confidence in the stability of exchange rate relationships.

(c) In an attempt to give concrete shape to the signals of cohesion
judged desirable, the following ideas had been put forward on the basis of
assumptions regarding the dollar. It had been noted that US economic
fundamentals continued to hold out a real threat of dollar depreciation. If
the dollar were to decline, co-ordinated action to preserve stability in
the EMS and recover room for manoeuvre should take the form of a signal in
the direction of a relaxation of interest rates, initiated by Germany.

Any upward trend shown by the dollar should be countered not by a
further increase in interest rates but by co-ordinated interventions in

dollars only.

3. Sterling and the Spanish peseta

(a) Sterling

The size of the UK trade deficit in August reflected the strength
of domestic demand in that country. In the view of the UK Alternate this
had justified the policy of progressively tightening interest rates. He
acknowledged that sterling was vulnerable at its present level and hoped

that further increases in interest rates could be avoided.

(b) The Spanish peseta

The weakening of the peseta had to be seen in the context of a
rate of inflation higher than the 3% target, the sharp deterioration on
current account and the cut in interest rates. The depreciation only partially
offset the considerable appreciation of the peseta vis-a-vis the Deutsche
Mark (of the order of 8% since the beginning of the year) in real terms.
The decline of the peseta primarily reflected short-term capital movements,
in particular under the contagious influence of pressures on the French

franc and the Italian lira.

C. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. Hoffmeyer added a few comments on the abolition of the last
exchange controls in Denmark to which Mr. Dalgaard had referred. This would
end fifty-five years of controls and would enter into force on lst October.
From that date capital movements would be free of restrictions, save for
two rules: firstly, a rule on financial institutions’ external positions,
which was liberal and was intended to ensure that the financial intermediaries
did not speculate against the Danish krone, and secondly a tax provision
whose principle was that Danish residents had to ensure that the Danish tax
authorities received the same information about their deposits abroad as
about deposits in Denmark. Danish residents were themselves responsible for
supplying this information, so that there would be no conflict with the
national legislation of those countries in which the deposits were held.

As had already been mentioned, the announcement of the abolition
of exchange controls as from lst October 1988 had had no effect on the
exchange market.

The Chairman noted that there were no further comments on the

reports given by Mr. Dalgaard and Mr. Janson.

Til. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EEC Ministers of Finance on
developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen countries
participating in the concertation procedure during July, August and
the first few days of September 1988.

The Chairman took note of the Committee's approval of the
“concertation report", which would be submitted as usual to the EEC Ministers

of Finance.

IV. Exchange of views on recent developments in public finance and policy
implications.

The Chairman pointed out that the Committee had not been able to
hold this exchange of views at its previous meeting. Although Mr. Raymond
had already introduced the note on public finance in July, he might now
wish to repeat one or two points or perhaps bring his introduction up to

date.

A. Statement by Mr. Raymond

There was no need to bring the introduction given in July up to
date, since the note on public finance basically dealt with 1987, but the
substance of what he had said in July and of the note itself could be summarised
again.

The evolution of public finance in 1987 could be characterised by
three welcome developments and three that gave cause for concern. The welcome
developments highlighted in the note were:

- a slight overall contraction, as a proportion of GNP, in expenditure
and in the aggregate budget deficit for the Community as a whole;

- a slight improvement in convergence among member countries;

- a lessening of the conflicts between fiscal and monetary policies,
primarily as a result of a sharp reduction in direct monetary
financing of the budget deficits.

The three areas of concern were:

- the progress that had been made was very limited;

- no significant, lasting progress had been made in those countries
whose positions were the least favourable, i.e. those in which
the budget deficit or the public debt ratio was highest; this was
particularly true after adjustment for cyclical factors in these
countries, such as a temporary rise in revenue associated with
higher-than-expected growth, or the decline in nominal interest
rates, which had not continued in 1988;

- in those countries whose budgetary positions were favourable, on
the other hand, the authorities saw little scope for using the

fiscal instrument to stimulate economic activity.

B. Statement by Mr. Janson

1. Broadly speaking, the Alternates agreed with the conclusion of
the report presented by Mr. Raymond. While conflicts between fiscal and
monetary policy had lessened in 1987, budgetary developments were only in
part satisfactory. Wide differences remained in budgetary positions, which

in several cases still seemed unsustainable in the medium term.

2. The Alternates noted that in some countries interest service

on public debt had a major impact on budgetary balances. This made it harder
to reduce the deficits as adjustment efforts had to focus on non-interest
expenditure, which could be difficult to trim.

It had also been noted, on reading Table 10, that in some countries
substantial differences existed between gross interest payments (column a)
and these same payments after deduction, on the one hand, of revenue from
taxes on interest income (see column e) and, on the other hand, of the
interest received by the authorities on their own financial assets (see
column h). This demonstrated the importance of the fiscal implications of
the liberalisation of capital movements for some countries and might, in
the opinion of one of the Alternates, be a useful subject for study by the
“Raymond Group".

3. The German Alternate had commented on the factors underlying
the growth of the German budget deficit and on its consequences for interest
rates. He had noted that the Bundesbank would closely monitor the price
effects of the increase in a number of taxes on consumption planned for.
next year. |

The Italian Alternate had stated that his Government intended
transforming the budget deficit excluding interest payments - at present
3.4% of GNP - into a small surplus by 1992, which represented an adjustment
of some 4% of GNP. Interest payments were currently equivalent to 8% of
GNP. If this objective were achieved it should make it possible to stabilise
the debt ratio in terms of GNP in 1992. This obviously depended on interest

rate developments.

4. The Alternates had also noted that the public sector deficits
were financed less and less by base money creation, i.e. by direct central
bank financing or, indirectly, through government borrowing abroad. Financing
government deficits on the domestic financial markets had in effect become

a widely followed practice in the EEC countries.

5. The discussion had shown that the impact of the public finances
on monetary policy could not be judged either from the size or from the
method of financing of the budget deficits.

A number of Alternates stressed the need to consider countries'
overall domestic saving, within which public sector dissaving could be
absorbed by a high level of private sector saving. This did not mean that

the budget deficit did not require correction in the medium term, but for
the immediate future it was more difficult to see it as a source of macro-
economic disturbance.

Similarly, one Alternate noted that the fact that there was no
direct central bank financing of the budget deficit was not sufficient to
place a real constraint on the management of the public finances, as the
present situation in the Community demonstrated. This would have to be
borne in mind in the study of the appropriate operational framework for a
future European central bank, and other forms of budgetary discipline might
have to be considered.

It had to be added that on 6th September the Monetary Committee
had stated that it might soon address the question of government budget
financing mechanisms in member countries. The staff of the Commission would
be preparing a memorandum for this purpose. Mr. Loehnis had pointed out
that for several years now the Committee of Governors had undertaken an
annual review of developments in public finance on the basis of documents
which were then forwarded to the Monetary Committee, and that the Monetary
Committee should therefore take these documents into consideration in its

proposed study.

C. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton noted that the experts' report presented the
following conclusions: the public finance situation had been partially
satisfactory in 1987 but prospects for closer convergence within the Community
were uncertain. In the United Kingdom there had been further progress in
reducing public expenditure and in the policy of reducing the public debt.

The objective was to continue this policy over the medium term and to preserve
a balanced budget. In fact, the budget surplus could considerably exceed

the forecasts and reach 3% of GNP in 1988. Nonetheless, monetary expansion

was very vigorous owing to the sharp increase in private sector borrowing.

The economy was in fact very buoyant, domestic demand was very brisk and
exceeded supply potential, hence the deterioration in the current account

and the sharp expansion of credit. It should, however, be noted that there

was an improvement in the area of supply, productivity and employment. This
had led to an increase in real incomes, a rise in confidence within industry
and among households and also an increase in private saving. These phenomena,

which were more marked than in the other Community countries, accounted for
the differences between the United Kingdom and other member countries in
terms of monetary expansion and public finance.

Mr. Ciampi began by thanking the Group of Experts and its Chairman
for the report, which gave a clear and full picture of developments in the
different Community countries. Without doubt Italy had most difficulties in
this area, given the size of the public sector borrowing requirement, the
scale of the public debt and the links between budgetary performance and
the other components of the economy and the monetary situation. Although
the borrowing requirement was essentially financed by the market, it had
effects on the economy and on the monetary situation. The efforts made in
recent years had done no more than make it possible to avoid an increase in
the borrowing requirment as a proportion of GNP. The need to tackle this
problem decisively was recognised by all, and government circles and the
population as a whole had become aware of it. The programme of budgetary
adjustment was seen in the context of the European structure, of which ©
Italy was very much in favour, but a certain contradiction between the
profound desire for further integration and the disorder in the Italian
public finances had to be recognised. Measures had been taken in the summer
to hold down the budget deficit but the most important thing was to put in
place a multi-year programme of successive cuts in the deficit and in the
borrowing requirement. A proposal was to be presented to Parliament before
the end of September; it would represent the first phase of a multi-year
plan whose aim was to eliminate the non-interest deficit by 1992. This was
to be achieved by raising taxes and reducing public expenditure.

The borrowing requirement, which amounted to approximately 11.52
of GNP, posed a difficult problem even if it was not financed by money
creation or central bank intervention. For years the central bank had
consistently pressed for financing on the market; this had made it possible
to bring monetary expansion in Italy under control, but at the expense of
high interest rates, which in turn added somewhat further to government
costs. Only a few years ago, for example in 1982-83, great resistance had
had to be overcome to convince everyone of the need to avoid monetary financing
of the budget deficit. Today, thanks in particular to the persistence of
the central bank, this need was recognised by all and had become a prime
concern of the Government and of Parliament.

The Chairman pointed out that, in accordance with established

tradition, the note on public finance would be sent to the Monetary Committee

following a brief written procedure to enable the central banks to put
forward any proposals they might have for changes to the text. That the

note would be sent to the Monetary Committee might be considered additionally
expedient in that it could be useful for the study which that Committee
intended to undertake. It was also traditional to draw the note and the
Governors' comments on it directly to the attention of Finance Ministers.

Of course, the Governors would as usual receive a copy of the covering

letter to the Ministers, which would set out the substance of the exchange

of views the Committee had just had.

V. Exchange of views_on the items on the agendas for the international
meetings in Berlin.

The Chairman explained that this exchange of views was traditionally
included in the agenda of the Committee's September meeting but that, almost
equally traditionally, the Committee did not hold any discussion on this
subject. In fact, the Governors had an opportunity to address these questions
in other forums.

The Chairman noted that there were no further comments.

VI. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee:

- Exchange of views on the decision by the British authorities
to issue short-term Treasury bills in ECUs in the near future.

The Chairman noted that the Alternates had heard a brief report
from their British colleague concerning the decision by the UK authorities
to issue short-term Treasury bills in ECUs in the near future, and that
Mr. Leigh-Pemberton would now say something to the Committee.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton made the following comments on the British
Government's ECU Treasury bill programme. The main objective of the programme
was to have a short-term instrument available so as to secure greater
flexibility in the management of the public debt, i.e. of official assets
and liabilities in foreign currencies. The programme was also aimed at
helping to promote the use of the ECU on the international markets and at
strengthening London's role in transactions in ECUs. There was, in fact, a
gap to be filled between the market in deposits and that in securities in
ECUs, hence the need for short-term instruments which were government-

guaranteed, actively traded and very liquid on a secondary market. Italy

- 13 -

had been a pioneer in this field with its one-year Treasury bill programme;
the United Kingdom had the shorter end of this market in mind, viz. maturities
of one, three and six months.
Since the announcement of the programme in early August the final
details had been worked out. The first tender would take place in October
and this would probably be followed by a series of monthly operations, each
involving about ECU 500 million, probably for maturities of one, three or
six months. Initially, the programme could be expected to total some ECU 1
to 2 billion. The prospectus distributed to the Alternates the previous day
would not be published for several days; it contained the details of the
programme, which would be reviewed in March 1989 in the light of the experience
of the first six auctions. These were planned as a continuous operation,
i.e. the intention was not simply to borrow in ECUs but to develop a new
liguid secondary market for bills in ECUs. Arrangements had been made with
a group of banks and securities houses which would act as market-makers and
would market the instruments among their customers. The prospectus listed
the institutions which had agreed to play this role: they included the
major British houses, but also banks from other Community countries, as
well as a small number of institutions from outside the EEC which already
conducted a substantial amount of business in ECUs.
So far the response of potential investors and of market-makers
to the announcement of the programme had been very positive. The UK authorities
were aware, however, that if they wished to build up a market their programme
had to get off to a good start and other issuers had to enter the field;
they hoped that interest would grow and that other issuers would extend the
range of instruments available. It would be interesting to know whether
plans along these lines existed in other EEC countries.
The Chairman thanked Mr. Leigh-Pemberton for his interesting
remarks; he noted that there were no comments and wished the Bank of England
and the British Treasury good luck in implementing their programme for the

issue of short-term securities in ECUs.

- Departure of Mr. Janson.

The Chairman noted that, owing to the fact that he was due to
retire shortly, Mr. Georges Janson was participating for the last time in
the work of the Committee. He added that there was much he could say, having

known Mr. Janson since university days, but that he would not inflict a
- 14 -

long speech on him since over the past few days and in the days ahead he
had had and would have the opportunity to attend or to chair meetings
distinguished by the participation of Mr. Janson for the last time.

Going no further than the Committee of Governors, within which he
had carried out extremely important work, Mr. Janson had established at
least three records: the record for length of service, having been a member
of the Committee for seventeen and a half years; the record for attendance,
not having been absent for one of the 180 meetings held during this period,
and, finally, the record for chairmanships, having chaired the Committee of
Alternates for three separate terms: in 1974, in 1978 and in 1988. With
such a track record, Mr. Janson could certainly look back with confidence
and satisfaction. It was with these sentiments, together with their thanks
and their best wishes, that the Governors were today taking leave of Mr. Janson.

Mr. Janson recalled that he had joined the Committee of Governors
under the chairmanship of Mr. Carli at the April 1971 meeting, just as —
preparations were being made to reduce the fluctuation band from 1.50Z to
1.20%. In May 19/71, the following month, the whole plan fell apart when the
Deutsche Mark and the Dutch guilder were floated. The Belgians and the
Dutch had then worked to set up a fixed link between their currencies,
called the "worm", which subsequently slipped into the "snake" to be finally
swallowed up - but not before having been the precursor of the Community
exchange rate systems. Now, seventeen or eighteen years later, the Governors
were themselves being called on to study the question of a European central
bank, and he wished them greater success than in some earlier projects.

Mr. Janson thanked the Governors for having listened to him for
sO many years; he was aware that very often he said what he thought, which
could be rather irritating but was probably the best way of being understood.
He also thanked the interpreters who had had to adjust to his volubility
and speed of delivery, which was all the faster since he frequently departed
from the draft texts of his statements.

The Chairman added that Mr. Janson's departure was unfortunately
not the only one. Mr. Masera was leaving the Banca d'Italia to take up the
office of Director General of the IMI as from ist October. The Chairman
thanked Mr. Masera for his valuable contribution to the work of the Committee
over a number of years and, on behalf of the Governors, wished him every

success in his new responsibilities.
- 415 -

VII. Date and place of the next meeting.

The next meeting would take place in Basle on Monday, 8th November

1988, beginning at 10 a.m.
Committee of Governors of the 13th September 1988
Central Banks of the Member States

of the European Economic Community

Confidential

BRIEF REPORT ON

DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

JULY AND AUGUST 1988

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of

the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce-

dure! and briefly describes their interventions during July, August and the

first few days of September 1988.

I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main features of the foreign exchange markets in July and

August 1988 were:

a further strengthening of the US dollar against most currencies
in July and early August followed by a certain decline in late
August against European currencies;

increased, concerted intervention sales of dollars mainly against
Deutsche Mark;

good demand for sterling and yen which stayed in a relatively
narrow range against the US dollar up to the end of August when
they weakened against most currencies;

increases of official interest rates in many countries.

The US dollar continued to move higher against most foreign

currencies during July and August. Throughout the period the dollar bene-

fited from signs of strength in the US economy which were thought likely to

1 The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.
lead to a tighter monetary policy and thus to higher dollar interest rates.
The Federal Reserve's commitment to containing inflationary pressures was
evident in the early August decision to increase its discount rate by
0.5 percentage point to 6.5%. Market participants were also encouraged by
the belief that the international adjustment process was proceeding, a
belief reinforced by the release of better-than-expected US trade statistics
for May and not dispelled by less favourable trade statistics for June. On
various occasions during the two months the US authorities intervened to
limit the dollar's rise, operating at times aggressively in co-operation
with other central banks. Late in August the dollar moved slightly down-
wards against European currencies. The dollar closed the period 2.3% higher
against the yen and 3.2% higher against the Deutsche Mark.

Having been stable in July the EMS experienced some movements in
August. The Irish pound and the Deutsche Mark moved to the top of the EMS
band while the Danish krone, the French franc and the Italian lira weakened
somewhat.

The Deutsche Mark continued to weaken sharply in July and the
first few days of August. Despite sometimes substantial intervention, it
lost considerable ground against the US dollar in particular. This weakness
was caused by capital outflows from the Federal Republic, for the most part
induced by higher interest rates on most foreign markets. From the second
third of August onwards the Deutsche Mark recovered appreciably vis-a-vis
the US dollar and all other currencies. As a result, it moved to the top of
the EMS exchange rate band. On 25th August the Central Bank Council of the
Deutsche Bundesbank raised the official discount rate from 3% to 3 1/2Z% per
annum, thereby consolidating the increase in DM interest rates on the money
markets in recent weeks in the wake of the rise in US dollar interest
rates.

The further 1/4 point cut in the intervention rate of the Banque
de France at the beginning of July had no effect on the strong position of
the French franc throughout July and the first few days of August. The
general rise in interest rates that followed, first in the United States
and subsequently in Europe, was reflected in particular in a further nar-
rowing of the differential between German and French market rates, which
this time resulted in arbitrage in favour of the Deutsche Mark and some
weakening of the position of the franc. These pressures abated in the last

few days of August.
The Belgian franc weakened as a result of the tensions which
developed at the beginning of the period under review. The policy of the
Banque Nationale was, on the one hand, to support the currency with rela-
tively substantial interventions and, on the other, to raise its discount
and lombard rates by 1/4 percentage point. After some weeks of calm, the
tensions re-emerged following the general upward movement in interest rates.
The Banque Nationale thus made further sales of foreign currency and twice
raised its discount and lombard rates by 1/4 percentage point to bring them
to 7.5% and 7.75% respectively.

The Dutch guilder eased somewhat further against the Deutsche
Mark, notwithstanding substantial sales of dollars by the Nederlandsche
Bank and a recovery of the interest rate differential vis-a-vis the Mark
after the marked fall that had taken place earlier. In view of the develop-
ments in interest rates abroad the Nederlandsche Bank increased its dis-
count rate on 29th July and 26th August by 0.25 percentage point on each
occasion to 4.02% and its interest rate on advances by 0.5 and 0.25 percen-
tage point respectively to 4.752.

The Danish krone declined from the upper end to the middle of the
EMS band. Danmarks Nationalbank lowered its official lending and deposit
rates by 1/4 percentage point to 7 3/4% and 8 1/2% respectively on 8th July.
Market rates were almost unchanged, but interest rate differentials in
favour of the krone narrowed.

Despite occasional fluctuations, the Irish pound was positioned
at the top of the EMS band for most of the period.

Seasonal factors and short-term capital inflows supported the
Italian lira throughout the summer leading to substantial intervention
purchases by the Banca d'Italia. The situation changed in the second half
of August following the Federal Reserve's discount rate hike as market
uncertainties developed about the future evolution of interest rates in
Europe. Such conditions have continued to prevail also in the aftermath of
the 1/2 point discount rate increase to 12.5% by the Banca d'Italia on
25th August.

Underpinned by three 1/2 percentage point increases in UK base
rates (from 9 1/2% at the beginning of July to 11% on 8th August) and the
perception that interest rates would need to remain high in order to combat
inflationary pressures, sterling saw periods of strong demand during July

and the first half of August, recording significant gains against European

currencies. However, sentiment turned against the pound on 22nd August amid
growing unease about the direction of the UK economy, and the release of UK
trade figures for July showing a record current account deficit caused
sterling to fall abruptly. It was steadied by a full 1 percentage point
increase (to 12%) in UK base rates on 25th August, but ended the month on a
soft note. Over the period, sterling's trade-weighted index rose by 0.8% to
75.8.

The Greek drachma weakened by 3.8% and 0.7% against the US dollar
and the ECU respectively. In effective terms the drachma depreciated by
1.22.

The Spanish peseta remained firm during most of the period, weak-
ening slightly at the end of August. The Banco de Espana's interventions
were sporadic and, on the whole, much smaller than in any other period of
the year. In nominal terms the peseta appreciated by 0.9% against the ECU
and depreciated by 2.12% against the US dollar. The Banco de Espana raised
its three-month repurchase agreement rate by 1/4 percentage point to 10.52%;
at the same time a technical correction was introduced in the overnight
rate which was reduced by 1/8 percentage point to 10 3/82.

The Portuguese escudo decreased vis-a-vis the US dollar by 3.62.
As from ist August the weights of the currencies on which the effective
exchange rate index is based were updated and in line with the objectives
defined by the authorities the escudo depreciated by 0.25% in effective
terms.

Up towards the end of August the Swiss franc continuously weakened
vis-a-vis all important currencies. This was caused by marked interest rate
increases for investments in other currencies. During that period the export-
weighted value of the franc dropped by 2.7%. It was only in the last days
of August when the franc managed to break away from its year's low. Effective
26th August, the official discount and lombard rates were raised by
1/2 percentage point each to 3% and 5% respectively.

The Austrian schilling weakened by 2.9% against the US dollar in
July and August, with a monthly spread of 4.1% and 3.0% respectively.
Against the Deutsche Mark the schilling fluctuated in both months within a
range of 0.24%. With effect from 4th and 20th July and 3rd August the money
market rate for short-term open market operations was raised in steps of
1/4 percentage point to 4 5/8%. Banks eligible for refinancing were given

additional liquidity assistance with an offer of special open market
operations from 22nd to 29th July at 6 1/2%, after a temporary undesired
liquidity shortage had arisen as a result of large interest rate induced
capital outflows. In line with the measures taken by other central banks,
the discount rate was raised by 1/2 percentage point to 4% with effect from
26th August. The lombard rate remained unchanged at 52.

The Norwegian krone continued to weaken during the period and the
currency index moved from 110.7 to 112.6. Despite some positive indications
of reduced pressure in the domestic economy, uncertainty in the market
concerning the future stance of fiscal policy and the effect of reduced
interest rate differentials led to some outflow of foreign exchange. On
balance, however, the interest rate differential against the basket curren-
cies remained as high as 5 percentage points.

The Swedish krona weakened somewhat from the middle of July. This
was partly due to smaller interest rate differentials vis-a-vis foreign
currencies and a leads and lags effect after the heavy inflow in May. The
Riksbank intervened by selling currencies but allowed at the same time the
currency index to rise by 1 percentage point to 131.7. From the second part
of August the market has been balanced.

In effective terms the Finnish markka remained quite stable. It
was supported, however, by relatively large sales by the central bank.
Domestic market interest rates increased by over 100 basis points.

The Japanese yen declined by 2.2% against the US dollar during
July and August. Despite the overall bullish sentiment towards the
US dollar that prevailed overseas, the yen stayed within a relatively narrow
range of Yen 132 to Yen 135 under the persistent dollar-selling pressure
from Japanese exporters and institutional investors in the forward market.
Toward the end of August, however, the rumour concerning a new Japanese tax
on equity-related capital gains triggered an abrupt fall of the yen, which
dropped to a nine-month low of Yen 136.85 in the New York market on
3lst August. Vis-a-vis the European currencies the yen appreciated by 0.92.
In particular, the yen reached a new high of Yen 69.96 against the Deutsche
Mark on 18th August.

After moving to a 6 1/2 year high of US$ 0.8373 in late July, the
Canadian dollar weakened throughout the remainder of the period ending the
month of August near the US$ 0.8075 level - its weakest level since May.
This represents a decline of 2.1% since June. Lending support to the cur-

rency in July was the good performance of the Canadian economy, firm

commodity prices, and the positive spread between Canadian and

US short-term interest rate differentials which, in turn, encouraged
foreign investor interest in Canadian dollar denominated securities. In
August, however, against the background of the US dollar's strength against
the major overseas currencies, the Canadian dollar was undermined by polit-
ical uncertainties regarding the passage of the pending US/Canada free
trade legislation by parliament and the outcome of a possible federal elec-

tion this fall.

II. INTERVENTIONS
A. Interventions in US dollars

Net sales of US dollars in July and August amounted to US$ 21.5
billion, compared with sales of US$ 0.2 billion in June. They consisted of
gross purchases of US$ 1.8 billion and gross sales of US$ 23.3 billion.
Major purchases were undertaken by the Banco de Portugal and in July the
Bank of Canada. Large sales of dollars were undertaken by a number of cen-
tral banks with the Deutsche Bundesbank, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York and, in August, the Bank of Canada being the major sellers. A number
of central banks participated also on some occasions in concerted

interventions by selling US dollars against Deutsche Mark.

B. Interventions in Community currencies and in private ECUs

Interventions in EMS currencies and ECUs by Community central
banks amounted to the equivalent of US$ 5.7 billion compared with US$ 2.6
billion in June. The interventions consisted mainly of purchases of Deutsche

Mark with the Banca d'Italia and the Banco de Espafia as the main buyers.

III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 9TH SEPTEMBER

After the release of various statistics indicating slower economic
growth the dollar lost some ground.
Within the EMS the French franc and the Italian lira experienced

some pressure which abated somewhat by the end of the week.
1A

EVOLUTION DE L'ECU, DU COURS MEDIAN DES MONNATES PARTICIPANT AU
MECANISME DE CHANGE DU SME ET DES MONNATES DES BANQUES CENTRALES DE

LA CEE NE PARTICIPANT PAS A CE MECANISME, SUR LA BASE DES COURS
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986 VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*

* voir page suivante.

9.9.1988

24

20
EVOLUTION DES MONNATES DES BANQUES CENTRALES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A
LA CONCERTATION, SUR LA BASE DES COURS RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986
VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*

| |
| | | |
28 | |
: | | | 7
| | ! pO
, | | 1
| | | i |
| | | | |
24 | | oo
| | | |
| | |
| | | |
| ! | |
20 | | ) |
| |
a | |
ean | | | |
ry ’ aan | | |
| .. Pa | | |
16 Ae a | | |
| aan | yo ‘ | |
j ‘ ‘ “~ r | oO ee / | —a i
| ~ ~ c ‘ M + / - Y \ | 4
A uw eros N |
v | Pn We si lg | \_ = | |
Vie? 1 BY | ‘re |
12 ~~ y Sogo } “a
4 vA wy} | ~a-"%
| \ . > “e seb . |
| ‘ { ‘. ” ‘ Aa ore ‘ |
‘ %~e . -_ : . 7 ‘. “ | | “4
| ‘ { . ve’, bd e- ‘ail | ‘
13 : * e : « ‘Je el ! : .
| ‘ ‘ A | fe ‘ hae ie | .
. We A ‘ ~» oy . See, + ne : : |
8 ‘\! ‘ ‘ “ss | “ee * . fs . ° .! . 7
| Co ) Yen he “=p on vs | ‘ - se “ * ee ..° ‘° : |
| ee FS \ eee ‘ e | a] o meee ‘s a, |
Nam —~-”% eA v> ‘Ja
= — $Can ‘a are ar : os fe !
KRS ‘ . A ‘ |
I lee Sch | Met Ow | | |
KRN | Wi, 8! |
Po tteeeees FIM | #,” rH | ! ‘ / a
4 ; wcecece ‘ a ‘ ners ‘ / “\. . | tet
x4 “e tay ! Sere |
| | \ Pun * ipa! ‘
| , f" hes, y sao! |
a . ,
| | | V “ W/ ‘ 7
4 4
| | | \" bo |
0 1 |
27.5 10.6 24.6 8.7 22.7 5.8 19.8 2.9
1988

* ECU 0,93425; £ 0,6773; DR 138,7601; PTA 131,8700; ESC 146,0995;

FIM 4,7925; $Can 1,3805; FS 11,6215; Yen 159,7993; KRS 6,7750; KRN 7,3975;
sch 13,6520; cours médian des monnaies participant au SME 0,92913. Le
cours médian des monnaies participant au SME représente la moyenne jour-
naliére des cours des deux monnaies 4 marge de fluctuation de 2,25% qui
se sont éloignés le plus de leurs cours-pivots bilatéraux actuels.

9.9.1988

1B

28

24

20
MOUVEMENTS A L'INTERIEUR DE LA GRILLE DE PARITES DU SME CALCULES

SUR LA BASE DES COURS DE L'ECU DANS LES OIFFERENTES MONNATIES

PARTICIPANTES

io) wn
- i] !
nn -
' ‘ ;
“ ’
‘ a
{ 3 |] ”
{ a s Fa
— —. re. epee ee EN —peotre ce fae
1
i} ' *
i] ‘ s
i] a an
' e, o”
’ . °
*
t i] _o7”
’ % <7
! >
' a
t . i
! | wee
§ f ae
! ] :
{ = x
I “sy
\ o) “a
{ o .
‘
! _« «
f 8 ee ¢
I * CC @
I : 7 4
1 7 @
1 Ff ‘
1 as 1
L { ‘oO by
ee ee re oe ToT 7 ee
! ' ’
\ ‘ 4
‘ %
‘ °
Noo ‘
‘ é
i} “met \.
i] - -
I o” ¢
~ a
1 ~ rd
, é
' r)
I é ”
°
i) sa r a
; ad .Y ‘\
4 a
‘ “el é A
( “-
' re l
( t 4
I ’ - ‘“
t
i ‘ }
_ ‘ ‘
‘
' {
ee ere ee eae >. —.-—.- ~~...
! ’ ? \
' ‘ @
1 ‘ 1
~
I ~~ , —_
ed a
! Jt ~
! . t
! ( o/ .
1 1 od
‘ \ Q
we
1 wat.
i a’ I!
1 _- Te
! ‘ ad
“ oa”
' \
{.
’ ’ >
’ £
' poms
’ e ~.
' | s
¢
J ¢ ‘
i] ) “.
' 4 “aL .
t r) -- a
—_ — — a rs re — ~~. FttC~S
. -
~e ?,
oO w
- oO

Oo - _ N N oO
> ; ————-]} + oe
7 i ; | — ron)
-_—— - - ¢«----7--T er — — — a — —~ + =,
re \ '
“> \ !
7 \ o
; / ! .
.” / ' -
~~ J
\ ‘ |
7 \
oo” \ '
cf ) | 0)
\ foo rs
f ) !
a i
\ t
j eee ee ee ee ee ee ee por meme ee ee ee ee ee eee ee eee eee eee ee eee
~ 7 !
/ / -
> os q
/
/ ’ _
(
\ '
NX i
» w
\
,
by
es Poy SS ee ee ee ee
yo
c7 ! ¥
' t
{ ; co]
!
7 ‘ _
~ NN {
XN “ od Ou
\ 7 t ZFudtweoarw
/ { ( Ouuw iu ¥ «8 ©
a 1? pou: °
~~ | t 8 ' _
\ ( { { ] '
\ t J t
\ \ fou boy
-. ‘ !
ww? coawTw eee J— ee ST ewe gp earn sree sees ees wi oa ee et wn
| nd
wn ro) wn rw) w on
- ”

1988

9.9.1988
EVOLUTION DE L'INDICATEUR DE DIVERGENCE*

27.5 10.6 24.6 8.7 22.7 5.8 19.8 2.9
1988

* L'indicateur de divergence a pour but de mesurer, sur une base compa-
rable pour toutes les monnaies participant au mécanisme de change européen,
la position d'une monnaie vis-a-vis de son cours-pivot ECU. L'écart
maximal de divergence est le pourcentage maximal par lequel le cours de
marché de 1’ECU dans chaque monnaie peut s’apprécier ou se déprécier par
rapport 4 son cours-pivot ECU; il est exprimé par + 100, le seuil de
divergence étant + 75. Les données qui ont servi de base 4 l'établissement
de ce graphique sont les cours de 1’ECU exprimés en termes de diverses
monnaies, cours qui sont toutefois corrigés des effets des fluctuations

de la lire italienne, de la livre sterling et de la drachme grecque au-
dela de la marge de 2,25% vis-A&-vis des autres monnaies participant au

SME.
9.9.1988
4A

DE LA PESETA ET DE

DE LA DRACHME,

EVOLUTION DE LA LIVRE STERLING,

L'ESCUDO PAR PAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE

DECEMBRE 1986*

RELEVES LE 31

N
-

re) t oO t ra)
ee = “T | rr: as | ‘ ee
' ‘ {|
_ : —_ a
a a
wm pe ee ee eee ee ee oad meio tae ee +
v /
“ Fa
-” \
é
¢
‘ \ ©
ran)
. { ”
oe oO ’ f
crn '
wWOa w ' {
br: ' \
13 \ ©
li ‘, « ‘
' , °
t }
‘s \
a, Ne et —
‘ a
\ootn
: f a
\ {
' 7
‘ {
4
/ |
\ Kw
‘ \ —_~ fs)
‘, 7
‘ |
‘ (
cm mmm mm ee es 8 en ts ep me —s Ta
, (
f
wo
\ \ :
/ a
y XN
i /
; \
; /
‘ \ oOo
' \ ~~ Oo
t t -
f
/
1 /
‘S \
awe ae ee ee ey hee ee ee ee ee pee ee ee ee. yo —

1988

DR 148,526; PTA 141,151; ESC 156,382.

° # 0,724942;

9.9.1988

4B

EVOLUTION DES MONNATIES DES BANQUES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A LA
CONCERTATION PAR RAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*%

1988

~ $EU 1,07038; $Can 1,47766; FS 1,73562; Yen 171,046; KRS 7,25181; KAN 7,91812;
sch 14,6128; FIM 5,12978.

9.9.1988
