Confidential

_ (Translation)

MINUTES*
OF THE 225th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 10th MAY 1988 AT 10 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Banque
Nationale de Belgique and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Godeaux, accompanied
by Mr. Janson, Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen; the Governor of Danmarks National-
bank, Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Rieke; the
Governor of the Bank of Greece, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by Mr. Papademos
and Mr. Karamouzis; the Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio, accom-
panied by Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France,
Mr. de Larosiére, accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the
Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady
Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi,
accompanied by Mr. Dini and Mr. Masera; the President of De Nederlandsche
Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr. Szasz and Mr. Boot; the Governor
of the Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo
Marques; the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied
by Mr. Loehnis and Mr. Price; the Director-General for Economic and Financial
Affairs of the Commission of the European Communities, Mr. Costa, accompanied
by Mr. Louw; Mr. Kees, Secretary of the Monetary Committee; the Director
General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr. Jaans. Also present at
the meeting were Mr. Raymond and Mr. Dalgaard, Chairmen of Groups of Experts.
The Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul,
Mr. Scheller and Mr. Cook, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan also attended.

The Chairman opened the meeting by proposing that items II and V
of the agenda be discussed at the same time in view of the links between

the subjects covered.

nD
* Final text approved at the meeting on 13th June 1988, which incorporate
some drafting changes.
I. Approval of the minutes of the 224th meeting.

The Committee unanimously approved the minutes of ‘the 224th meeting,
on the understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be in-

corporated in the final text.

II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:

- Preparation by the 'Dalgaard Group'' and discussion by the Committee
of Alternates;

- Statistical charts and tables.

V. Examination of current monetary policies in EEC member countries based
on Report No. 32 of the group of experts chaired by Mr. Raymond.
Adoption of a mandate for the “Raymond Group" concerning the improving
of monetary policy co-ordination between EEC member countries.

A. Statement by Mr. Dalpaard

The dollar had continued to move within a narrow band whose limits,
from November 1987 to the beginning of May 1988, were $1 = DM 1.65 and
1.70. In mid-April it had recorded a brief decline following the publication
of the US foreign trade figures, but this had been quickly halted by quite
substantial, concerted interventions by several central banks. The stability
of the dollar had been helped by two factors: the markets’ perception that
the central banks would not allow the dollar to fall much further and the
rise in short and long-term interest rates in the United States. This upward
trend had spread to some other countries, in particular France and Germany,
at least as far as long-term interest rates were concerned. It could still
not be ruled out that the dollar would fall further later, for example if
inflation were to rekindle in the United States, if there were further
unfavourable US foreign trade figures, or if the Federal Reserve appeared
hesitant as to the policy to pursue, in particular as regards accepting
higher interest rates.

The yen had continued to appreciate also vis-a-vis the European
currencies and had returned almost to its level of the summer of 1986 vis-a-vis

the Deutsche Mark.
Within the EMS there had been some movement in the relative positions
of currencies, and some interventions had been made. Overall, however, the
situation had been calm, particularly when it was considered that there had
been elections in two countries, viz. France and Denmark. In fact, the
French elections appeared to have had a greater influence on the Italian
lira than on the French franc, which had not experienced any tensions. The
authorities had let the exchange rate slip, but only very slightly; there
had been no interventions; and interest rates had not been changed.

The Italian lira had weakened from mid-April onwards, and sizable
interventions had been made in the market. Substantial outflows of capital
had in large measure represented a reversal of the inflows which had occurred
in the wake of the reintroduction of exchange controls in 1987; by this
means the Italian banks had reduced the exchange risks they had incurred.

The political tensions in Denmark in mid-April had resulted in a
slight weakening of the Danish krone and some firming of market interest
rates, but the calling of elections and the election campaign had not had
any impact on the exchange rate.

The other EMS currencies had remained stable. All in all, the
experience of April and the beginning of May had been satisfactory and had
shown that the flexible deployment of the various instruments could be
highly effective; in particular, it appeared that even modest exchange rate
movements within the band had a considerable stabilising effect. These
positive results had been possible because the market did not anticipate a
realignment in the near future and assumed that, even were there to be a
realignment at a later date, it would be a minor one and would probably
leave market rates more or less unchanged. In this situation the market
tended to focus on small variations in interest rate differentials. In the
three countries already mentioned, viz. Denmark, France and Italy, non-resident
capital inflows had persisted right up to the elections, taking advantage
of the high rates of interest.

In the Netherlands the introduction of a system of compulsory
reserves had been announced with the aim not of tightening monetary policy
but of enabling De Nederlandsche Bank to retain its influence on short-term
interest rates.

Outside the EMS exchange rate mechanism, mention should be made
of two currencies. The pound sterling had remained strong; pressure had

eased somewhat with the fall in oil prices and the rise in interest rates
in some countries, but recently sterling had strengthened further. In the
longer term, however, it was expected to weaken. The Spanish peseta had
appreciated further, and the Banco de Espana had made sizable purchases.
The 0.7Z increase in the consumer price index in March, much larger than
expected, had led to a rise in market interest rates, resulting in fresh
inflows of capital and a firming of the exchange rate.

The "Monitoring Group" had also discussed the question of the
choice of intervention currencies on the basis of the situation in April,
when there had been at the same time sizable sales of Deutsche Mark by the
Banca d'Italia and substantial purchases of that currency by the Banco de
Espana. This situation had not given rise to any real problems, but the
group was agreed that in future intervention policies should be better
co-ordinated and that there should be closer co-operation between the central

banks concerned.

B. Statement by Mr. Raymond

The development of the economic situation was undoubtedly more
favourable than expected, but the financial and exchange markets were none-
theless not immune to further disturbances.

For its part, the European Community was encountering some particular
difficulties of its own.

Firstly, it appeared to constitute an area of lower growth within
the OECD group and was, unfortunately, likely to remain so. It could suffer
as a result of a more aggressive posture by the Far East and improved American
competitiveness. Some EEC countries, in which the growth of domestic demand
had been too rapid, now had to restrain it. In the countries subject to the
narrow-band exchange rate regime, the forecasts did not predict any overall
acceleration. This was understandable for those of them which had balance-of-
payments difficulties. It was a different matter in the case of Germany,
where the authorities considered that at present they had little scope for
a relaxation of monetary policy or for greater fiscal stimulus. This standpoint,
which had been put to the group by the representatives of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, had met with differing reactions.

Secondly, the European Community still suffered from insufficient
convergence in certain economic fundamentals.

Price convergence was making progress, with a slight acceleration
in the rise in prices in countries with close to zero inflation and a further

curbing in the high-inflation countries. On the other hand, certain countries

with close to 4% inflation did not envisage any improvement, which would
mean, for example, the persistence of a gap of several percentage points
vis-a-vis Germany, possibly giving rise to problems with the exchange rate
relationship against the Deutsche Mark.

In the field of current payments, the reduction in the German
surplus was continuing in volume terms, but this improvement (from the
adjustment point of view) was masked by terms-of-trade developments. It was
to be feared that the surplus in value terms would decrease only very slowly
in the coming years and, moreover, that the overall deterioration in the
Community's current account, already referred to indirectly in connection
with Asian and American competition, would affect the countries already in
deficit just as much as Germany.

What could be envisaged to reduce these divergences which, over
time, could threaten parity stability? A first instrument was monetary
policy; Chapter II assessed its current stance. Neither the results nor the
degree of constraint exerted on the real economy appeared to have changed
much in the last six months. The monetary aggregates, generally the broader
ones, were growing faster than predicted or desired. This was due in part
to a preference of economic agents for assets bearing short-term market
rates of interest in a period of uncertainty about the future of long-term
rates, which appeared to be firming, and in part to an acceleration, the
rate and recency of which varied between countries, in the growth of domestic
lending.

Monetary policy was considered to be relatively accommodative in
Germany, where the monetary aggregates, even the narrower ones, had now
been growing rapidly for over two years. Conflicts had emerged between
external and internal objectives in the United Kingdom and Spain, where it
had been necessary to lower short-term rates, despite domestic overheating,
because of the growth in the foreign exchange reserves.

The current monetary expansion was not considered a threat to the
credibility of monetary policies, at least in the immediate future. However,
it did warrant a degree of caution for the future, as had been pointed out
by the Group in its previous reports.

The German representatives felt that they had now practically
exhausted their room for manoeuvre, given both the accumulation of liquidity

in the economy and the low level of nominal interest rates reached. Some
other members of the Group were of the opinion that the German authorities
were in a position to be flexible.

In those countries with a deteriorating current balance the view
had often been expressed that a further raising of already high interest
rates would be detrimental to the already weak rate of growth in Europe.

These discussions showed that there was little hope of seeing any
major spontaneous adjustments in monetary policies with a view to strengthening
the convergence of economic performances. The same could be said with regard
to fiscal policies, even though the situation in some countries still required
correction because the deficit or public-sector debt remained high. Germany,
for its part, considered it had taken a step towards international adjustment
in 1987 but did not feel it could move any faster, especially in 1989, a
standpoint which was questioned by some.

However, the members of the Group considered it dangerous to
create a situation in which the burden of countering divergences and exchange
market tensions rested solely on the instrument of monetary policy. They
had also urged that structural reforms such as would improve the overall

efficiency of the European economies should not be neglected.

C. Statement by Mr. Janson

1. The Alternates had taken into consideration:

- the oral report presented by Mr. Dalgaard, which focused essentially
on the current situation on the exchange markets; and at the same
time

- Report No. 32 of the “Raymond Group" which had a longer-term

perspective and dealt chiefly with more fundamental questions.

The Alternates had noted with satisfaction that the current exchange
market situation, both within the EMS and worldwide, was free of major
tensions, but they were concerned about certain developments that might

cause disturbances in the future.

2. With regard to the current situation the Alternates had noted in
particular:
- the psychological impact of the co-ordinated interventions carried
out on a large scale when the dollar was suffering a bout of
weakness in the wake of the publication of less satisfactory

current-account figures; in the view of the Alternates it was
necessary to seek to maintain this psychological impact as far as
possible; ;

- the fact that within the EMS the election period had passed without
any major tensions; this good performance was attributable not
only to the flexibility of interest rates but also to progress in
convergence, especially between France and Germany;

- the need for close and frequent consultation on the choice of
intervention currencies, in particular among the central banks

that were signatories to the EMS Agreement.

3. As far as the longer-term outlook was concerned, the attention of
the Alternates had been focused on two problems:

- the rise in long-term interest rates, which had so far been more
marked in the United States than in Europe and had had the effect
of widening long-term interest rate differentials;

- the Community's inability to achieve stronger economic growth and
a higher degree of convergence among member countries, which
cdrried the risk of engendering tensions at the international
level and within Europe (which was the principal argument of

Report No. 32, as M. Raymond had just pointed out).

Given the role played in this context by the economic policy
pursued by Germany, the Alternates had considered it essential to hear the
opinion of the German representative. Mr. Gleske had made an interesting
statement. The Alternates had noted with satisfaction that the Bundesbank
did not intend to alter the stance of its monetary policy at present and
that it did not consider the rate of growth of the monetary aggregates to
be a factor likely in itself to jeopardise price stability. The Bundesbank‘s
representative had pointed out, however, that a close watch had to be kept
on the rapid pace of monetary expansion insofar as the pressures coming
from the real economy indicated a certain deterioration in the climate of
price stability.

The Alternates had also noted that, again in the opinion of the
German authorities, the low rate of growth in Germany had its origin in
demographic and structural factors. A policy of stimulating domestic demand
would therefore be unlikely to remedy this problem. As far as monetary
policy was concerned, any action by the authorities aimed at lowering short-

term interest rates would prove counter-productive since it would entail,
-~ 8 ~-

through the intermediary of inflationary expectations, a rise in long-term

capital market rates.
On the other hand, it had been noted that a tightening of monetary

policy could be counter-productive: a rise in interest rates would contribute

to capital inflows (or a reduction in capital outflows) and thus serve to

increase liquidity. At the same time, the rise in interest rates would have

repercussions throughout Europe. Such an impact could only be avoided at

the cost of greater exchange rate variations, both within the EMS and

internationally. Greater exchange rate flexibility, however, would not be

in the interest of the European countries; it would not serve the purpose

of greater convergence and would have adverse consequences for the management

of the EMS.

D. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. Duisenberg offered some explanations regarding the
introduction of a system of compulsory reserves in the Netherlands.
Hitherto, the Nederlandsche Bank had used the two instruments of official
discount and lombard rates and quantitative credit restrictions, but it
also wanted to be able to influence the yield curve in the long-term
sector. To that end, an agreement had been reached with the Government, and
the central bank would be able to carry out open market operations in the
long-term sector; in an initial stage it would build up, over a period of
eighteen months to two years, a portfolio of government securities
amounting to around Fl. 3 billion. Given that it was not a question of
financing the budget deficit, the total of short-term Treasury paper held
by the banks would be simultaneously reduced by a comparable amount. This
would result in an increase in banks' liquidity and, with their agreement,
this additional liquidity would be frozen by means of the compulsory
reserves during the transitional period. Once the portfolio of government
securities had been built up, the Nederlandsche Bank would be better able

to influence long-term capital market interest rates.

Mr. Pohl expressed his satisfaction that the issue of interventions
and of their co-ordination had been discussed by the "Monitoring Group";
exactly that subject fell within its brief, and it was the duty of the
central banks to co-ordinate their efforts to stabilise exchange rates

within the EMS and also against the dollar. Within the EMS, there were
clear rules of procedure governing co-ordination, written rules laid down

in the Agreement establishing the EMS and in the Basle/Nyborg Agreement of
September 1987. These rules stipulated that, for interventions in EMS
currencies, whether purchases or sales, the consent of the central bank
issuing the currency used was required. These rules were fundamental and

had to be respected by all the members of the Community, both those participa-
ting in the exchange rate mechanism and the others.

The remarks made by Mr. Raymond and Mr. Janson, in particular
regarding the lack of convergence within the Community, deserved to be
looked at more closely. Admittedly, there was a lack of convergence as far
as current accounts were concerned; the disequilibria had even increased
slightly as a result, in particular, of the fall in the price of oil and
Natural gas. It was necessary to consider also the development of domestic
demand and inflationary pressures and to concentrate on the current
accounts rather than external trade, since the former included intra-EEC
transfers and tourism, which were very large components. It was debatable
whether, as had been pointed out, the existing substantial imbalances posed
a threat to the stability of the exchange rate mechanism. That was perhaps
true in the long term, but in the short term there did not appear to be any
tensions in spite of those external imbalances and the holding of
elections. It would be interesting, nevertheless, to look more closely at
the reasons for this calm. The imbalances did not entail tensions or
problems as long as they were offset by capital movements. Those movements
should not represent simply lending or borrowing but, above all, direct
investment, and the deficit countries should improve the conditions for
direct investment in then.

It was also debatable whether it was necessary to reduce the
external imbalances, and what would be the best way to go about it. Adjusting
the exchange rate was one way but, for very good reasons, that was more or
less out of the question at present, and in any event minor adjustments had
no effect on the current-account balance. Nonetheless, the exchange rate
was still an appropriate and classic method of correcting external imbalances.
The other method, which consisted in taking action in the areas of general
economic and budgetary policy, did not fall within the province of the
Governors. They should make it clear that the principal aim of monetary
policy was not to put right the errors of budgetary policy but to maintain

price stability. In that respect, German monetary policy was if anything
- 10 -

expansionary, judged by the monetary aggregates and the low level of interest
rates. Thus, even if that meant there were no margin for manoeuvre, for the

moment there were no plans to change this accommodative attitude.

The Chairman remarked that the Governors had emphasised on several
occasions the need for better co-ordination of interventions and had pointed
out that the communication channels for this existed. The question was thus
in what form, and in what forum, could improved co-ordination be achieved

in concrete terms.

Mr. Rubio said that Spain did not participate in the exchange
rate mechanism and thus did not have the same legal obligations; however,
it did inform its partners of its interventions and had avoided purchasing
Deutsche Mark during periods of tension or pressure. Moreover, there were
times when it was necessary to intervene very swiftly and when prior
notification or prior consultation was impossible. These problems should be
discussed in a more general context. Thus, the problem of interventions was
linked to that of the composition of reserves; Spain had, in fact, a lot of
dollars for the size of its economy, and did not want any more. The Banco
de Espana was therefore prepared to discuss all these issues, in particular
the aspect of reserves composition, which had never previously been raised,

and was ready to present its case and to listen to the others.

Mr. Tavares Moreira expanded on a number of remarks concerning
Portugal in Report No. 32. The Report suggested, for example, that the
slowdown in the growth of the monetary aggregates had been less than forecast.
In fact, the slowdown had been in line with projections in connection with
various factors, such as inflows of capital, public sector indebtedness and
the reclassification of certain bank deposits held by non-resident Portuguese.
It was true that, in the current inflationary environment, the inflexibility
of monetary policy instruments had made it impossible to reduce monetary
growth further, but the central bank should soon have more flexible instruments
at its disposal. As far as the Portuguese current account was concerned,
the mention of a substantial deterioration in 1988 should be corrected
insofar as the current account was nonetheless forecast to remain in surplus

to the tune of around $600 million.

Mr. Duisenberg wondered whether there were not some misunderstanding
on the part of Mr. Rubio in respect of interventions. Article 15 of the EMS

Agreement did, indeed, stipulate that interventions in Community currencies
- jl -

could only be carried out with the consent of the issuing central bank, but
that rule bound all the signatories to the Agreement and not just those

participating in the exchange rate mechanism.

Mr. de Larosiere observed that, in addition to the legal aspect
which Mr. Duisenberg had just mentioned, there was a more general aspect.
It would, in fact, pose a great danger to the balance of the EMS if the
European central banks were to intervene individually in the currency of
their choice for any desired amounts with the intention of modifying the
composition of their reserves. Such a policy would have very disruptive
repercussions on the members of the exchange rate mechanism, who were
obliged to maintain very close relationships at all times between their
exchange rates and that of the Deutsche Mark, for instance. There was a
real problem there, which had been raised some time ago, under different

circumstances, with their colleagues from the United Kingdom.

Mr. Pohl followed up the remarks made by Mr. Duisenberg and
Mr. de Larosiére by recalling that the EMS Agreement of 13th March 1979 was
general in application, which meant that all the signatories were obliged
to respect it, not simply the members of the exchange rate mechanism.
Furthermore, the Governors had always been in agreement on the principle
that interventions should be co-ordinated. To that end, a telephone network
had been installed and four concertations took place each day. It had all
worked very well, and within this framework several central banks, such as
the Banque de France, had accumulated considerable holdings of Deutsche
Mark in consultation with and, in short, with the consent of the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Such a rule was fundamental to the EMS, and also to co-operation
within the G-7 countries. Clearly, one central bank could not be expected

to buy dollars while others were buying Deutsche Mark.

Mr. Rubio expressed surprise at and disagreement with

Mr. Duisenberg'’s intervention and his interpretation of Article 15 of the
EMS Agreement of 13th March 1979. He voiced his conviction that the Banco
de Espafia had respected its legal obligations under the Agreement by pro-
viding the required information on its operations in the framework of the
concertation system; in his opinion, the Agreement did not involve any
other legal obligation for the Banco de Espana since the latter was not
subject to the discipline of the exchange rate mechanism. He added that he

did not believe the legal aspect was the most important one; on the
- 12 -

contrary, he believed the economic aspect was, and he noted that in this
respect the Banco de Espana had supported the US dollar strongly in 1987
and during the early months of 1988 by absorbing a very considerable
proportion of the dollars accumulated by the EEC central banks. He also
indicated that the Banco de Espafia was ready to collaborate with the other
EEC central banks at times of crisis and to discuss problems related to
intervention currencies and the composition of reserves if it was wished to
study this question in its entirety.

Mr. Hoffmeyer recalled that the concertation telephone network
had been set up within the EEC at the beginning of the 1970s precisely for
the purpose of enabling the member countries to co-operate; it was only
later that other countries, in particular the United States and Japan, had
been connected. Consultation before intervention was a permanent principle
which had always been followed.

In the experts' Report No. 32, the question of the stability of
the EMS which had been addressed raised two principal issues, namely the
development of the competitive capacity of the European countries and that
of their balances of payment, in particular the German foreign trade surplus.
As far as competitiveness was concerned, the results and the conclusions
which could be drawn varied depending on the criteria used, the rate of
inflation, the GDP deflator or unit costs. In spite of the technical diffi-
culties involved, it might be interesting to take hourly labour costs, and,
based on this criterion, the conclusions might be less negative than those
in Report No. 32. The German foreign trade surplus was still worrying.
Economic growth in 1988 would indeed be more vigorous than forecast, perhaps
rising as high as 3%, which might explain the increase in industrial exports
from Denmark to Germany. However, two comments should be made. Firstly, the
State of Schleswig-Holstein, adjacent to Denmark, was a depressed area with
a high unemployment rate, and it was therefore very difficult to export
there. Secondly, projections for growth and the current-account surplus in
Germany in 1989 were somewhat pessimistic and might entail an adjustment of

exchange rates.

The Chairman referred to Mr. Poéhl's remarks on the disequilibria
within Europe vis-a-vis Germany and on the possible remedies. European
countries did not seem to be performing very well on the German market,
since the growth of their exports was weaker than that of countries outside

the EEC. A theoretical or textbook solution consisting in the adjustment of
- 13 -

exchange rates had been put forward, but one had to realise that prices
were not the only factor to have a bearing on competitiveness. The case of
Belgium was significant in this respect: its currency had appreciated
vis-a-vis the French franc and depreciated in relation to the Deutsche Mark
and the Dutch guilder, but Belgian exports to France were growing faster
than those to Germany and the Netherlands. It therefore appeared that
modification of the exchange rate parities was not the only means of

correcting external imbalances and certainly not the most important one.

Mr. de Larosiére noted that this varied performance of Belgian
exports was due to the fact that the growth of domestic demand was faster

in France than in Germany.

Mr. Pdéhl acknowledged that the five German research institutes
were predicting a slowdown in economic growth in Germany in 1989, which was
partly associated with the increase in taxation that had been announced.
This, however, was an area for which the Ministers of Finance were respon-
sible. In addition, it might be desirable to tell the Ministers that the
existing disequilibria could not be corrected either by modifying exchange
rates - which the Governors considered inappropriate under the present
circumstances - or by monetary policies. Other methods had to be implemented

by the governments.

The Chairman recalled that the Governors had to adopt a mandate
for the group of experts under the chairmanship of Mr. Raymond on the
improvement of monetary policy co-ordination and that the Alternates had

studied this topic and proposed a draft dated 9th May 1988.

Mr. Janson pointed out that the Alternates had, in fact, studied
three drafts proposed by various central banks and attempted to synthesise
them. The result was the draft of 9th May 1988; the first four items were
based on a consensus, but there had been no agreement on item 5 and three
versions had been submitted to the Governors: the first tended to represent
the argument put forward by the Banque de France and the Banca d'Italia,
the second was drawn from suggestions made by the Bank of England, while

the third was an attempt to find a compromise by the office of the Chairman.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton appreciated the fact that the draft submitted
by the Alternates contained the second version of item 5, but he would

accept the third version, which clearly explained what the "Raymond Group"
- 14 -

should do; in addition, he suggested a few minor improvements to the wording

of the English version of the mandate.

Mr. de Larosiére pointed out that he concurred with Mr. Leigh-
Pemberton and therefore favoured the third version of item 5; he proposed,
however, that the term “emergence', which was really very vague, be omitted
and that the French read “to facilitate the discussion of the monetary

policies envisaged with a view to developing a co-ordinated approach".

Mr. Ciampi specified that his preference was for the first ver-
sion of item 5 but that he would accept the third; in addition, he sug-

gested that in English the term "fostering" be replaced with a slightly

more dynamic word like “developing”.

The Chairman noted that the Committee had agreed to adopt the
mandate for the "Raymond Group", having accepted the third version of
item 5 and the editorial changes proposed by Mr. Leigh~-Pemberton,

Mr. de Larosiére and Mr. Ciampi. (See Annex 2, final version of the mandate. )

In reply to a question from the Chairman, Mr. Raymond pointed out
that the mandate which had just been adopted by the Committee seemed to him
appropriate for the work of the group of experts. The group had already to
some extent anticipated the Governors’ wishes by giving indications in
Report No. 32 of Europe's relative position vis-a-vis the rest of the world
and devoting quite lengthy discussions to the theme of convergence. The
mandate could therefore only strengthen the willingness of the experts to
continue on this path. It would, however, be desirable if the Governors
informed their experts that they were free to discuss the topics and that
they were not participating in the work merely as advocates of the policies

pursued in their own countries.

III. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EEC Ministers of Finance on
developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen countries
participating in the concertation procedure during April and the first
few days of May 1988.

The Chairman took note of the Committee's approval of the
“concertation report", which would be submitted as usual to the EEC Ministers

of Finance.
- 15 -

IV. Continuation of the exchange of views on the monetary structure of
Europe, based on the draft report by the Chairman of the Committee of
Alternates and the discussion the Alternates will have on this subject
on 9th May 1988.

The Chairman recalled that the President, Mr. Stoltenberg, had
distributed the agenda for the next informal meeting of the ECOFIN Council,
to be held in Travemtinde on 14th May 1988, in which it was planned that the
Chairman of the Committee of Governors would present a brief oral report on
European monetary co-operation. It was with this imminent objective in view
that the Alternates had worked at their meeting on the Monday and that the

Governors should embark on a discussion.

A. Statement by Mr. Janson

Mr. Janson began by saying that he had distributed to the Alternates
a second working document whose purpose had been, and was now, to summarise
and review the areas that had already been the subject of exchanges of
views by both the Alternates and the Governors in April. It was, therefore,
not a text to be approved as a report by the Chairman of the Committee.
However, the Chairman would have to make a brief report to the Ministers;
on the basis of the discussions that had been held up to the present, this
report might draw on the following outline, taking into account any remarks

the Governors might now make.

"1. The Governors have conducted an initial exchange of views regarding
the ideas contained in the memoranda to which they have been asked to give

their attention.

2. The questions raised are fundamental ones which relate both to
the present operation of the European Monetary System and to the future of
the European monetary structure. A study of these questions demands consid-
erable preparation and the Governors’ observations are confined at this

stage to the procedure to be followed for their examination.

3. The Governors note that many of the questions raised relate to

areas that lie specifically within their competence.

A number of aspects of the desired strengthening of the European

Monetary System have already been the subject of decisions on their part
- 16 -

within the framework of the Basle/Nyborg agreements; moreover, the Governors
have taken the necessary steps to take further their examination of other
aspects, linked to the full liberalisation of capital movements, in particular
possible ways and means of improving the co-ordination of monetary policies.
(This the Governors had just done by giving the mandate to the ‘Raymond
Group". )

4. The Governors intend to examine the other aspects of the proposals
put forward, to the extent that they lie within their sphere of competence.
They consider it desirable that, both as regards the strengthening of the
system and for the prospective studies on the subject of the European monetary
structure, the necessary work should be carried out within the competent
Community institutions, in which all member countries and all the central

banks concerned are represented.

5. The Governors are in agreement as regards the underlying approach
to the work which is to be conducted:

- the need to consolidate the achievements of the European Monetary
System in terms of internal and external stability and to build
the future progress of the system on these foundations;

- the scrutiny of the ideas that could help strengthen the system
and bring advances, in a balanced way, towards the objective of
economic and monetary union;

- the desirability of focusing the examination on the concrete
proposals that have been put forward, taking account of the basis

on which they rest and of their technical aspects.

6. The Governors will take all steps to ensure that the work is
brought to a successful conclusion in reasonable time, but will give them-

selves time for a thorough examination of these various questions."

B. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. de Larosiere considered that, on the basis of the discussions
the Alternates and the Governors had already had, the report to the Ministers
could be a little more detailed. It had seemed, in fact, that in April the
Governors had been agreed on two ideas. The first had been to undertake a
study of the adjustments that could be made in order to strengthen the
present operation of the EMS; various suggestions had been put forward in

memoranda, and Mr. de Larosiére recalled that he wished the question of

~ ]9 -

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton noted that several Governors wished to stress
to the Ministers that monetary policy had its limits and that overall
economic policy, in particular budgetary policy, should play its role. It
would be useful to be a little more explicit and, drawing on Mr. Janson's
report dated 27th April 1988, underline the need:

- for progress in areas outside the competence of the central
banks, such as the co-ordination of overall economic policies and
action on structural obstacles to growth; and

- to avoid any changes to the EMS which would risk destabilising
the economy.

If, in fact, certain countries were to yield to the temptation of
pursuing a more expansionary budgetary, and even monetary, policy, without
tackling structural problems, not only would they fail to achieve faster

growth but they would also risk destroying the EMS and stability.

Mr. de Larosiére said that he was broadly in agreement with what
it was proposed to submit to the Ministers, in particular on what the
Governors had done and intended to do, and added that he did not wish to
give the impression that the concept of symmetry had the Committee's
approval. However, it should be clear that in the Committee's subsequent
work on the concrete proposals the question of greater symmetry in inter-
ventions would not be evaded. This question could even be mentioned in the
Chairman's oral report as being an idea put forward by the Governor of the

Banque de France.

Mr. Pohl pointed out that he was perfectly willing to see the
Governors discuss the idea of symmetry, but it should be extended to
include economic performances and not limited to interventions. However, it
seemed preferable to avoid using this term, since even if there was some
asymmetry in economic performances the Governors should not give the
impression that they recognised that there was asymmetry in intervention
obligations.

The Chairman wound up the discussion by noting that the various

comments made by the Governors were sufficient to draw up a preliminary

- 17 -

symmetry to be discussed in this context. The second idea had been to begin
examining a much more distant question, viz. monetary integration within
Europe and the institutional and practical aspects this might comprise.

It would be desirable if these two ideas were to be reflected in

the oral report to the Ministers.

The Chairman pointed out that point 5 of the outline presented by
Mr. Janson stated that the Governors were in agreement as regards the under-
lying approach to the work to be conducted, viz. the need to consolidate
the achievements of the EMS and to build the future progress of the system
on these foundations and the scrutiny of the ideas that could help bring
advances, in a balanced way, towards the objective of economic and monetary

union. This was certainly a framework that could be expanded upon.

Mr. Janson recalled that point 5 of the outline for a report also
mentioned the desirability of focusing the examination on the concrete
proposals that had been put forward, taking account of the basis on which
they rested and of their technical aspects, which meant that the Governors
were indicating their willingness to take into consideration all the

memoranda that had been presented.

Mr. Pohl recognised that it was not easy to submit a report on
questions that had not yet been discussed in detail. The message to be sent
to the Ministers could be grouped under three headings. Under the first
reference could be made to the action the Governors had taken to implement
the Basle/Nyborg agreement, for example the important steps taken to
improve the co-ordination of monetary policies, including the mandate given
to the Group of Experts, and also the use of the new credit facilities and
the co-ordination of intervention policies. A second section would indicate
the Governors’ willingness to study the technical modifications to the
operation of the EMS that had been suggested, in particular by the French
and Italian authorities, but it would be desirable not to use the term
symmetry, which was both misleading and a source of disagreement among the
Governors. The various proposals could nonetheless be referred to briefly,
indicating that time would be needed to examine them and thus to report to
the Ministers. Finally, a third section could mention the institutional
framework for the development of monetary union, but with prudence and

circumspection. The political thinking in this area was not clear, and it

- 18 -

would be preferable to await the European Council meeting at the end of
June before deciding anything. If the Heads of State were not to take any
decision in this area, it would be premature or risky to forge ahead at
this stage; were they actually to agree to set up a group of experts, the
latter would have to work in contact with the central banks, and the

Governors would be able to keep this work under scrutiny.

Mr. Ciampi considered that the suggestions put forward by
Mr. Janson for the outline of the report by the Chairman of the Committee
reflected the state of progress of the discussions by the Alternates, which
made it impossible to go much beyond a preliminary report. However, it was
necessary not to let questions that fell within the competence of the
central banks be taken out of their hands, and it would therefore be useful
to give a rather more precise list of the topics the Governors would be
examining; to this end some of the comments made, in particular by
“Mr. de Larosiére, could serve to flesh out the proposed outline of a
report. It would also be desirable, as Mr. Pohl had pointed out, to empha-
sise the limits of monetary policy, which could not support the whole
burden of adjustment; budgetary policy had an essential role to play, while
the objective of monetary policy was above all to ensure price and exchange

rate stability.

Mr. Duisenberg accepted that the European Council at the end of
June might not take any decision on the subject of monetary integration,
but it would not be desirable to take this for granted. It was important
that monetary issues and the further development of the EMS should continue
to be studied by the competent bodies, namely the Monetary Committee and
the Committee of Governors, and the latter should make this position clear

to the Ministers.

The Chairman pointed out that the outline of the report contained
two important statements in point 4, viz. that the Governors would examine
the aspects of the proposals put forward that lay within their sphere of
competence and that it was desirable that the studies on the strengthening
of the EMS and on the European monetary structure should be carried out
within the competent Community institutions, namely the Monetary Committee
and the Committee of Governors. However, as Mr. Pohl had pointed out, if
the Heads of State wished to set up a group of experts, this should not be
opposed.
- 20 -

oral report! and stressed that the Governors were agreed that none of the
ideas presented in the various memoranda should be disregarded; they would
all be examined in due course, and there would be an opportunity for all

opinions to be voiced.

VI. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee.
Problems encountered by European banks operating in Japan.

Mr. Janson mentioned that the Alternates had received a request
from the services of the Commission, aimed at inducing the Committee to
make representations to the Bank of Japan. The object would be to persuade
the latter to remove certain barriers encountered by foreign banks in Japan
as regards the terms of deposit collection and the operation of the inter-
bank market. This question had already been raised within the Monetary
Committee and views had been divergent.

The Alternates were of the opinion that bilateral representations
by the countries concerned would be more appropriate and effective than a
joint approach by the Committee of Governors. That had been the course
adopted, with some success, by a number of countries, among them the United
Kingdom and the United States. Moreover, it was necessary not to under-
estimate the domestic political problems raised in Japan by deregulation

and the relaxation of requirements.

The Chairman noted that the Committee shared the opinion of the
Alternates that no joint representation should be made to the Japanese
authorities and that it should be left to individual countries to take the

initiative of bilateral representations.

1 The text forming the basis of the Chairman's report is attached as
Annex 3.
- ?] -

VII. Date and place of the next meeting.

‘

The next meeting would take place in Basle at 10 a.m. on Monday,
13th June 1988, i.e. just before the BIS Annual General Meeting. The June
meeting was traditionally confined to one or two items only, such as the
approval of the Minutes and of the “concertation report". As in previous
years, the latter report would be prepared at a meeting to be held by the
"Concertation Group" at 8.30 a.m. on Monday, 13th June. The 'monitoring"
exercise, which had not existed in June 1987, might be carried out without
a meeting of the group of experts but during Friday afternoon's telephone
concertation which, for the occasion, might be protracted so as to enable
Mr. Dalgaard to make a report to the Governors on the Monday. Of course,
should the situation so require, the "Monitoring Group" could meet in Basle
during the weekend. The same would apply to the Committee of Alternates

but, as yet, there were no plans for such a meeting.
Annex 1

“ommittee of Governors of the fOth May 1988
Central Banks of the Member States Confid val
of the European Economic Community wont icentiat

BRIEF REPORT ON
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

APRIL 1988

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of
the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce-
dure? and briefly describes their interventions during April and the first

few days of May 1988.

IT. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main features of the foreign exchange market during
April 1988 were:

- The US dollar firmed slightly vis-a-vis most currencies.

- Stability within the EMS continued although there were minor
changes of positions.

- The positive economic trend registered generally and fears of

inflation caused a rise in interest rates in some countries.

The US dollar moved marginally higher on balance against most
major currencies. Throughout the month the dollar was underpinned by rising
US interest rates as well as expectations of further increases. The dollar
came under a bout of selling pressure following the announcement of a

slight widening of the US trade deficit in February. However, the dollar's

1 The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.

Jecline was held in check as widespread reports of concerted intervention
reinforced the sense that official co-ordination was continuing. The dollar
closed the month approximately 3/4% higher against the Deutsche Mark and
1/22 higher against the yen.

The EMS remained stable. There were, however, some changes in the
positions of the individual currencies. In particular the Italian lira and
the Danish krone weakened.

The Deutsche Mark proved to be relatively stable. At the end of
April, its export-weighted index vis-a-vis fourteen industrial countries
(172.8%) was slightly below the level reached at the end of March (173.12;
1972=100). Small exchange rate gains were shown against the Swiss franc,
the Italian lira and the Danish krone, whereas losses were registered
vis-a-vis the US dollar and the pound sterling.

In the election environment, the French franc moved within rather
narrow limits. The publication of less satisfactory economic figures had no
significant impact (external trade deficit of Fr.fr. 5.2 billion in February,
following Fr.fr. 0.6 billion in January; price increase of 0.3% in March,
following 0.2% in February).

The Dutch guilder showed a firm tone vis-a-vis the EMS currencies
throughout the month. The Nederlandsche Bank bought a moderate amount of
Deutsche Mark to smoothen this tendency.

The Belgian franc slightly improved its position within the EMS.
No change in official interest rates took place.

The Danish krone weakened by 1/2% within the narrow EMS band in
the middle of the month in connection with a difficult political situation
which resulted in a call for a general election.

The Irish pound was relatively stable, remaining in the upper
half of the EMS band during the month. Over the period the Central Bank of
Ireland effected net purchases of foreign currency to absorb continuing net
inflows and reduced the short-term facility rate by 3/4 percentage point to
8 1/2% on 1lth April.

The Italian lira was subject to some pressure, as market partici-
pants continued to reduce short-term borrowing in foreign currencies, ahead
of the French presidential elections. The Banca d'Italia intervened on
several occasions in the market and accepted a slight depreciation of the
lira against the Deutsche Mark, while keeping the lira/French franc rate

stable.

Sterling was very firm and some periods of strong overseas demand
were seen. A 1/2% cut in UK base rates on 8th April (to 8%, their lowest
level for ten years) tempered enthusiasm for a while, but further inflows
were seen following the disappointing US trade figures for February.
Although there was some precautionary profit-taking ahead of the UK trade
figures for March, the pound recovered on news of the reduced deficit and
sterling ended the month on a firm note. Its trade-weighted index rose by
0.4 per cent. to 78.4 (1975=100).

In the course of the month the Greek drachma weakened against
both the US dollar and the ECU by 0.9% and 0.22% respectively. In effective
terms it declined by 0.52.

The Spanish peseta ended the period 0.8% higher with respect to
the EMS currencies in effective nominal terms, due to continued capital
inflows and in spite of some purchases of foreign currencies by the Banco
de Espana. With respect to the US dollar, the peseta strengthened by 0.22.

| In line with the exchange rate policy defined by the authorities,
the monthly depreciation of the Portuguese escudo in effective terms was
reduced by 0.1 percentage point to 0.32%.

The Swiss franc weakened vis-a-vis all currencies. In relation to
the US dollar the depreciation amounted to just over 1 1/2%. Its export-
weighted value dropped by 1.6%. This trend is attributed to the domestic
interest rate level which continues to be low.

The Austrian schilling weakened vis-a-vis the US dollar by 0.82,
the monthly spread amounting to 22. As against the Deutsche Mark the
schilling fluctuated by a mere 0.062.

Supported by a continued currency inflow which increased during
the last days of the month, the Swedish krona firmed against its currency
index which moved from 130.75 to just above 130.00, i.e. the lower limit of
the band. In order to curb the rapid credit expansion and to reduce domestic
demand, the discount rate was increased from 7.5% to 8.52% as from
29th April.

The Norwegian krone strengthened further, appreciating by 1.6% in
effective terms. Firmer oil prices and the high level of domestic interest
rates continued to be the main factors. Although the interest rate differ-
ential narrowed somewhat against the basket currencies, it remained on

average as high as 6 3/4% at the end of the month.

In effective terms, the Finnish _markka strengthened slightly.
Finlands Bank made some intervention purchases. .

The Canadian dollar appreciated, improving by 0.4% against the
US dollar to close at US$ 0.8130 and improving by 0.6% on a G-10 trade-
weighted basis. The strengthening was in response to Canada's continued
strong economic performance, favourable terms of trade, and favourable
spread between comparable US and Canadian money market rates.

The Japanese yen traded within a relatively narrow range against
the US dollar, depreciating marginally by 0.3%. The yen's stability was
brought about partly by concerted intervention by the major central banks,
particularly in mid-April, and by the fact that previously expected large
dollar sales by Japanese institutional investors did not materialise.

Vis-a-vis the major European currencies the yen appreciated by 0.32.

II. INTERVENTIONS
A. Interventions in US dollars

In April the central banks effected net purchases amounting to
US$ 4.6 billion compared with US$ 2.5 billion in March. Gross purchases
amounted to US$ 5.2 billion (of which US$ 2 billion in concerted action to
support the US dollar around the middle of the month). The main buyers were
the Bank of Canada and the Bank of Japan. Gross sales amounted to US$ 0.6
billion.

B. Interventions in Community currencies and in private ECUs

Interventions in EMS currencies by Community central banks
amounted to the equivalent of US$ 2.8 billion compared with US$ 5.3 billion
in March. These interventions mostly consisted of sales of Deutsche Mark by
the Banca d'Italia and, to a lesser degree, of purchases of Deutsche Mark

by the Banco de Espana.

III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 6th MAY

The upward trend of the US dollar continued vis-a-vis all cur-
rencies except the Japanese yen. Within the EMS, there was a slightly

greater variability of exchange rates.
1A

EVOLUTION DE L'ECU, DU COURS MEDIAN DES MONNAIES PARTICIPANT AU
MECANISME DE CHANGE DU SME ET DES MONNATES DES BANQUES CENTRALES DE
LA CEE NE PARTICIPANT PAS A CE MECANISME, SUR LA BASE DES COURS
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986 VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*

\
}
N

|
|
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
4
|
|

= Voir page suivante.

6.5.1988
1B

EVOLUTION DES MONNAIES DES BANQUES CENTRALES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A
LA CONCERTATION, SUR LA BASE DES COURS RELEVES LES 31 DECEMBRE 1986
VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*

te

-

~ 7 wee
> -»

~
1

1988

* ECU 0,93425;: £ 0,6773; DOR 138,7601; PTA 131,8700; ESC 146,0995;
Yen 159,7993; KRS 6,7750; KRN 7,3975;
Le

FIM 4,7925; $Can 1,3805; FS 1,6215;
Sch 13,6520; cours médian des monnaies participant au SME 0,92913.
cours médian des monnaies participant au SME représente la moyenne jour-

naliére des cours des deux monnaies a marge de fluctuation de 2,25% qui
se sont @éloignés le plus de leurs cours-pivots bilatéraux actuels.
6.5,.1988
2

MOUVEMENT A L'INTERIEUR DE LA GRILLE OE PARTIES DU SME CALCULES SUR
LA BASE DES COURS DE L'ECU DANS LES OIFFERENTES MONNAIES
PARTICIPANTES

ade i i)
enane” meet

6.5.1988
100

-100

EVOLUTION DE L'INDICATEUR DE DIVERGENCE*

100

ieieietehdaiietiiaiieidabiaaiddeidd eit 75

w----- KH | ; 50

aeeenwse

25

et eee

oae
ewe emeereanant

a
a
~
~~ —. es
é
‘

-25

eee eee ee

-50

-75

-100

29.1 12.2 26.2 11.3 25.3 8.4 22.4

1988

* Lt’indicateur de divergence a pour but de mesurer, sur une base compa-
rable pour toutes les monnaies participant au mécanisme de change européen,
la position d'une monnaie vis-a-vis de son cours-pivot ECU. L’écart
maximal de divergence est le pourcentage maximal par lequel le cours de
marché de 1’'ECU dans chaque monnaie peut s’appréctier ou se déprécier par
rapport 4 son cours-pivot ECU; il est exprimé par + 100, le seuil de
divergence étant + 75. Les données qui ont servi de base a4 1’ établissement
de ce graphique sont les cours de 1'ECU exprimés en termes de diverses
monnaies, cours qui sont toutefois corrigés des effets des fluctuations

de la lire italienne, de la livre sterling et de la drachme grecque au-
delé de la marge de 2,25% vis-a-vis des autres monnaies participant au

SME. 6.5.1988

4A

EVOLUTION DE LA LIVRE STERLING, DE LA DRACHME, DE LA PESETA ET DE
L'ESCUDO PAR PAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*

1988

“ # 0,724942; DR 148,526; PTA 141,151; ESC 156,382.
6.5.1988

EVOLUTION DES MONNAIES DES BANQUES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A LA
CONCERTATION PAR RAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*

|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
.

e«

. . o”
ow” %e—"* arr Es

a el hes ae .

29.1 12.2 26.2 11.3 25.3 8.4 22.4
1988

= $EU 1,07038; $Can 1,47766; FS 1,73562; Yen 171,046; KAS 7,25181; KAN 7,91812;
Sch 14,6128; FIM 5,12978.

6.5.1988

4B

-16

Annex 2

Committee of Governors of the 10th May 1988
Central Banks of the Member States
of the European Economic Community Final version

MANDATE FOR THE GROUP OF EXPERTS CHAIRED BY M. RAYMOND

The Governors consider it desirable to improve the co-ordination
of monetary policies between the member countries of the EEC, particularly
in view of the full liberalisation of capital movements, and to supplement
the monthly monitoring procedure. To this end the group of experts chaired

by M. Raymond shall seek, in particular, in its semi-annual reports:

1. to draw attention to any lack of convergence of macro-economic
variables which might jeopardise external or internal monetary
stability, analysing the causes and suggesting suitable cor-

rective measures;

2. to evaluate, especially from the point of view of monetary
policy, economic performances in the Community and to analyse
their possible deficiencies with respect to the economic

objectives of the Community;

3. to specify what contribution, within the whole range of economic
policy instruments, monetary policy could make to the adjustments

called for by the above-mentioned analyses;

4. to examine their implications for the development of the monetary
aggregates and the conditions for the financing of economies in

the future;

5. to provide the Committee of Governors in its autumn report with
the data and analytical background necessary to facilitate the
discussion of prospective monetary policies with a view to

developing a co-ordinated approach.
Annex 3

Committee of Governors of the 13th May 1988
Central Banks of the Member States (Translation)
of the European Economic Community

NOTES FORMING THE BASIS FOR THE
PRELIMINARY ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE
TO THE INFORMAL ECOFIN COUNCIL MEETING ON 14th MAY 1988
ON THE STRENGTHENING OF MONETARY CO-OPERATION WITHIN THE EEC

l. The Governors have conducted an initial exchange of views regarding
the ideas contained in the memoranda to which they have been asked to give
their attention. This account of their discussions in my capacity as Chairman

of the Committee is purely preliminary.

2. The questions raised relate to two sets of concerns. The first is
connected with the operation of the European Monetary System and the ways

in which it might be further modified without altering its institutional
character. The second relates to the future of the European monetary structure,
that is to say the realisation of the goal of economic and monetary union

and the ways and means of making concrete progress along this path.

3. Before dealing with these two areas in turn, I should like to
draw attention to a number of points to which the Governors attach great
importance in connection with the two aspects I have just mentioned.

(a) Whether the focus is on the short term or the more distant future,
it is important that the work, whose successful conclusion will
require a general consensus, should be carried out in fora in
which the twelve parties involved, be they governments or central
banks, are represented. In the opinion of the Governors it would
therefore be highly desirable that the task of examining the
proposals for strengthening European monetary co-operation be
entrusted to the appropriate Community institutions, viz. the
ECOFIN Council, the Committee of Governors and the Monetary Committee.

(b) The questions raised relate, inter alia, to areas that lie within
the competence of the central banks. Proposals affecting the

powers of the central banks and, a fortiori, the arrangements
concluded between them, should as a matter of course be examined
in the first instance by the Governors.

(c) The reinforcement of European monetary co-operation is a process
which builds both on day-to-day practice, in the form of permanent
concerted contacts between authorities and markets, and on an
examination of the extent to which the existing arrangements are
adequate to achieve the goals pursued, which may lead to decisions
of a more systemic nature. It is important that any modifications
to the existing rules, procedures and mechanisms should derive

directly from the realities and needs of co-operation. They must

be seen as the fruit of continuous, coherent and balanced progress
based on the consolidation of what has already been achieved.

4 Some of the proposals put forward are expressly designed to
contribute to the strengthening of the European Monetary System.

The strengthening of the EMS is a constant concern of the Governors
which may be reflected, when necessary, in amendments to the rules and
procedures in force, the most recent example being the Basle/Nyborg agreements,
drawn up with a view to the full liberalisation of capital movements. The
improvements in the facilities for financing and settling interventions
resulting from these agreements have already been put into practice. For
example, a sizable amount of intra-marginal interventions (ECU 3.4 billion)
has already benefited from the new financing terms. The monitoring of develop-
ments in the member countries and in the capital markets has been intensified,
and the close concertation between central banks, which has at times taken
the concrete form of co-ordinated action in the markets, has undoubtedly
contributed to the smooth functioning of the system in recent months. The
Governors have, moreover, taken the steps announced in their recent report
on the full liberalisation of capital movements to reinforce the process of

monetary policy co-ordination among the member countries.

5. The wish has been expressed in a number of quarters that various
other modifications to the operation of the European Monetary System be

examined, chiefly, according to their advocates, with a view to promoting a

better balance between economic performances, economic policy objectives
and the constraints bearing on the different participants.

The Governors propose to examine these proposals insofar as they
lie within their sphere of competence. They will seek to examine all the
concrete proposals that have been put forward, taking account both of their
underlying motivations and of their technical aspects. The proposals concerned,
in particular, are those relating to the intervention mechanism, reserve
asset diversification, the ECU creation mechanism, the development of the
use of the official and the private ECU, the expansion of the role of the
EMCF and a new credit mechanism connected with the full liberalisation of
capital movements.

In this examination particular importance will be attached to the
concern to consolidate the achievements of the European Monetary System in
terms of internal and external stability and to build the future progress
of the system on these foundations. In this context, it has been pointed
out that focusing priorities more sharply on economic growth would carry
the risk of destabilising the EMS without achieving the desired objective.
Clearly, the balanced operation of the system and, a fortiori, the achievement
of a higher rate of growth and the reduction of external imbalances within
the Community do not depend exclusively on the central banks, the mechanisms
in place or monetary policies, the limits of which must be clearly recognised.
Overall economic policies, including structural policies, must play an

important part in these areas.

6. As regards the future of the European monetary structure and the

more ambitious steps it implies, the Governors have already stressed that
they support the objective of economic and monetary union and so are willing
to examine any ideas that could help to achieve this objective.

In the light of the Governors' discussions, I should like to
emphasise two fundamental considerations.

Firstly, while the prospect of the full implementation of the
internal market in 1992 naturally raises the question of the monetary environ-
ment in the single market, progress in European monetary integration must
be a balanced process. Increased integration of central bank responsibilities
is only conceivable if paralleled by increased integration of responsibilities
for economic policy formulation and implementation and in a context of

progressive convergence of economic, social and fiscal structures.

Secondly, should there be the political will to address the whole
set of issues raised in a balanced manner and subsequently to take on all
that it entails within _a European framework, I feel certain that the Governors

will not delay in instituting a constructive examination of all the implications
of the process for the exercise of their responsibilities and of the inter-
mediate stages that will make for coherent progress towards the aimed-for

objective.

