Confidential

(Translation)

\

MINUTES*
OF THE 223rd MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 8th MARCH 1988 AT 10.00 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Banque
Nationale de Belgique and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Godeaux, accom-
panied by Mr. Janson, Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen; the Governor of Danmarks
Nationalbank, Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of
the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Rieke;
the Governor of the Bank of Greece, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by
Mr. Karamouzis; the Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio, accompanied
by Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France,
Mr. de Larosiére, accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the
Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by
Mr. O'Grady Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia,
Mr. Ciampi, accompanied by Mr. Dini, Mr. Masera and Mr. Saccomanni; the
President of De Nederlandsche Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by
Mr. Szasz and Mr. Brockmeijer; the Governor of the Banco de Portugal,
Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo Marques; the Governor of the
Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by Mr. Loehnis and
Mr. Kirby; the President of the Commission of the European Communities,
Mr. Delors, accompanied by Mr. Costa, Mr. Mingasson and Mr. Dixon; the
Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr. Jaans. Also
present at the meeting was Mr. Dalgaard, Chairman of the Group of Experts.
The Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy,
Mr. Bascoul, Mr. Scheller and Mr. Cook, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan

also attended.

*Final text approved at the meeting on 12th April 1988, which incorporates
some drafting changes. ;
4
ind
i

I. Approval of the minutes of the 222nd meeting

The Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 222nd
meeting, on the understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would

be incorporated in the final text.

Il. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:
- Preparation by the 'Dalgaard Group" and discussion by the Committee

of Alternates;
- Statistical charts and tables

A. Statement _by Mr. Dalgaard

The main feature in February and the beginning of March had been
the remarkable stability on the foreign exchange markets: the dollar and
the yen had been stable and there had been no tensions within the EMS. On
the whole there had been only slight fluctuations in both exchange rates
and interest rates, and interventions, too, had been on a small scale.
There was one smal] difference, however: whereas in January most of the
countries with comparatively weak currencies had been able to lower their
interest rates and purchase foreign exchange, this had occurred to a very
much smaller degree in February.

The stability of the dollar seemed to have been linked to the
improvement in the trade balance of the United States and to the feeling
that the US authorities considered the dollar to be low enough. This
Stability had been achieved without significant support interventions since
net dollar purchases had totalled approximately 2 billion in February,
compared with 7.5 billion in January and a monthly average of the order of
10 billion in December, November and October 1987. There was nothing to
guarantee, however, that the situation would last. In fact, the US trade
balance was healthier owing to essentially seasonal factors and could
deteriorate again; moreover, a tightening was highly unlikely for monetary
policy and virtually out of the question for fiscal policy.

Within the EMS, currency fluctuations had been very limited. The
Belgian franc had firmed slightly, enabling interest rates to be lowered
and purchases of foreign exchange to be made. The French franc had weakened

slightly against the Deutsche Mark, but this was a very minor change in

view of the growing internationalisation of the French currency and the
resultant increase in capital movements. A similar increase had, moreover,
been registered in most of the EMS countries, and it was satisfying to see
that it had been possible to meet it by means of minor adjustments to the
currencies within the band and to interest rates and with the aid of modest
interventions.

Outside the exchange rate mechanism sterling had been subjected
to strong pressure. For several months in 1987/7 its exchange rate had been
maintained within a narrow band, just below the DM 3 threshold, solely by
means of substantial interventions. Following a slight weakening in
December/January a rise had been recorded in February despite a slight
slipping of long-term interest rates, the drop in oil prices and a poor
trade balance. However, as the British economy was experiencing strong
growth and public finances were in an excellent state, investments in
sterling were attractive and free of risk because the market felt that any
fall in the exchange rate would be offset by a rise in interest rates. At
the beginning of March it had been possible to maintain the DM 3 exchange
rate only by means of substantial interventions made, for the most part, in
Community currencies, Deutsche Mark, French francs and ECUs.

The Spanish peseta had been firm at the beginning of February,
and sizable interventions had been made. As from 10th February the tighten-
ing of the swap arrangements offered to banks had resulted in a marked

weakening of the exchange rate and halted interventions.

B. Statement _by Mr. Janson

The analysis carried out by the Alternates had dealt with:

- the behaviour of the dollar in recent weeks and its prospective
development in the months to come;

- the specific development of certain European currencies within

the EMS exchange rate mechanism or outside it.

The Alternates had placed their analysis in a broader context,
taking into account not only developments in the foreign exchange markets
but also macro-economic developments (summarised in the Secretariat's
monthly publication) and prospects for the immediate future.

The Alternates had expressed their satisfaction at the stability
which the dollar had exhibited in the preceding weeks. This stability had

shown itself not only in the very small fluctuations in the dollar exchange

rate but also in a sharp reduction in the volume of interventions in sup-
port of the dollar (which seemed to indicate that the US current account
had been financed by spontaneous flows during the preceding weeks). It
seemed that the steadiness of the dollar was due both to underlying and to
technical factors. However, the situation was still delicate. The adjust-
ment of current-account disequilibria could only be a slow process (given
the size of the disequilibria) and, in view of the marked extent to which
the trade balance of the United States was affected by seasonal factors, it
could not be ruled out that the figures in this respect would, in nominal
terms, be less favourable in the coming months. This could have repercus-
sions on the standing of the dollar, and the authorities might be faced
with choosing between accommodating the downward pressure and supporting
the dollar by means of interventions and/or an adjustment of monetary
policies. Conversely, a tendency to appreciate might also create problems.
The German Alternate pointed out in this respect that in that case the
downward trend of yields on long-term securities in Germany might be halted
or even reversed. This would be a Situation analogous to that observed in
the summer of 1987.

Within the EMS the Belgian franc had benefited from a quite sub-
stantial current-account surplus and from inflows of funds in connection
with the events centred on the -"Société Générale de Belgique" and the in-
crease in share prices on the Brussels Stock Exchange. However, these in-
flows had been offset, to a large extent, by outflows of funds as Belgian
residents had sought high-yielding foreign bonds. The proceeds of the in-
terventions effected by the Banque Nationale de Belgique were not reflected
in an increase in foreign exchange reserves but were used by the Treasury
to reduce external indebtedness.

The strong position of the Dutch guilder was attributable to a
combination of structural and temporary factors. The latter included expec-
tations of a further lowering of key rates in the Netherlands. The expecta-
tions were fuelled by the frequency of the reductions decided on during
recent months; a further cut in interest rates would, however, carry the
risk of the level of interest rates in the Netherlands falling too far and
subsequently necessitating an adjustment in the opposite direction.

The upward pressure on the pound sterling posed serious problems
for the British authorities. The upward trend of domestic prices, the sus-

tained growth rate of domestic demand, the risk of the economy overheating

and the prospect of a significant current-account deficit were all reasons
for maintaining and perhaps even raising the current high level of interest
rates. If sterling persisted in its tendency to appreciate as a result of
inflows of funds, the authorities would be faced with the choice of either
allowing the pound to appreciate beyond the DM 3 threshold, which they had
just done the day before, or to continue their diversified interventions in
ECUs and certain EMS currencies, or to combine both approaches to some
extent. The British Alternate pointed out in this connection that the Bank
of England would ensure that the interventions were made in close co-
operation with the central banks of the currencies concerned and with due
attention to the cohesion of the EMS currencies.

The Alternates also noted that the Banco de Espana had not inter-
vened for almost a month. This development reflected, on the one hand, the
fall in interest rates in Spain and, on the other, the new foreign exchange
policy being applied by the Spanish central bank (which was no longer
present in the market on a permanent basis) and the effect of the limits
imposed on Spanish banks' spot positions in foreign currencies.

Finally, the Alternates stressed the importance of not restrict-
ing the discussion to an analysis of developments on the foreign exchange
markets but of taking into consideration also the data on the real economy
and the possible repercussions on the behaviour of the foreign exchange and
financial markets. In their view, such an approach would meet the objective
of the strengthened monitoring procedure, viz. the detection of risks which

might affect the cohesion of the EMS.

C. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton pointed out that, after the sterling exchange
rate had been kept below DM 3 for almost a year, the upward pressure in the
early days of March had been such that it had become impossible to carry on
and the threshold had been crossed. Basically, however, the exchange rate
policy remained the same, i.e. its aim was to ensure the stability of the
exchange rate as far as was possible in the context of general monetary
policy. This exchange rate policy had been put into effect in 1987, with
allowance for certain adjustments to the sterling exchange rate from time
to time. The pound was to be prevented from appreciating too much, but also
from depreciating too much to stop the “accommodation" of the increase in

domestic prices. On Monday, 7th March, the Bank of England had had to
intervene again, taking up fairly large amounts of Deutsche Mark, French
francs and ECUs, and it was grateful to its partners for their understand-
ing and co-operation, in particular during the past few weeks; it under-
stood the problems to which such interventions could give rise, and these
interventions had been carried out specifically with a view to ensuring
that the EMS parity grid was not disturbed. The interventions in ECUs had
again given rise to problems. The Treasury had wished to have greater
recourse to this type of intervention, believing such an approach to be
more Community-spirited and, moreover, that it would enable certain diffi-
culties encountered with interventions in specific currencies to be
avoided. But the composition of the ECU was such that in purchasing ECUs,
it was inevitable that more than 40% of the purchase would consist of
strong currencies and the remainder comprise weaker currencies. That raised
in any case the issue of the use of the ECU as a valid intervention instru-
ment within the EMS.

Mr. de Larosiere thanked Mr. Leigh-Pemberton for having done the
utmost to ensure that the interventions by the Bank of England were carried
out smoothly and did not disturb the relative positions of the currencies
within the narrow band, and for the co-operative attitude shown over the
past few days. However, that was not the only problem. The United Kingdom's
intervention to purchase currencies such as the Deutsche Mark, the French
franc or the component currencies of the ECU posed a fundamental problem
for relations between the European countries and for operating practices
within a fragile international monetary system. There was a general agree-
ment to stabilise the dollar, but it needed to be appreciated that the
equilibrium was extremely delicate: the US current-account deficit was
substantial and would continue for a long time to come, while economic
adjustment in the United States had made a modest start and was likely to
be unconvincing when the foreign trade figures were published every month.
Given the situation of unstable equilibrium, the purchase by the central
bank of a major country of substantial amounts of non-US currencies, but
particularly EEC currencies, constituted a further threat of dollar weaken-
ing (it had, incidentally, fallen slightly on Monday, 7th March). It might
be asked whether it was sensible to risk rocking the entire international
monetary system by making purchases of already strong currencies when a
country reached, or thought it was reaching, certain limits. In this

respect one could only applaud the fact that the United Kingdom had

abandoned the DM 3 limit, but the movements which were taking shape on the
foreign exchange market as a result of this action were worrying.

Mr. Pohl pointed out that it was precisely upward pressure that
the Deutsche Mark was being subjected to that day (8th March) and asked
Mr. Leigh-Pemberton why, if he considered sterling to be too strong, he
purchased European currencies, even via the ECU, but not dollars, which
would have more or less the same effect.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, in reply, pointed out that intervening
directly in Deutsche Mark had a greater impact on the pound
sterling/Deutsche Mark rate than purchasing dollars. It was true, as
Mr. de Larosiére had said, that world monetary equilibrium was fragile, but
it should not be forgotten that the Bank of England had made dollar
purchases totalling nearly 25 billion in 1987. In January 1988, as had
already been mentioned, the UK authorities had been of the opinion that in
order to influence the pound sterling/Deutsche Mark rate and also because
of the vast quantity of dollars accumulated, a diversification of reserves
was desirable. To understand this attitude, it had to be borne in mind that
the United Kingdom had already contributed substantially to the stability
of the international monetary system.

Mr. Pohl observed that the Bank of England had purchased
US$25 billion in 1987 but had resold some of this as the official reserves
had increased by less. It was understandable that nobody wanted to invest
in a currency that was depreciating. However, the G-/7 agreements could not
function if one country, like the United Kingdom, expected other countries
to purchase more dollars while it diversified its reserves, i.e. sold dol-
lars and purchased Deutsche Mark in exchange.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton acknowledged that 5 to 6 billion dollars had
been converted into other currencies, which nonetheless left a net increase
in dollar reserves of approximately 19 billion, far more than was the case
in a number of other countries. The objective now was not to let the pound
rise too high and too quickly. The interventions on Monday, 7th March were
intended precisely to control the market and avoid excesses. It was hoped
that the pound would quite quickly reach a level at which interventions
would no longer be necessary and which would not be too much higher than

the previous exchange rate of DM 3.

Mr. Pohl emphasised that the Deutsche Bundesbank was not prepared
to purchase dollars while other banks were selling them or purchasing
Deutsche Mark. |

Mr. Hoffmeyer recalled that in an initial report on a common
policy in respect of the dollar the Governors had already agreed in 1975
that in the event of dollar weakness vis-a-vis the EMS the central banks
should not intervene in the system's strong currencies. But even purchases
of ECUs represented interventions of which approximately 50 per cent. was
in strong currencies, not 40 per cent., since sterling was one of the
strong ECU currencies, which meant, moreover, that the Bank of England was
purchasing its own currency.

Mr. de Larosiére thought that a large part of the Bank of
England's dollar purchases was not so much an intervention aimed at sup-
porting the US currency as a move to rebuild UK official reserves, which
had previously diminished. If this interpretation was correct, it should be
taken into account. In any case, when a country, for reasons of its own
based on the elements of its overall economic policy (growth, interest
rates, monetary policy, etc.), considered that it had to prevent its cur-
rency from appreciating too much vis-a-vis the dollar or another currency,
it was obvious, under the prevailing circumstances and in the context of
the Louvre Accords, that its interventions should not involve the strongest
currencies. If this was not the case, the very logic of any move to stabi-
lise the dollar would be destroyed. The Governors should give this matter
serious thought and also take note of Mr. Péhl's comments.

Mr. Janson expressed his satisfaction at the Governors' discus-
sion, the outcome of which should be a clear exchange rate policy for the
central banks, in particular with regard to their action in the framework
of concertation. Thus, if there was a consensus that further falls in the
dollar should be avoided, this meant that central banks with strong curren-
cies which had to purchase foreign currencies should acquire dollars, and
that those with weak currencies should not sell dollars. The problem for
the latter was, therefore, to know which currencies they could use to sup-
port their own currencies.

Mr. de Larosiére pointed out that central banks with weak curren-
cies should sell strong currencies, for example Deutsche Mark, to the

extent that they had any, for one could not demand the impossible.

Mr. Doyle recalled the problem of interventions in ECUs at times
of simultaneous sterling and Deutsche Mark strength.

Mr. Janson considered that it was very important that the Gover-
nors' agreement on this principle concerning intervention - viz. dollar
purchases by those central banks with strong currencies and Deutsche Mark
sales for those with weak currencies - should become a clear brief for
central bank exchange dealers until there was a complete reversal in the
foreign exchange market.

Mr. Duisenberg said that he shared Mr. de Larosiere's concern.

The action on the pound was a sort of unilateral realignment; it illustrated
very clearly that one should not try to cope with such a situation using
only interventions and realignments. Interest rates should also be used, as
the participants in the EMS exchange rate mechanism had agreed, supplemented,
if necessary, by budgetary instruments.

The Chairman thanked Mr. Leigh-Pemberton for having opened a very
interesting debate which demonstrated the extent of the co-ordination of
central bank policies and the means which could be employed to achieve the
desired convergence. The observations which had been made contained the
seeds for an improvement in the methods of co-operation.

Mr. Dalgaard said that the monitoring group would take account of

the views and comments of the Governors.

III. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EEC Ministers of Finance on
developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen countries
participating in the concertation procedure during February and the
first few days of March 1988

The Chairman took note of the Committee's approval of the

“concertation report", which would be submitted as usual to the EEC Ministers

of Finance.

IV. Continuation of the discussion on the Commission's proposals
concerning the full liberalisation of capital movements on the basis
of Report No. 63 prepared by a group of experts under the chairmanship
of Mr. Dalgaard

The Chairman recalled that the oral report on this question which

he had presented to the ECOFIN Council on 9th February 1988 had been amended
- 10 -

to take account of the comments made by a number of Governors at the
meeting on 9th February 1988. A text had accordingly been drawn up after
that meeting and distributed to the Governors. |

Mr. Dalgaard briefly presented Report No. 63, drawn up by a group
of experts under his chairmanship, noting that it had been an unusually
difficult report to prepare owing to the fact that capital movements raised
many complex issues, particularly for exchange rate policy and monetary
policy; moreover, even though the experts had met on three occasions, the

report did not contain a consensus on all the issues addressed.

A. Statement by Mr. Janson

The Alternates had found the concluding remarks of Report No. 63
of the "Dalgaard Group" to be a useful basis for drawing up the final

opinion of the Committee of Governors.

1. The Alternates had noted that the conclusions of Report No. 63
reiterated certain principles that had already been stressed in the oral
report by the Chairman of the Committee of Governors to the ECOFIN Council
in February:

- the aim of liberalisation in itself met with unanimous support;

~ in order to ensure that liberalisation did not jeopardise the
achievements of the EMS with regard to internal and external
stability, it was necessary to follow policies which would foster
stability of prices and costs and eliminate excessive external
imbalances;

- the participation of all Community currencies in the exchange
rate mechanism on equal terms remained a highly desirable objec-
tive even if, in conjunction with the liberalisation of capital
movements, it could make the management of the EMS more diffi-
cult;

- some of the countries in which liberalisation was less advanced
stressed the importance they attached to the adoption of adequate
measures to improve economic and social cohesion within the

Community.

2. It was now agreed that the liberalisation of capital movements as
such did not at present seem to necessitate any adjustment of the EMS oper-

ating mechanisms as strengthened in 1985 and 1987. This was not to say that

- }]] -

further strengthening might not be found necessary at a later stage once

more experience had been gained with the technical improvements introduced

recently.

3.

The Governors should address the issues below with a view to

arriving if possible at a common position to submit to the Ministers.

(a) While it was generally recognised that greater co-ordination of

(b)

monetary policies was required in a context of full liberalisa-
tion of capital movements, there was disagreement on the appro-
priate means of achieving it. Some Alternates were in favour of
establishing a framework for the ex ante co-ordination of mone-
tary policy for the whole system at Community level and treating
any deviations symmetrically. Under this approach a role might be
played, for example, by commonly agreed targets for domestic
credit expansion and a rule whereby the money creation effects of
intra-EMS interventions were not offset by changes in credit to
the domestic sector.

Other Alternates favoured a pragmatic approach, stressing that,
firstly, too formal an analytical framework was not suited to the
unforeseeable and complex nature of the problems associated with
co-ordination and that, secondly, the existing procedures were a
sufficient basis for improving the co-ordination of monetary
policies.

The Alternates were of the opinion that, while noting these
divergences of views at the present stage, the Committee of
Governors could suggest to the ECOFIN that it pursue its work in
this area. Specifically, the Governors could ask the “Raymond
Group" to elucidate the proposals made concerning the establish-
ment of a framework for the ex ante co-ordination of monetary

policies.

The Alternates were in agreement with the Commission in recom-
mending that the conduct of monetary policy, which remained a
national responsibility, should continue to be able to rely on
instruments and markets designed or organised to ensure its
effectiveness. However, the provisions proposed to this end - in
effect Article 2 of the proposed Directive and the relevant
recital - called for two sets of comments on the part of the

Alternates.

~ |]? -

The first concerned the room for manoeuvre left to the authori-
ties to take measures, for monetary policy purposes, that might
run counter to liberalisation and non-discrimination. A deroga-
tion limited to the two instruments mentioned in Article 2 did
not adequately cater for the range of measures that might be
adopted to meet monetary policy needs. In the view of the
Alternates a more general formula should be adopted in order to
leave room for the conduct of monetary policy.

Secondly, the Alternates shared the Commission's concern to
ensure that monetary policy grounds could not be cited in order
to introduce disguised restrictions on capital movements.
Surveillance therefore had to be exercised in this connection, on
the responsibility of the Monetary Committee and the Committee of
Governors, in which the Commission was represented. The form
taken by this surveillance must not, indeed, be such as to
indirectly result in the conduct of monetary policies being
placed under Community jurisdiction, as would be implied by the
notification requirement under Article 2 and the reference to a
“framework of appropriate Community procedures" in the preamble.
The Commission representative had noted that it was at all events
the responsibility of the Commission to ensure compliance with
the obligations laid down in the Treaty and the secondary legis-

lation.

(c) Diverging views had been expressed on the need for a specific
safeguard clause as proposed in Article 3 of the Directive. Some
felt that the safeguard provisions contained in the Treaty of
Rome were sufficient to cover all conceivable eventualities and
an additional clause would do more harm than good. Others, on the
contrary, considered that such a clause should form part of the
available arsenal of defensive measures and that its drawbacks
could be limited by means of appropriate conditions: use only in
exceptional circumstances, limited duration, and Community sur-

veillance.

4, The Alternates retained their doubts as to the usefulness of
extending the 1972 Directive on regulating international capital flows and
neutralising their undesirable effects. The Commission representative had

pointed out that, regardless of what became of the 1972 Directive, the real

- 13 -

question was that of finding the appropriate vehicle to give expression to
the following three concerns: the economic and technical justification of
the “erga omnes" principle of liberalisation, the possibility for the
Community to revoke this principle if necessary, and the indispensability
of Community procedures for monetary and exchange rate policies with a view
to monetary union.

Mr. Janson concluded by saying that the Alternates could prepare
a draft report for discussion and approval by the Governors on the basis of
the experts’ Report No. 63, the Alternates’ discussions, the substance of

which had just been outlined, and the Governors' subsequent deliberations.

B. The Committee's discussion

Mr. Ciampi noted that it was not surprising that the work carried
out by the experts and the Alternates had not culminated in unanimous
reports, given the differences of opinion which still existed; he paid
tribute to the quality of this work and made the following remarks. The
concern, already expressed in January, that the liberalisation of short-
term capital movements might involve risks for the EMS found little support
within the Committee, and it was to be hoped that events would prove this
fear to be unfounded. All possible misunderstandings should be dispelled:
as it has demonstrated in the past, the Banca d'Italia favours a further
strengthening of the EMS and growing integration in EFurope; its concern is
that the proposals or measures which are currently being examined could
lead to incoherencies or imbalances which might turn out to be dangerous in
the future.

There had been a choice between progressing along the path lead-
ing to the liberalisation of capital movements and that leading to the
enlargement of the exchange rate mechanism. The choice had fallen on a
decisive advance along the former, which would necessarily mean a delay on
the latter. The liberalisation of short-term capital movements will pose
problems both for exchange rate stability and for the autonomy of national
monetary policies.

With regard to the first issue, the Banca d'Italia was anxious to
limit the risks of exchange rate instability in order to avoid unnecessary
realignments. Two measures appeared to lend themselves to this purpose.
Firstly, a recycling instrument which would not be a financing mechanism in

the traditional style but which would be designed and managed in the general

- 14 -

interests of the EMS. Secondly, a new safeguard clause whose existence,
instead of undermining the credibility of the objective of liberalisation,
would, on the contrary, serve this goal by making it possible to cope with
difficult situations.

The liberalisation of capital movements would reduce the scope
and autonomy of national monetary policies. As it was not reasonable to
think that a single central bank would be able to determine monetary policy
for the whole system, with the other member countries being content to
follow suit, ex ante co-ordination had to be developed with a view, firstly,
to defining and, secondly, to implementing a genuinely Community-wide mone-
tary policy. In this respect the Alternates' proposal that the Raymond
Group study the issue in depth could only be supported.

Article 2 of the draft Directive was directly concerned with the
powers of the central banks, and the Governors should voice their opinion
on this. The monetary authorities might be permitted to use instruments
other than those listed under Article 2 subject to prior verification that
the instruments complied with the spirit of the obligation of liberalisa-
tion.

The aim of monetary policy co-ordination could not be restricted
to convergence towards low inflation rates; growth was absolutely essential
to genuine and sound monetary stability. In addition, the elimination of
persistent disequilibria in the trade balance and the balance of payments
on current account could not rely on non-monetary policies alone. Finally,
it was difficult to accept, as stated in Report No. 63 (page 14), that the
co-ordination of monetary policies could work only if there was sufficient
support from other policies. A co-ordination of the various policies was of
course necessary, but if that argument had been put forward from the out-
set, the EMS and convergence would not have become what they were, aided,
in part, by the action taken by the central banks.

Mr. Duisenberg began by pointing out that on Tuesday, 12th April,
most of the Governors would have to leave the BIS very early (at 11 a.m.)
to travel to Washington for the meeting of the Interim Committee, and that
it would therefore be advisable to organise the times of the meetings so as
to leave sufficient time for the Committee's discussions.

The Chairman said that arrangements would be made to take account

of these exceptional] circumstances.
-~ 15 -

Mr. Duisenberg addressed the fundamental issues raised by the
liberalisation of capital movements, commenting on three points, namely the
co-ordination of monetary policies, the instruments of monetary policy and
the specific safeguard clause.

Regarding monetary policy co-ordination, the Governors had
reached an important agreement in Basle and Nyborg in September 1987 which
established, in particular, the principle of combining the utilisation of
interest rate differentials and a flexible and full-scale use of the fluc-
tuation margin, with a minimum of realignments. Of course, in time, the
central banks would have to go beyond the terms of this agreement, but in a
pragmatic way. On the other hand, it would not be sensible to start drawing
up and adopting new rules straight away. The degree of pragmatism to be
desired might be illustrated by the example of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
which displayed great flexibility when in 1987, in the interests of ex-
change rate stability, it allowed an overshooting of its monetary targets
for the second year running. It was very unlikely that the Deutsche
Bundesbank would have agreed to this overshooting ex ante, even if it had
been approved collectively within the Committee. As Mr. Ciampi had suggested,
the group of experts under the chairmanship of Mr. Raymond could, nonethe-
less, analyse and clarify the issue of the methods or procedures of mone-
tary policy co-ordination.

What monetary policy instruments were chosen had to remain the
preserve of the relevant national authorities, and, consequently, those
instruments likely to have an external impact should be excluded from the
Directive. The Directive, in Article 2, provided for a derogation in favour
of two instruments of this type, which had the disadvantage of making this
provision seem like a permanent derogation from the obligation to liberalise
capital movements. Article 2 of the Directive should limit itself to empha-
sising the competence of the national authorities, which, moreover, had
already been recognised in the Treaty. In this connection the assertion
contained in Report No. 63 (Section IV, 1(c)), that derogations other than
those specified in Article 2 would only be possible under safeguard clauses,
was unacceptable. However, in order to ensure that the liberalisation of
capital movements was not thwarted by monetary measures introduced by indi-
vidual countries, it was imperative that the Monetary Committee and the
Committee of Governors examined the justification for these measures on a

case-by-case basis. In this context it might be useful for both committees
to be notified of certain measures taken by national authorities. The
requirement of notification to the Commission should nonetheless be omitted
from Article 2 of the Directive and the list of monetary policy instruments
should not be restrictive. Moreover, the preamble should be amended accord-
ingly; more precisely, in the second recital, the expression "Whereas Member
States should be able to take, within the framework of appropriate Community
procedures" might be replaced by "Within the framework of the restrictions
imposed by their Community obligations".

The specific safeguard clause provided for in Article 3 of the
Directive did not appear necessary, given the existence of general safe-
guard clauses in the Treaty. If exchange controls were abolished, the mere
possibility of reintroducing them constituted a signal to the market that,
in the event of tensions, restrictions would be imposed. This would lead to
an outflow of funds from the countries concerned. A specific safeguard
clause would thus have a counter-productive and negative effect, particu-
larly if it had to be a permanent component of the provisions of the Direc-
tive.

Mr. Pohl said that he very largely agreed with all of
Mr. Duisenberg's remarks and, in particular, with those concerning monetary
targets. The Commission's proposal for the full liberalisation of capital
movements was one of the great advances made by the Community in recent
years and a very significant step towards a monetary union and closer mone-
tary co-operation. At the same time liberalisation was no more than the
fulfilment of commitments undertaken in the Treaty. Mr. Duisenberg's com-
ments on the specific safeguard clause had to be taken very seriously. In
fact, if it was intended to demonstrate the intention of progressing reso-
lutely towards a single integrated capital market, there should be no sug-
gestion of any mental reservation or of leaving any loophole for back-
pedalling. The elimination of existing controls had to be carried out with-
out hesitation and in such a way as to convince the markets that it was
irreversible. An integrated capital market was as important for the future
of Europe as the goods and services market, since, in reality, funds only
moved to wherever they would be employed most profitably.

Improving monetary policy co-ordination was necessary if only
because there would, ultimately, be total freedom of capital movements.
Monetary policy objectives should not be unified but co-ordinated more

closely, the aim being to keep the operating conditions of the markets as

- 17 -

stable as possible. The countries which had achieved the greatest stability
could clearly not back-pedal and aim for an average. On the contrary, it

- was necessary to continue along the path of maximum stability. On the other
hand, monetary policy should not be entirely given over to the offsetting
of capital movements or exchange rates. Monetary policy also had other
aims; moreover, it could not be fully effective unless other elements of
the policy mix were adequate. The co-ordination of monetary policies did
not require new mechanisms or procedures. The necessary structures existed:
the Committee of Governors with its Alternates and groups of experts oper-
ated effectively, and bilateral consultations also played a role. Embarking
on more institutionalisation would not lead to any real progress; it was
better to use and develop the existing infrastructure.

To achieve the objective of the EMS, i.e. fixed but adjustable
exchange rates which should be adjusted only rarely, interest rates would
have to be altered more than hitherto as long as fundamental divergences
persisted between countries.

The requirement to notify the Commission provided for in
Article 2 of the draft Directive posed certain legal problems in Germany.
It was in fact felt that monetary decisions had to remain the prerogative
of national institutions, the Deutsche Bundesbank in particular. This had
been expressly confirmed at the time of the revision of the Treaty, and the
Commission therefore had no specific competence in monetary affairs. A
compromise could be reached by saying that notification could be made to
the Committee of Governors, on which the Commission was represented.

Mr. de Larosiére shared Mr. Pohl's view that the liberalisation
of capital movements within the Community was an essential goal, certainly
a cornerstone of progress towards the single market. France considered this
move to be irreversible; it had substantially reduced its regulations and
was determined to bring the process to a conclusion. The impression should
not be given that liberalisation was a secondary or uncertain objective. It
was thus possible to be quite frank as regards the actual conditions of the
specific safeguard clause, but the drafting of a clause should not be
allowed to detract in any way from the credibility of the objective.
Certainly, in the event of an overt balance-of-payments crisis or extreme
volatility in the capital markets it would be necessary to let a country
take corrective measures as long as monetary integration was not at a more

advanced stage, but the safeguard clause should not give the impression

that a sort of permanent and institutional loophole was being created. Ways
and means might be found to cope with this concern, and it was possible
that the provisions of the Treaty of Rome concerning the balance of pay-
ments and capital markets would suffice.

As a counterpart to a positive attitude towards the full liberal-
isation of capital movements, it was essential that more be done with
regard to the co-ordination of economic and monetary policies, as desired
by Mr. Ciampi. An ex ante discussion should be held on the objectives of
economic policy and not just of monetary policy, the latter being only one
element of the whole array of economic policy instruments. In addition to
the convergence which was materialising in the combat against inflation, it
was necessary to define the general aims of convergence towards which the
Community should be working, a kind of optimum that would take into account
the structural characteristics of the different countries. The equilibrium
aimed for in this way would be based on objectives for prices, growth,
employment and external trade and equilibrium, and would thus combine mone-
tary variables and the real economy. Such an approach would make it pos-
sible to assess the degree of mutual compatibility existing between mone-
tary policies, and its methods might vary. There was no question of setting
up institutional procedures which would be likely to discourage or cause
concern to some member countries, but it was imperative to work towards
convergence in all the areas for which economic policy objectives were set
if the aim was to bring about ex ante monetary policy co-ordination. The
absence to date of such ex ante discussions bore testimony to the somewhat
ad hoc nature of the monetary co-ordination which the Governors had
achieved, and much further progress was required in this field.

Mr. Delors thanked the Governors, the Alternates and the group of
experts under the chairmanship of Mr. Dalgaard for the work which they had
undertaken. The Commission had of course proposed texts, but it had mainly
raised questions concerning monetary and economic policy, appropriateness
and legal issues; it would amend its texts on the basis of the remarks
which had been made. The Commission had made a strategic choice in submit-
ting, in 1987 already, a text for the full liberalisation of capital move-
ments; it had considered that complete monetary and economic union could
not be made a prerequisite for the liberalisation of capital movements. On
the contrary, liberalisation would give impetus to achieving the common

market in financial services and boost progress in monetary co-operation.
- }9 -

If the Directive on liberalisation were adopted swiftly, it would have a
great psychological impact and be of great significance for the completion
of the single market. One could envisage an application date being set for
six or twelve months’ hence, much sooner than could, for example, be fore-
seen for the convergence of indirect tax rates.

The Commission had also raised questions concerning the appropri-
ateness and legal aspects of, in particular, Article 2 of the draft Directive
(monetary policy instruments) and Article 3 (safeguard clause). The Governors
were correct in saying that the wording of Article 2 was too restrictive,
and it would consequently be revised. Article 155 of the Treaty of Rome
made it obligatory for the Commission to ensure that it was notified of any
derogations, even if only provisional, from the liberalisation of capital
movements, but the Commission did not intend to bring its own power or
expertise to bear. Once notified, it would consult the Committee of
Governors and the Monetary Committee.

There was also a problem in connection with the appropriateness
and legal aspects of Article 3. The clause applied to the case where a
country experienced a speculative run on its market without any lasting
impact on its balance of payments. Some said that such a clause undermined
the credibility of the liberalisation of capital movements, but without it
it was doubtful whether the Council would reach any agreement. In point of
fact, the provisions of the Treaty concerned balance-of-payments disequi-
librium and did not apply to this particular case.

There were still two other difficult problems worth mentioning.
The first was related to taxation and comprised two elements. On the one
hand, concerning the taxation of share dividends, one might propose a con-
vergence of corporate taxation, which should be fairly easy to accept in
view of the national laws governing the assessment of corporation tax, tax
credit and deductions at source. On the other hand, there was the very
difficult matter of interest on bank deposits and bonds since national
arrangements varied very greatly, ranging from absence of declaration to
declaration and from non-taxation to taxation with or without deduction at
source. The second problem concerned fair competition within a common
financial area in which certain currencies could only fluctuate within
narrow margins of 2.25 per cent. while others were able to float. For coun-

tries which would implement fully the liberalisation of capital movements
- 20 -

there was a magic triangle consisting of the freedom of these movements,
monetary policy co-operation and common exchange rate constraints.

The Chairman drew three conclusions as regarded procedure at the
end of the Committee's discussion:

- the time of the Committee's next meeting, on 12th April, could be
altered to take into account the Governors! departure at 1] a.m.
and to leave a little more time for the discussions;

- a document would be drawn up by the office of the Chairman and
the Secretariat aimed at combining and reconciling the points
contained in the excellent Report No. 63 and the comments made by
the Alternates and the Governors; this document would serve as a
basis for the discussions to be held on 12th April and for the
report to be submitted to the Ministers of Finance for the meeting
of the ECOFIN Council on 18th April 1988;

- there was still disagreement on the important issue of what
methods to use to improve co-ordination of monetary policies; as
the Alternates had suggested, the Governors could point out in
their report to the Ministers that they were continuing their
work in this area, and the Raymond Group could be requested to

clarify some of the suggestions which had been made.

V. Exchange of views on the manner in which the Committee could examine

the memorandum by Minister Balladur following the mandate given by the
the ECOFIN Council

The Chairman recalled that, during their ECOFIN Council lunch on
Sth February 1988, the Finance Ministers had invited the Governors to
examine the proposals and ideas formulated by Mr. Balladur in a memorandum
published in January; the Chairman had notified the Committee of the terms

in which the mandate had been given in a message dated 12th February 1988.

A. Statement by Mr. Janson

The Alternates had briefly broached the question of the organisa-
tion of the work to comply with the mandate from the ECOFIN Council to
examine the Balladur memorandum. They had noted first of all that the

French Minister's memorandum comprised two main sections: the first dealt
- 21 -

in large part with subjects which the Governors had already examined or
were in the process of examining, for example the liberalisation of capital
movements and the strengthening of monetary policy co-ordination; the
second section focused more on the longer-term aspects, in particular the
creation of a single currency area and a European central bank.

The Alternates suggested discussing the matter in depth at their
April meeting on the basis of a preparatory working document by the office
of the Chairman. It had been agreed that the work should not be limited to
an examination of the French memorandum but should also take into consider-
ation the notes presented by other official figures, such as Minister Amato,
as well as any contributions from other countries or central banks.

As far as the timetable of work was concerned, the Alternates had
started from the premise that a preliminary report should be presented to
the June session of the ECOFIN Council (probably on 6th June) and that to

that end the Governors should discuss the matter in depth in May.

B. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. de Larosiere agreed with the suggestions made by Mr. Janson
on behalf of the Alternates. Mr. Balladur's memorandum in effect contained
two rather different sets of ideas. The first set comprised reflections on
the operation of the EMS, on the desirability of extending it to other
participants and on certain improvements to the operation of the mecha-
nisms. At the end of the memorandum questions were asked regarding the
future of a European central monetary institution; questions were raised
rather than positions adopted. The work should focus on both these sets of
ideas and the consideration of the future of a European central bank should
not be allowed to obscure the importance of examining the first set. The
greater the convergence along the path leading to monetary stability, the
more questions should be asked about the purpose of economic policy objec-
tives and their consistency, and about optimum growth within overall
stability. It was in that spirit that the comments contained in
Mr. Balladur's memorandum concerning the symmetry of interventions and of
adjustment efforts needed to be interpreted. Forecasts for the more distant
future and concerned rather with the institutional aspects should not over-
shadow the importance of progress towards greater European monetary inte-
gration within the framework of the existing system. On the other hand, as
Mr. Janson had pointed out, it was important to begin thinking now about

the profusion of ideas for the creation of a Furopean central bank, as

- 2? -

contained for example in Mr. Genscher's memorandum. To that end, it would
be useful to set up a think tank within the Committee, even were it only to
be called at some future date, if at all. |

Mr. Pohl recalled that a number of the topics addressed in the
papers by Mr. Balladur and Mr. Amato had been discussed at length up to
September 1987 and had led to the Basle-Nyborg Agreement. Everyone was
aware that the Agreement was a compromise in which the Deutsche Bundesbank
had gone as far as it could; it had even been harshly criticised by highly
respected circles in Germany, whose opinion it was that discipline within
the EMS would be weakened by the Agreement, in particular by the increase
in the already generous credit facilities. The new facilities had since
been used and had contributed to the stability of the system.

Several of Mr. Balladur's and Mr. Amato's proposals, in particular
those relating to symmetry and asymmetry, had been discussed ever since the
inception of the EMS and had invariably provoked differences of opinion.
The endless repetition of such proposals did not contribute to the stability
of the system. Neither did statements such as that by Mr. Amato, who,
according to an Italian newspaper, had claimed that the Deutsche Mark was
structurally undervalued, implying that the other currencies were overvalued
and that a realignment was in the offing, perhaps even inevitable. It was
necessary to avoid making this sort of pronouncement in public and also to
avoid announcing regularly that the EMS needed to be improved, which only
gave the impression that the system was unsound and unable to function
effectively.

Mr. Pohl said that he was, however, prepared to discuss the ideas
put forward in the memoranda circulated: in particular, the question of how
the convergence and the co-ordination of both economic and monetary poli-
cies could be improved, given that it was impossible to isolate the one
from the other. As Mr. de Larosiere had suggested, the countries partici-
pating fully in the exchange rate mechanism should set themselves common ex
ante targets. For the time being, and because the Ministers had submitted a
request to the Governors, the Alternates could study these issues in depth
by taking into consideration the memoranda by Mr. Balladur and Mr. Amato,
but not Mr. Genscher's note, which was a personal opinion and not a German
Government paper.

Mr. Duisenberg was also of the opinion that discussion of these

issues, which were so high on the agenda elsewhere, could not be avoided
- 323 -

and that, as Mr. Janson had said, the Committee should not be caught off
guard. It was not easy, however, to decide what should be discussed and
what could be disregarded. For a start, in addition to Mr. Balladur's memo -
randum was Mr. Amato's paper to be taken into consideration and that of

Mr. Genscher which, although representing personal views, did come from the
German Minister of Foreign Affairs? As for Mr. Balladur, should his inter-
view with the Wall Street Journal also be taken into account? If so, it
should be noted that this article put the accent on promoting currencies'

internal and external stability, whereas in his paper on the monetary

structure of Europe Mr. Balladur emphasised the sharing of the burden within

the EMS, which it might not always be possible to reconcile completely with
the commitment to internal and external stability.

The Chairman emphasised that the Governors should turn their
attention to these issues because, for one thing, they had been given a
mandate by the ECOFIN Council and, for another, they could not remain
silent on subjects which involved them and which had been generating
various ideas for some time, even if, among themselves, they had differing
views as to the practicability of some of the ideas and the timetable of
possible implementation. It therefore seemed useful to start the discussion
off within the Committee of Alternates, rather than create a new group of
experts. With a view to these discussions, the Chairman's office would draw
up a document indicating the various questions which should be raised.

Asked by Mr. Janson if the French side wished to add anything
with regard to Mr. Balladur's memorandum, Mr. de Larosiére said that, to
his mind, monetary stability was a pivotal objective for every central bank
and it received top priority at the Banque de France, as at its partner
central banks. It was, however, not forbidden to reflect on the consequences
for the cohesion of the EMS of the existence of balance-of-payments dis-
equilibria in certain countries, which could reflect a debatable choice of
policy mix. It if was valid, in periods of divergent rates of inflation, to
be compelled under the exchange rate mechanism to exercise greater rigour,
it was valid to wonder whether, whatever the circumstances and whatever the
policy mix of the country with the strongest currency, the whole Community
should be guided by that particular policy mix. Thus there had to be a
discussion about economic policy objectives, otherwise there would be

tensions within the EMS. It was in that light that the debate about greater

- 24 -

symmetry should be seen, and the French side might submit some detailed
ideas at a later stage.

Mr. Pohl expressed his agreement with Mr. de Larosiére's analysis
and acknowledged that imbalances in economic performances and balance-of-
payments disequilibria were two of the problems currently besetting Europe.
The situation was not, however, as extreme as that described by Mr. Dini
when he said that a single central bank should not set the pace of monetary
growth for all the others, whose duty was only to follow. In any event,
even if it was true, it would apply only to those which participated in the
exchange rate mechanism, and with a greater margin for manoeuvre for Italy,
thanks to the wider fluctuation band.

If these subjects could be examined initially by the Alternates,
it would be useful to define the mandate a little more closely. In fact,
the memoranda by Mr. Balladur and Mr. Amato touched on a number of prob-
lems, some of which, such as policy in regard to the dollar and the European
central bank, were eminently political. The Governors should concentrate on
monetary policy, but realise that monetary policy was not capable of
correcting the errors introduced by other policies and was not able, for
example, to redress balance-of-payments current-account diseguilibria.

The issue of symmetrical interventions had been raised repeatedly
during the past ten years; the Deutsche Bundesbank had sound reasons for
opposing it and was not prepared to revise its opinion. Was it, therefore,
of any use to bring up the topic yet again, knowing a reconciliation to be
impossible given that such interventions would mean an end to autonomous
monetary policy for the Bundesbank and would rapidly lead to a splitting-up
of the EMS?

Other issues, such as the enlargement of the system or the co-
ordination of budgetary policy objectives, were either not really within
the competence of the Governors, or had already been discussed in the
Committee's report presented at Nyborg. It seemed important, therefore, to
clarify the mandate and to draw up a list of the questions requiring
answers on the basis of the document to which the Chair had referred.

The Chairman pointed out that the object of the document to be
produced by the Chairman's office was precisely to determine which issues
were to be examined and which were to be ignored either as being outside
the competence of the Governors or because the Governors did not plan to

consider them.
- 25 -

VI. Exchange of views on the relationships between the EEC and the four
newly industrialised Asian countries on the basis of a short
presentation by Mr. Bockelmann

The Chairman noted that, owing to the advanced hour, it appeared
that he would have to postpone the presentation Mr. Bockelmann had planned
to give until a subsequent meeting. He thanked Mr. Bockelmann for the sta-
tistical tables and charts he had prepared for the Governors and for the
distribution of the text of his presentation, to be arranged in the very

near future.

Vil. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee

Reappointment of Mr. Dalgaard as Chairman of the Group of Experts
on foreign exchange policy

The Chairman recalled that Mr. Dalgaard's three-year term of
office was due to expire on 3lst March 1988. He proposed that Mr. Dalgaard
be reappointed for a further three years, i.e. until 3lst March 199].

Mr. Dalgaard was completing his second three-year term of office and, since
March 1982, had been a highly competent and extremely efficient Chairman of
the Group of Experts.

The Chairman noted that the Committee approved his proposal and

expressed to Mr. Dalgaard the congratulations and thanks of the Committee.

VIII. Date and place of the next meeting

The next meeting would be held in Basle on Tuesday, 12th April
1988, but given that most of the Governors would be leaving for Washington
in the course of the morning, the time would very probably be brought

forward.
