Confidential

(Translation)

MINUTES *
OF THE 239th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 14th NOVEMBER 1989 AT 10.30 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Bank of
Greece and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by
Mr. Papademos, Mr. Karamouzis and Mr. Brissimis; the Governor of the Banque
Nationale de Belgique, Mr. Verplaetse, accompanied by Mr. Rey,
Mr. Michielsen and Mrs. de Wachter; the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank,
Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Schlesinger and Mr. Rieke; the
Governor of the Banco de Espafia, Mr. Rubio, accompanied by Mr. Linde and
Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France, Mr. de Larosiére,
accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the Governor of the
Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady Walshe and
Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi, accompanied
by Mr. Dini and Mr. Santini; the President of De Nederlandsche Bank,
Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr. Szasz3 the Governor of the Banco de
Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo Marques and
Mr. Amorim; the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton,
accompanied by Mr. Price; the President of the Commission of the European
Communities, Mr. Delors, accompanied by Mr. Pons, Mr. Boyd and Mr. Dixon;
the Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr. Jaans;
Mr. Kees, Secretary of the Monetary Committee. Also present at the meeting
were Mr. Raymond and Mr. Dalgaard, Chairmen of the Groups of Experts. The
Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul,
Mr. Scheller and Mr. Giles, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan also

attended.

ee ec i

* Final text approved at the meeting on 12th December 1989, which
incorporates some drafting changes.

I. Approval of the minutes of the 238th meeting

The Committee approved the minutes of the 238th meeting on the
understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be incorporated

in the final text.

II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:

- Preparation by the "Dalgaard Group'"' and discussion by the
Committee of Alternates};

- Statistical charts and tables

A. Statement by Mr. Dalgaard

The experts had noted that the dollar had weakened by almost 7%
since the beginning of September and that there was no longer any talk of
an upward trend. There were several reasons for this decline, in particular
the narrowing of interest rate differentials and the declaration by the
Group of Seven, which had been followed up by sizable interventions. A
further weakening of the dollar appeared more probable than renewed
firmness if various factors came into play, for example if there was no
improvement in the US trade balance and budget, if interest differentials
narrowed further and if the political situation in Europe stabilised.

As far as the EMS was concerned, the experts had focused on two
events, viz. the interest rate rise in Germany and the rumours of a
realignment. German market rates had risen gradually by 1% at the
short-term end and 0.5% for the long term; official rates had been raised
by 1% on 6th October. The majority of the other EEC countries had
immediately followed this increase. Spain and Italy, with already high
rates and firm currencies, had not raised their official rates and had
allowed their currencies to weaken.

Rumours of a realignment had begun to be heard in the first half
of October and had become very strong around the 15th of the month3 based
on statements made in Germany, the rumours had been felt in most ERM
countries, and especially in Denmark, Italy, France, Spain and Ireland.

These countries had had to undertake at times massive interventions, such
~3-

as Denmark's record sale in a single day of DM 3 billion on Friday,
13th October.

The experts' views had differed as to the conclusions that could
be drawn from the last two months' experience in the EMS. An optimistic
view had been that the exchange rate mechanism had handled the problems
without too much difficulty, despite the advanced stage reached in the
liberalisation of capital movements and the long interval of almost three
years since the last realignment. Another view had held that recent
experience had shown that the situation in the EMS might be precarious}
even relatively vague rumours could trigger very large interventions. This
highlighted the need to ensure that exchange rates were convincing at all
times. In this connection the Bundesbank expert had mentioned that the
Deutsche Mark had depreciated by 5% in real terms in the period since the
last realignment, in the course of which Germany had had a very large and

increasing current-account surplus.

B. Statement by Mr. Papademos

The Alternates had first had an exchange of views on the recent
weakening of the US dollar. It had been noted that the market sentiment
towards the dollar appeared to have turned neutral or even bearish, which
was a welcome development. There had been general agreement that the
further narrowing of interest rate differentials had contributed to the
recent decline of the dollar, but there was less agreement on whether it
had been the main contributing factor. Some Alternates had emphasised the
important role that concerted interventions and public statements had
played in triggering the dollar's fall, following the G-7 meeting. It had
been pointed out that the importance of reduced interest rate differentials
should not be over-emphasised, as there had been periods in which lower
interest rate differentials had been associated with a strengthening of the
dollar.

The Alternates had also discussed the appropriate policies for
dealing with the large and growing intra-Community current-account
imbalances. The German Alternate had stressed that the imbalances reflected
fundamental disequilibria and should be remedied through a realignment of
exchange rate parities. Without a change in parities, Germany would be
importing inflation and its role as stability anchor in the EMS could be

jeopardised. Most Alternates had considered that current-account imbalances
-4-

could be addressed more effectively by employing domestic policy measures
and by closer policy co-ordination. The importance of improving the policy
mix in some countries had also been stressed. Exchange rate ad'justments
should not be ruled out, but they should play a secondary role. Demand
management produced its impact with a time-lag, but its effects in
lessening disequilibria were more permanent.

In connection with this discussion, reference had been made to
the effects on the markets of public statements concerning the desirability
of a realignment. The markets' interpretation of these statements as
relating to particular currencies had been unfortunate; nevertheless, it
had been a free expression of public opinion. A number of Alternates had
pointed out that the utmost restraint should be exercised in discussing the
issue of a possible realignment.

The Alternates had, finally, discussed interest rate policies in
some Community countries and the use of intervention currencies.

The recent weakening of the Belgian franc, despite the positive
economic developments in Belgium, had appeared to be due to the narrowing
of the differential between Belgian and German interest rates.

The British Alternate had reiterated the UK policy-makers’
commitment to continue the fight against inflation by pursuing a policy of
high interest rates and maintaining a strong currency. However, the recent
depreciation of sterling would contribute to the adjustment process, while
the slowing-down of the domestic economy would free resources for an
expansion of net exports.

With respect to the use of intervention currencies, the German
Alternate had underlined that, according to the Basle-Nyborg Agreement,
intra-marginal interventions could be carried out only with the consent of
the central bank issuing the intervention currency. However, he had pointed
out that it would be unfortunate to reopen the debate on the use of |
currencies in intra-marginal interventions. The Bundesbank had accepted the
Basle-Nyborg Agreement on the condition that other countries respected the
requirement of prior notification of the issuing central bank of
intra-marginal interventions in its currency. If there were some technical
difficulties in meeting this requirement during fixing sessions, they
should be tackled, and to this end the German Alternate had suggested

examination of this issue by the Dalgaard Group.
The Spanish Alternate had endorsed this proposal and had said
that in certain cases during the fixing session compliance with the
notification requirement would imply a compromise of exchange ‘rate
objectives which was not acceptable. He had suggested that the present
rules and procedures had become outdated and would have to be re-examined.
Interventions could in practice be carried out in a disguised manner, but
the Banco de Espana did not intend to resort to such practices.

It had also been stressed by the French Alternate that conditions
in the foreign exchange markets changed rapidly and intervention decisions
had to be taken quickly, and this might make it difficult to communicate
interventions prior to their implementation. A possible solution to the
problem might be the establishment of minimum amounts of balances for
interventions in different currencies for which notification would not be

required.

Replying to a remark by Mr. Rubio, the Chairman indicated that |
the Group of Experts under the chairmanship of Mr. Dalgaard would indeed be
examining the problems that had been mentioned with regard to interventions

and would be reporting to the Governors.

III. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EEC Ministers of Finance
on developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen
countries participating in the concertation procedure during
September, October and the first few days of November 1989

The Chairman noted the Committee's adoption of the “concertation
report", which would be sent to the EEC Ministers of Finance in the usual

way.

IV. Examination of the Report from the Committee of Alternates on the
Organisation of the Committee of Governors in view of Stage One
of Economic and Monetary Union

The Chairman said that in view of the limited time available to
the Governors and the fact that the issues dealt with in the Alternates'
Report required in-depth study, he proposed to postpone discussion of this

item until December. He reported briefly on the discussion which had taken
- 6 -

place on Monday, 13th November at the ECOFIN Council meeting on Economic
and Monetary Union, confining himself to the part which he had attended,
viz. Stage One. Mr. Delors might then present some comments regarding the
Ministers’ discussion of Stages II and III, which had taken place later.

As far as Stage One of Economic and Monetary Union was concerned,
the ECOFIN Council had indicated its agreement in principle to the texts of
the two proposals concerning the 1964 and 1974 Decisions, it having been
understood that formal adoption should take place at the next meeting on
18th December 1989 once the necessary opinions from the European Parliament
and the Economic and Social Committee had been delivered.

The texts agreed by the Ministers reflected the versions
including the amendments suggested by the Monetary Committee with a few
exceptions; those mentioned below were of direct interest to the Governors
and concerned in particular the 1964 Decision.

Firstly, in the second recital of the 1964 Decision, the
Commission had added the word "social" (which had not appeared in the
Governors’ draft) to the idea of economic cohesion between the Member
States. The Monetary Committee had suggested deleting the word but, at the
request of the Commission, the Council had agreed to reinstate it.

Secondly, in Article 2(a) of the 1964 Decision, the Council had
adopted the Governors’ wording, viz. "the Chairman of the Committee [and
not the members] shall be invited to participate in the meetings of the
Council of Ministers, whenever it deals with issues involving the tasks of
the Committee of Governors". The Council had adopted the same position
regarding the representation of the Committee of Governors in the Council's
multilateral surveillance (Article 7 of the 1974 Decision), with the
following entry to be made in the minutes of its meeting: "The Council
agreed that at each of its informal meetings, where the Governors of the
central banks of the Member States participate, an exchange of views will
take place on the economic and monetary policy in the Community”.

Thirdly, in Article 3, paragraph 1, of the 1964 Decision, the
words "and including" would be replaced by "as well as" issues within the
competences of the central banks affecting the stability of financial
institutions and markets.

Fourthly, the Monetary Committee had suggested removing the
European Council from the list of Community bodies to which the Committee

of Governors would send its annual report. The Council had reinstated the
reference in conformity with the Governors’ draft and the Commission's
proposal. However, it would be stated in the minutes of the Council session
that this was purely a transmission, not a submission for discussion or
approval.

The Chairman concluded his report with two remarks. Firstly, he
thanked the Commission, and in particular President Delors, for the support
they had given to the consensus reached by the Governors and reflected in
their draft of the 1964 Decision. Secondly, he suggested that, after having
listened to the remarks of President Delors on the Ministers’ discussion of
Stages II and III of Economic and Monetary Union, the Governors might have
an exchange of views on the procedure which could be followed by the
Committee to participate in the preparatory work for the inter-governmental
conference, in line with the conclusions of the Presidency of the European
Council in Madrid.

Mr. Delors confirmed that on Monday the Finance Ministers had
given their agreement in principle to the texts of the 1964 and 1974
Decisions; the adoption of the Decisions, which had been unable to take
place solely on procedural grounds, i.e. the availability of the necessary
Opinions, would take place in December.

As far as the Council's discussion of the subsequent stages of
Economic and Monetary Union was concerned, the Ministers had heard two
introductory reports. The first had been presented by Mrs. E. Guigou on
behalf of the group of personal representatives of the Finance Ministers
and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs which had been established by the
French Presidency. This document had doubtless been submitted to the
Governors and did not require comment. It sufficed to say that Mrs. Guigou
had pointed out that the group's mandate had been solely to raise the
questions posed by the implementation of the subsequent stages of Economic
and Monetary Union, and that she had mentioned the reservations of the
United Kingdom which were explicitly included in the report; for the rest,
her report had been unanimously adopted by the group. Thereafter, the
Chairman of the Monetary Committee, Mr. Sarcinelli, had made a long speech

in a personal capacity, which could be summarised as follows:

- Economic and Monetary Union would require new institutional

arrangements}

- 8 -

- the European system of central banks should be independent, but
there would have to be discussion of the responsibilities it
might assume, in the final stage, in terms of external’ relations;

- unless Stage One succeeded, it would be impossible to go on to
Stage IT;

~ a transfer of additional resources at the Community level would
have to be envisaged in the context of economic union}

- there was the question of "democratic accountability", i.e. the
accountability of authorities to elected representatives and
governments;

- the budgetary questions were complex; the report on Economic and
Monetary Union had proposed binding rules on budget balances and
financing, a proposal which had given rise to lively discussions
within the Monetary Committee as well;

- finally, the Committee had not yet had time to deal with the

Structural problems.

The Chairman of the Economic Policy Committee, Mr. Molitor, had
reminded the Ministers of the recent distribution of an opinion drafted by
the Committee on budgetary policy co-ordination.

The Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Major, had presented the
document drawn up by the UK authorities; he had confirmed that in the
course of Stage One the pound sterling would join the exchange rate
mechanism when the time was ripe; he had pointed out that while he was in
agreement with the objectives for the subsequent stages of Economic and
Monetary Union, he was not in agreement with the means chosen for achieving
them, and had expressed strong reservations about the need for
institutional changes in particular. This position was not that of the UK
Government alone, but was shared by all the political parties, a<s had
emerged from a recent House of Commons debate. Mr. Major had expressed the
fear that the system proposed in the report, in which the Governors had
been involved, would take the EEC countries not in the direction of the
lowest inflation rate, but in the direction of an average (this point had
subsequently been the object of considerable controversy among the
Ministers); he had concluded by pointing out that full and proper
preparations for the inter-governmental conference were not complete and

that it would, therefore, be premature to set the date for the conference.
-9 -

Without going into detail regarding the various contributions of
the participants in the debate, it could be said that eight out of twelve
countries had stated explicitly that the UK proposal did not constitute an
alternative to the Report of the Committee for the Study of Economic and
Monetary Union. Three countries, Denmark, Germany and Luxembourg, had made
no explicit statement. Nine countries, viz. the Twelve less Denmark,
Luxembourg and the United Kingdom, had said that the Committee's report
should remain the focal point of discussions, some speaking of a "basis for
discussion", others of "a point of reference". The German Minister,

Mr. Waigel, had dwelt upon the conditions for the success of Stage One and
had summarised them in four points: a market economy open both internally
and externally, monetary stability, budgetary discipline and application of
the principle of subsidiarity; he had also, for the first time, mentioned
the word "federalism".

As far as the question of setting the date for the
inter-governmental conference was concerned, eight countries had thought
that the preparation for it was full and proper; two countries, Germany and
Denmark, had made no comment$; two countries, Luxembourg and the United
Kingdom, had thought that the preparation was not full and proper.

The Commission had said that next April it would submit a
document to the Irish Presidency expressing its point of view on the
advantages and constraints of Economic and Monetary Union and would
endeavour to respond to the questions raised. This document would be
submitted for discussion by the Committee of Governors and by the Monetary
Committee as well as by the Foreign Affairs and Finance Councils. Moreover,
the Commission would study the UK document with an open mind and without
political preconceptions.

Several countries, in particular Belgium, France, Italy, the
Netherlands and Portugal, had criticised the UK proposal on economic
grounds and had not seen it as the right way to achieve the chosen
objectives. A number of Ministers had, however, noted with satisfaction the
change in position of the United Kingdom as regarded Stage One and, in
particular, the positive assessment of the European Monetary System. Other
Ministers, leaving aside the purely economic aspect, had considered that
the discussion of Economic and Monetary Union actually revealed two

different visions of the political future of Europe.
-~ 10 -

Mr. Ciampi thanked President Delors for his most interesting
report and said that, without wishing to be formalistic, in future an
effort should be made to avoid texts being submitted by the Committee of
Governors and subsequently closely scrutinised by the Monetary Committee;
such a procedure was undesirable.

Mr. de Larosiére agreed with Mr. Ciampi's remark.

Mr. Doyle also agreed with Mr. Ciampi's remark and asked a
question concerning the text adopted by the Council for Article 2(a) of the
1964 Decision. Under the terms of Article 2(a), the Chairman of the
Committee of Governors would be invited to participate in the meetings of
the Council of Ministers and would thus represent the Governors, which was
quite in order. But would the Governors themselves, who were already
entitled to participate in the meetings, lose that entitlement under the
new Decision?

Mr. Delors pointed out that the only problem which had been
discussed in the presence of the Governors at the informal meeting of the
ECOFIN Council in Antibes had been the following: could the Governors be
compelled to participate in formal meetings of the ECOFIN Council when
there was a so-called multilateral surveillance exercise? Since several
Governors had expressed reservations on the matter, the Council had not
insisted. Thus the situation could be summed up as follows: the Chairman of
the Committee of Governors would be invited to all the meetings of the
Council of Economic and Finance Ministers; secondly, the Governors would
participate in the Ministers' two informal meetings each year} and,
thirdly, there was nothing to prevent a Governor, with the consent of his
Minister, from accompanying the latter to all the meetings of the ECOFIN
Council if he so desired. The point of view which had been expressed by the
Committee of Governors had thus in the end been adopted by the Ministers.

Mr. Pohl understood that the Chairman of the Committee of
Governors was to be invited to participate in the meetings of the Council
if there were items on the agenda which touched on the tasks of the
Committee, but that he would not participate routinely in all the meetings.
He wished to know whether this interpretation was correct.

Mr. Delors confirmed that the Chairman of the Committee of
Governors was to be invited each time the Council was to deal with
questions involving the work of the Committee but that, naturally, he would

be at liberty not to participate in the meetings.

- ll -

Mr. Pohl understood that each Finance Minister could be
accompanied by the Governor of the central bank, but he recalled that in
Antibes he had spoken out against this. On legal grounds and as a matter of
principle, the monetary policy of the Bundesbank could not be subjected to
the Council of Ministers' surveillance procedure. The monetary policies of
the Community central banks had to be discussed and co-ordinated within
their Committee between the Governors, who would then, independently, make
a report to the Ministers.

Mr. Pohl appreciated that the constitutional framework varied
from country to country, but said that the situation in Germany explained
his opposition, voiced in Antibes, to the Governors' being obliged to
participate in the multilateral surveillance procedure.

Mr. Duisenberg referred to the hope voiced by Mr. Ciampi that, in
future, the Committee of Governors would abstain from drafting texts which

were subsequently closely scrutinised by the Monetary Committee. Such an

attitude called for a number of comments. The Governors had already pointed

out in the Report of the "Delors Committee" that their Committee's tasks
would have to be revised; they had drawn up a first draft, but it seemed
more or less unavoidable that their views would have to be co-ordinated
with those of the Finance Ministers. The Finance Ministers themselves, like
the Commission, were thus free to ask the opinion of the Monetary Committee
as well concerning a document drawn up by the Committee of Governors,
without this implying that the latter was subordinate to the Monetary
Committee.

Mr. de Larosiere recalled that the Governors had been invited to
submit their views on the functions of the Committee of Governors and that
they had done so in writing. The formal decision obviously resided with the
Council, and it was normal that the Ministers might have a somewhat
different opinion from that of the Governors. On the other hand, it was not
normal that the proposal for a text submitted unanimously by the Governors
and relating to the tasks of their Committee should be revised in detail
and redrafted by a body on which the Governors were represented by their
colleagues. It would have been preferable if the Governors’ text had passed
directly to the Council and if each Treasury Secretary had submitted his
comments, if any, to his Minister, who might, or might not, have taken them

into account. It was important to avoid a situation where a body in which
-~12-

central bank officials sat alongside their Finance Ministry colleagues
usurped the work of the Committee of Governors and rewrote its texts.

Mr. Delors pointed out that the Commission had adhered strictly
to the Governors' text and had defended it up to the moment when the
Ministers had reached agreement in principle on the text. The Commission
had understood quite clearly that the draft prepared by the Governors had
reflected an agreement between them and that any change would constitute a
negation of the efforts made to adopt a unanimous position. The President
of the Commission had drawn the Council's attention to this point.

Mr. Pohl said that he was in agreement with the substance of a
change which the German State Secretary for Finance had proposed in respect
of Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the 1964 Decision. The Ministers were
entitled to modify the draft drawn up by the Governors, but it was
unacceptable for the Monetary Committee to become a kind of supervisory or
higher authority above the Committee of Governors. This had already been
Said in the past and might be reiterated in an informal manner by the
Chairman of the Committee of Governors.

Mr. Duisenberg and Mr. Ciampi concurred with the gist of the
remarks made by Mr. de Larosiére and Mr. Pohl on these problems of
procedure.

The Chairman invited Mr. Papademos to report on the Alternates‘
discussion of the monetary policy monitoring system proposed by

Mr. Hoffmeyer.

Statement by Mr. Papademos on the establishment of a mutually agreed
system of monetary policy monitoring

As had been stated in the letter dated 7th November 1989 with
which the Chairman of the Committee of Alternates had sent the Governors
the Report of the Alternates on the organisation of the Committee of
Governors, the Alternates had had an exchange of views on the issue raised
by Governor Hoffmeyer's letter dated 28th July 1989. The discussion had
been based on a note prepared by Mr. Mikkelsen, dated 7th November 1989,
which had been distributed to the Governors on the day of the meeting. The
main points of this first exchange of views on this issue could be

summarised as follows.

l. All the Alternates had been in favour of a more systematic

analysis of monetary policies in a forward-looking direction in order to
- 13-

strengthen the co-ordination of member countries’ monetary policies. This
would comply with the new tasks of the Committee of Governors provided for

‘

in Stage One of Economic and Monetary Union.

2. The Alternates had agreed that any kind of more systematic and
Community-minded monetary policy monitoring system should be based on a
common understanding about the final objectives to be pursued. The primary
objective should be price stability, as had been stated in the proposed
amendment of the 1964 Decision. As this objective could not be instantly
achieved in some countries, it would be necessary to take into account

differences in the speed and method with which to attain this goal.

3. As far as methodology was concerned, most Alternates had
expressed their preference for a flexible system of monitoring. Among the
reasons given had been the following considerations:

- in Stage One policy decisions would remain within the competence
of the national authorities;

- the lack of practical experience of such a system was an argument
for implementing it on the basis of a "learning-by-doing"
approach, as envisaged in the proposed Council Decision on the
convergence of macro-economic policies during Stage One}

~- there was a diversity of financial structures and economic
environments within the Community}

- there was instability, at least in some countries, in the
relationship between monetary aggregates and final economic
objectives;

- there might exist potential conflicts with exchange rate

commitments.

These arguments had tended to favour a system of common
monitoring rather than a system of common monetary targets. However, one
Alternate had remarked that there was a trade-off between the flexibility

and the credibility of the system.

4. A central issue for the successful implementation of a system of
common monitoring was the choice of the intermediate variable to be
monitored. Interest rates were not considered appropriate intermediate
objectives, and the Alternates had wondered whether monetary aggregates or
domestic credit would serve as the most reliable indicator of policy. It

had been stressed that the choice between indicators should be based on a
- 14 -

number of criteria: their effectiveness in helping to achieve the domestic
final policy objectives, their usefulness in providing information
concerning developments in the balance of payments and their
controllability by the national monetary authorities. Also, consideration
should be given to the possible effects of deregulation and liberalisation
of capital movements on the reliability of monetary aggregates as
indicators.

The Alternates had thought that work should start with a review
of the intermediate monetary objectives in the various Community countries
and an examination of the reasons behind the existing diversity of
intermediate objectives. It would also be useful to analyse the

informational content and the effectiveness of the intermediate targets

currently adopted.

D. The Alternates had agreed that the questions raised needed
careful examination. They recommended that the group of experts under the
chairmanship of Mr. Raymond be asked to examine the note prepared by

Mr. Mikkelsen and to report to the Governors in due course.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton said he accepted that the ''Raymond Group"
might undertake a study of these questions, but he recalled that similar
studies had been carried out in the 1970s by another group, without any
real conclusions having been reached. It should thus be borne in mind that
the subject was not an easy one. Moreover, given that the Committee of
Governors would have its own research unit as from July 1990, the "Raymond
Group" could conceivably carry out a preliminary study and report at the
end of spring or early summer 1990 in order to avoid having the group of

experts and the research unit working simultaneously on the same subject.

V. Examination of Report No. 36 prepared by the group of experts
chaired by Mr. Raymond on current monetary policies in EEC member

countries

A. Statement by Mr. Raymond

Report No. 36 was the second detailed semi-annual report
presented to the Governors by the group of experts in 1989. Chapters I and
II analysed in turn real and monetary data, while Chapter III discussed the

possible remedies for the existing difficulties.

- 15 -

- Growth was still vigorous. A slowdown in 1989 had been foreseen a
year earlier; it had not taken place. It was now forecast to occur in the
course of 1990. On average, it was likely to remain moderate. The
overheating in the countries outside the zone of narrow fluctuation bands
was only just beginning to show signs of flagging. In the meantime, it had
helped boost activity and increase the German trade surplus. Only Denmark
was in an atypical conjunctural situation.

The average rate of inflation in the Community was more than one
percentage point higher than in 1988. It had peaked in July. The decline
was likely to be be modest in 1990. There was widespread concern about wage
pressures, with wage claims taking recent inflation into account in a
climate of strains on production capacity.

Divergences between inflation rates within the Community remained
substantial. Among countries linked by the exchange rate mechanism, rates

ranged from 1 to 6%. There had been no reduction in the divergences in

1989, and little or no progress was discernible in the forecasts for 1990.

This situation was not in line with the spirit of Stage One, which was to
begin in July 1990 with a view to establishing a zone of monetary
stability.

The trend was still less favourable in balance-of-payments terms,
since the divergences had widened. The current-account surpluses of Germany
and Ireland had increased to 4 and 2.4% of GDP respectively. Symmetrically,
several deficit countries had seen their position deteriorate. Spain's
deficit was expected to reach 3.1% of GDP in 1989 and 3.8% in 1990, and
that of Greece forecast to rise to 3%. The deficit in the United Kingdom

was likely to decline slightly.

- Monetary expansion had generally been stronger than expected,
although a deceleration was discernible. The most active source of money
creation was usually bank lending to the private sector. The financing of
the public sector had gained weight in Greece.

In the last six months, monetary policies had been tightened,
firstly, during the summer by means of a rise in interest rates in the
countries participating in the exchange rate mechanism, with the exception
of Italy owing to the firmness of the lira. In Spain this measure had been
supplemented by an increase in compulsory reserves and by the publication
of guidelines for bank lending growth. Outside the exchange rate mechanism,

the Bank of England had raised its rates in May, Greece had done likewise
- 16 -

in September, and Portugal had applied restrictive measures in April and in
July.

A second round of interest rate rises had occurred in early
October. The countries which had abstained were Spain and Italy, which had
just begun to benefit from an improved policy mix and wanted to halt their
currencies’ tendency to appreciate, and also Portugal and Greece. Greece
had just adopted new measures.

Monetary policies had not yet had the expected impact on
activity, which was running up against the limits of production capacity,
any more than on inflation and the external imbalances. The lag was being
prolonged by the profits situation in the corporate sector. Thus, as a
general rule, it would be premature for countries to lower their guard.

The relative calm which had reigned on the exchange markets,
welcome as it was at first sight, had not permitted interest rate
differentials to widen sufficiently to trigger an improvement in
current-account and price convergence. However, the "paradox of the
exchange markets” mentioned in Report No. 35 had diminished: the Spanish
peseta was less strong than it had been; the Italian lira had ceased to be
conspicuous by its firmness; finally, the weakening of the pound sterling
had led the monetary authorities to raise interest rates in the United
Kingdom.

Virtually all the experts had taken the view that if there were a
change in market sentiment, a realignment should be resisted. The effect of
a realignment on current~account positions would be uncertain. In the first
instance, the J-curve would aggravate the imbalances in value terms and the
very high level of capacity utilisation in the deficit countries would
prevent them from increasing their exports. To obtain favourable effects in
volume terms, forceful accompanying measures would have to be applied.

As far as inflation was concerned, a realignment would cause an
immediate widening of divergences. If the authorities of the member
countries were actually to provoke a realignment rather than just suffering
it, this would imply a relaxation of macro-economic control in the
high-inflation and deficit countries, which would be undesirable. These
countries preferred on the whole the “hard currency option”.

Finally, it might be feared that operators' confidence in

governments’ will to cohere might be shaken by a realignment.
- ]l7 -

Conversely, the delegation from the Bundesbank had stressed that
the development of real exchange rates, above all in 1989, ran counter to a
balance-of~payments adjustment and to the maintenance of price stability in
Germany. They had expressed the view that this development of real exchange
rates could not be allowed to continue and that the longer correction was
postponed the larger it would have to be.

To improve convergence, since it was not possible to rely on
interest rates alone, better co-ordination of budgetary policies would be
required. Fortunately, in 1990 these were expected to be more restrictive
in Spain and Italy, and more expansionary in Germany. The developments in
prospect elsewhere would not contribute to reducing divergences and, in
some cases, might even exacerbate them.

The experts had been of the opinion that in spite of the
practical difficulties to be feared, the intermediate objectives announced

for 1990 would be consistent with the general aim of improving convergence.

B. Statement by Mr. Papademos

The Alternates had had a short discussion on the report prepared
by the group of experts under the chairmanship of Mr. Raymond. The
discussion, which had taken place in the morning just before the meeting,
could be summarised as follows.

The Alternates had agreed that the group's latest report was
again of excellent quality and that it conveyed an accurate picture of the
state of the EEC economies and their degree of convergence. They had also
noted with satisfaction that the report tackled policy questions in a more
direct and more forward-looking way than in the past.

The Alternates had broadly endorsed the analysis and conclusions
of the report, in particular the recommendations aimed at maintaining the
current restrictive stance of monetary policies throughout the Community,
given the persistence of the risk of inflation. However, monetary policy
had to be supported by appropriate fiscal policy measures. It was extremely
important to implement an appropriate policy mix in several EEC countries,
because this would make it possible to improve convergence in the external
sector and simultaneously to reduce inflation. The growth in the budget
deficits in some countries meant monetary policy had to be tightened more

than would otherwise have been necessary.

desirable

continued

- 18 -

The Alternates had also addressed the question of whether it was
to change intra~Community exchange rate relationships and had

the discussion which they had started in the framework of the

monitoring exercise. Most Alternates had agreed that at this juncture a

realignment would not be helpful and that it was unlikely to contribute to

the adjustment process. The arguments put forward in support of this

position were the following:

as experience in some countries had shown, devaluations had had
only a short-lived effect on foreign trade while tending to
jeopardise the effectiveness of anti-inflationary efforts;

a devaluation would intensify inflationary pressures in countries
that were pursuing anti-inflationary policies, thereby
contributing to a further divergence of inflation rates in the
Community};

the price responsiveness of exports and imports tended to be low;
consequently, a small realignment would only produce marginal
results while a large realignment could undermine stability;
realignments could not be a substitute for domestic policy
measures but had rather to complement them;

the weakness of the Deutsche Mark in real terms was not only an
ERM problem but also involved currencies outside the ERM and even
the EMS, thus necessitating a more general approach.

Other Alternates had expressed different views:

in view of the growing external surplus of Germany vis-a-vis most
other EMS countries, persistent undervaluation of the Deutsche
Mark would continue to generate structural problems in Germany
and in the Community. Delaying corrective action could exacerbate
the problems and might necessitate the adoption of more drastic
measures later}

those not favouring a realignment argued that the devaluation of
their currencies would import inflation into their countries.
However, the undervaluation of the Deutsche Mark was importing
inflation into Germany, which undermined the function of the
Deutsche Mark as an anchor of stability in the EMS;

if a realignment were eventually required, the credibility of the
EMS would be damaged more if the realignment were forced by the

markets rather than if it were decided by the authorities.
- 19 -

C. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. Rubio agreed that it was necessary to slow the growth of
demand in Spain and pointed out that the Government had already taken
action. The budget deficit was likely to fall from 2.7% of GDP in 1988 to
2% this year and to 1.5% in 1990. The new Government would be formed in a
few weeks and was expected to ensure continuity in matters of fiscal
policy. The development of the monetary aggregates had changed radically in
the course of the last three months. Thus the growth of lending was now
only 6% at an annual rate, compared with 22% in the first quarter of 1989.
The current~account deficit was still substantial, at around USS 6 billion
for the first nine months of 1989, but in this period direct investment had
represented twice that amount. The current-account deficit thus seemed
almost necessary, otherwise the peseta would be much too strong.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, referring to Mr. Papademos' comments, was of
the view that a realignment forced by the market would be very bad; it
would, for example, be extremely unfortunate if a realignment were to take
place around lst July 1990, the moment when the liberalisation of capital
movements would be completed in most of the member states of the Community.

Mr. Pohl understood the arguments of the countries which did not
want their currencies to depreciate against the Deutsche Mark. But it had
to be recognised that Germany's trade and current-account surpluses were
growing rapidly while the deficits in several countries were also rising or
remained high. This, moreover, was a purely European problem: Germany's
surplus with the United States had greatly decreased in the past two years,
whereas that with the EEC countries was continuing to widen, having risen
from DM 52 billion for the first eight months of 1988 to DM 65 billion for
the same period in 1989. Increasing domestic demand in Germany was one
response to the problem, and this had been done, for example, by means of a
very large housing construction programme. Such a solution was rather
unrealistic given the very high level of production capacity utilisation,
and it was dangerous in terms of inflation, which was a major concern of
the central bank. The other solution would be to reduce the deficits in the
high-inflation countries, i.e. principally in the wider-band countries or
those which did not participate in the exchange rate mechanism. The markets
had already penalised, in exchange rate terms, the build-up and the size of
the current-account deficit in the United Kingdom. Other countries, such as

Spain and Italy, were opposed to a realignment so as not to import
- 20 -

inflation but to import stability instead, which meant that it was Germany
which was importing inflation. Leaving aside the exchange rate as an
instrument of adjustment (which was not stipulated by the EMS), there was
only one response: a common policy of price stability. Within the core of
narrow-band currencies appreciable progress had been achieved, but the
divergences had widened in particular vis-a-vis the countries outside the
exchange rate mechanism.

The four increases in German official interest rates undertaken
this year had to be seen in this context and as a response to the refusal
by practically all the governments of the Community countries to
contemplate a realignment and a revaluation of the Deutsche Mark. It was
thus important, in this context, to look at other ways to act and to find
an instrument, as Mr. Hoffmeyer and Mr. Mikkelsen had suggested, which
would make it possible to define and conduct monetary policies which were
consistent with a system of fixed exchange rates. Fiscal policies had, of
course, a vital contribution to make, above all in certain countries, but
monetary policies were still far from being based on a common standard of
price stability, which was indispensable to ensure compatibility with a
system of fixed exchange rates.

Mr. Hoffmeyer pointed out that the discussion of these problems
was virtually endless since there were advantages and disadvantages on both
sides. It would, however, be interesting to examine in greater detail the
rise in prices in Germany and to break it down according to different
components, for example the share attributable to imported inflation and
the domestic share, the source of which was primarily agricultural.
Furthermore, according to Report No. 36, if German residents’ Deutsche Mark
deposits abroad were included, monetary growth would be 8% at an annual
rate. That was a fast pace, which raised the question why the Bundesbank
did not systematically include these data in its calculations.

Mr. Rubio accepted that, even though its share in total German
foreign trade was small, Spain was a contributor to the German surplus} in
his opinion the work of the Committee ought to be forward-looking, based on
the Governors’ responsibility in the area of a common policy of price
stability.

Mr. Pohl pointed out that the German economy was approaching a
situation of overheating generated, in particular, by the very buoyant

demand for German products, above all from the European countries with high
- 2] -

inflation and excessive domestic demand growth. Importing inflation via
import prices occurred essentially as a consequence of the weakness of the
Deutsche Mark vis-a-vis the dollar, which meant that the recent
developments between these two currencies had brought about an improvement
and that a continuation of this trend would be desirable. As far as the
growth of the money stock was concerned, it was true that it was
considerable if German residents’ deposits abroad were included. These
deposits were not taken into account in the official target; in the past,
movements in these deposits had corrected themselves and had given no cause
for concern, but the current increase constituted a further major argument
for maintaining a strict monetary policy.

Mr. de Larosiere observed that, as far as inflation was
concerned, convergence had improved in the group of countries belonging to
the narrow band, but at a higher rate, except in the Netherlands. On the
other hand, divergences had widened outside the narrow band of the
mechanism. Two conclusions could be drawn at a policy level. The countries
of the first group had to continue to improve their convergence and had to
ensure that their inflation level did not rise, which meant that they had
to make sure there was no deterioration in the monetary and fiscal policy
mix. In that regard, monetary growth of 8% in Germany, if German residents'
deposits abroad were included, was not very reassuring. The countries
outside the narrow band had to reduce their widening divergences and, to
that end, they had to correct and tighten their domestic policies. Report
No. 36 of the group of experts sounded a rather worrying alarm; it would be
desirable to bring this document to the attention of the Finance Ministers
and to explain to them that policies had to be improved, and without delay.

Mr. Leigh-Pemberton said he thought it was dangerous to focus the
debate too closely on exchange rates and on a sort of sharing-out of
inflation between the countries participating in the exchange rate
mechanism. In fact, the aim should be to ensure convergence on a minimum
inflation rate. One could understand the Bundesbank not wanting to see its
policies sapped by imported inflation, but a firm exchange rate policy was
a major component of the anti~inflationary policies of many countries, in
particular the United Kingdom. Thus there had to be greater differentiation
of monetary and interest rate policies within the EMS, so that they would

be more restrictive in countries with high inflation and large external
deficits. By so doing it should be possible to avoid the pressures for a
realignment. In fact, given sufficiently firm and appropriate policies in
the deficit countries, capital flowed towards the countries which had need
of it and did not cause disturbances.

As far as trade relations between the United Kingdom and Germany
were concerned, there was indeed a serious imbalance due principally to
imports of capital goods. The appreciable decline in the rate of investment
in the United Kingdom should improve the bilateral balance.

The Chairman offered a few comments on the subject of Greece.
Owing to the persistent uncertainty on the fiscal front, the Bank of Greece
had had to take certain monetary policy measures aimed, in particular, at
curbing lending to the private sector. The commercial banks and savings
banks had been asked to restrict the growth in their lending to the private
sector to 5% between the third and fourth quarters. Any bank exceeding this
percentage would be penalised by being required to place an amount
equivalent to 25% of the excess as a non-interest-bearing deposit with the
central bank for a period of six months. In addition, new bonds with an ecu
clause would be issued. These measures were expected to soak up liquidity
and improve somewhat the effectiveness of the central bank's policy.
Interest rates would probably have to be raised further, despite the fact
that real lending rates were already very high. It was vital, however, that
the budget deficit - which was wholly unacceptable - be reduced as a matter
of urgency, otherwise monetary policy would not be able to right the
situation.

In reply to the comments voiced by a number of Governors,

Mr. Raymond said that the group of experts could undertake a preliminary
study of the questions raised concerning monetary policy instruments, the
interpretation of statistics and aggregates, and monetary policy

co-ordination.

VI. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee

The Chairman informed the Committee that Mr. Delors wished to
make a brief statement concerning Poland and Hungary and their relations

with the Community.
Statement by Mr. Delors on aid to Poland and Hungary

At the last Group of Seven summit meeting, held in Paris in July,
the European Economic Community was entrusted with co-ordinating aid to
Poland and Hungary. This co-ordination did not cover the action being taken
by the International Monetary Fund, but the Community was in close contact
with that organisation, in order to try and achieve consistency. Since the
mutual recognition between Comecon and the Community, the latter had signed
two trade and co-operation agreements, with Poland and Hungary
respectively, and was preparing an agreement covering trade, and possibly
co-operation, with the German Democratic Republic.

The obstacles to co-operation were numerous: the difficulties of
obtaining timely information, the discrepancy between the statements made
by governments and their implementation. Lastly, of the twenty-four
countries which had agreed to take part in this effort (the twelve EEC
countries plus twelve other OECD members), Japan had so far shown very
little commitment.

The ECOFIN Council on 13th November had asked the President of
the Commission to report on this matter, and the Monetary Committee had
been convened as a matter of urgency on 15th November to take stock of the
situation. The current results of the co-ordination could be summarised as
follows:

- the Federal Republic of Germany had made large commitments to
both Poland and Hungary, which should alleviate the financial
Situation in those countries in the short term;

- substantial food aid, of the order of ecu 260 million, had
already been granted to Poland back in August, half of this aid
coming from the Community;

- the trade agreements already signed had been improved by granting
the two countries a generalised system of preferences designed to
alter the pattern of exports, which were excessively concentrated
on the Soviet Union;

- the European Investment Bank had pledged ecu 800 to 1,000
million, to be shared between the two countries.

The situation of these countries was currently very difficult:
Poland was on the verge of bankruptcy; in Hungary, the political situation
was extremely delicate, and in the last two months the economic situation

had worsened appreciably.
- 24 -

In Poland, the difficulties were threefold: the population was
starting to get impatient, despite the political changes that had taken
place; progress in privatising businesses and above all dismantling
monopolies in the agricultural sector was very slow; and inflation had
recently soared from between 100 and 200% to more than 700% following the
liberalisation of agricultural prices. A number of problems arose. The
first, which was the subject of a very open political debate in Poland, was
whether a package of extremely tough measures could be taken soon. The
second related to an agreement with the IMF; here, it seemed doubtful
whether a letter of intent would be signed by the end of the year. The
third concerned the risk of a food shortage, in response to which further
emergency aid of some ecu 200 million could be provided in the near future.

The financial and monetary aspects of the situation in Poland
were also critical. Despite the advanced stage reached in the negotiations,
the IMF was reluctant to pledge US$ 570 million instead of the US$ 700
million planned a few weeks ago. Monetary reform of the kind undertaken in
Germany in 1948 appeared to be necessary, for the flight out of the zloty
had assumed enormous proportions: in a matter of months, the zloty had lost
54% of its value, the dollar being worth Zl. 3,100 on the official market
in mid-November and between Zl. 5,000 and 7,000 on the black market.
Monetary reform should therefore be a priority and could be supported by
the creation of a stability fund, as proposed by President Bush. The United
States had promised a contribution of US$ 200 million and the Federal
Republic of Germany DM 500 million. The external balance was also a serious
problem: the current-account deficit was likely to increase from US$ 2
billion in 1988 to US$ 3 billion this year. The USSR had decided to freeze
its 6 billion rouble loan until 1995, and this raised the question of what
the Paris Club could do in conjunction with the IMF effort. Finally, the
Polish Prime Minister had written to the President of the Commission to
propose the establishment of a Euro-Polish bank. The latter could serve as
a foundation for aiding the modernisation, or even the re-establishment, of
a banking system in Poland. It could also provide guidance for investors,
in order to try and revitalise the fabric of the Polish economy. Such a
bank should not be a new public institution but should be established with
the assistance of Western banks.

In Hungary, the main difficulty was of a political nature. There

were currently 106 parties, and the main ones had failed to agree on the
- 25 -

economic measures to be taken during an election campaign which was likely
to be protracted. Inflation was increasing and now running at 17 to 182,
and the external balance was deteriorating, the current -account deficit
rising from 2 to 4% of GDP. Chief among the current problems was the
political agenda. A referendum was to take place on 26th November, the main
issue being whether the election of the president of the republic should be
held before or after the parliamentary election. If the Hungarians chose to
elect the president first, the successful candidate would have more power,
but this would also have the effect of postponing the parliamentary
elections and hence of delaying the bold decisions that needed to be taken.
Furthermore, an agreement with the IMF, which the Fund considered
essential, would probably not be accepted by the political parties because
of their failure to agree among themselves and would be put off until after
the elections, i.e. until March or June 1990.

If there were no agreement with the IMF, Hungary would be faced |
with a liquidity problem in the months ahead, since its official reserves
equalled only three months’ imports. The IMF and Hungary differed, however,
as to the content of the agreement, for example on devaluation of the
Hungarian forint (the IMF wanted 50%, instead of the 10% agreed to by
Hungary) and the cutting of subsidies. The Hungarians were currently
seeking one of two things: the first was a US$ 1 billion bridging loan, of
which the Belgian Minister of Finance had spoken as representative of the
"constituency" in which Hungary was situated. Since such a loan was linked
to an agreement with the IMF, if the agreement was not concluded Hungary
would instead request cash aid to see it through the first quarter of 1990,
which was the most difficult one for seasonal reasons (energy purchases and
low revenue from tourism). Such exceptional cash aid was criticised by the
financiers, who felt that it would create a precedent for granting
assistance prior to the conclusion of an agreement with the IMF. Thus there

was a dilemma.

The Chairman thanked Mr. Delors for his very interesting

statement, which had described two very difficult economic situations.

%
%

*&

The Chairman informed the Committee that Mr. Pégo Marques was

taking part in a meeting of the Committee for the last time; the Governors
had greatly benefited from Mr. Pégo Marques' experience and his
contribution, and they expressed their gratitude for his collaboration and
offered him their best wishes for the future. |

Mr. Pégo Marques thanked the Chairman and made the observation
that everyone, no matter what their role, had a part to play in the
construction of Europe. However, those in the market-place did not always
have all the information at their disposal and had to act on the basis of
their interpretation of the facts. Mr. Pégo Marques offered the Governors
and the Alternates his professional and personal good wishes for success at
a time of great challenges presented by monetary union and relations

between eastern and western Europe.

VII. Date and place of the next meeting

The Committee's next meeting would be held in Basle on Tuesday, |

12th December 1989 at 2.00 p.m.

Annex

Committee of Governors of the 14th November 1989
Central Banks of the Member States
of the European Economic Community

Confidential

BRIEF REPORT ON
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER 1989

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of
the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation procedure?
and briefly describes their interventions during September and October and

the first few days of November 1989.

I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main features of the foreign exchange markets in September
and October 1989 were:

- a limited further appreciation of the dollar to period highs
until mid-September, followed by a strong depreciation in the
remainder of the period;

- a round of increases of official rates in most European countries
in early October;

- the emergence of temporary tensions in the exchange rate mechanism
of the EMS in connection with rumours of a realignment;

- a pronounced decline of the Japanese yen and sterling against

most other currencies.

The US dollar moved lower during the September-October period as

market participants responded to official statements and actions indicating

1 The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.

~?2-

concern at the dollar's rise. After reaching period highs of DM 2.0035 and
Yen 148.95 by mid-September, the dollar began to ease as market participants
grew cautious ahead of the 23rd September G-7 meeting. The dollar then
declined more forcefully after the release of the G-7 communiqué and
subsequent visible intervention operations. As the period progressed,
narrowing interest rate differentials favouring dollar assets and concern
about financial market volatility following a decline in equity prices in
the United States on 13th October also served to lessen the market's positive
sentiment toward the dollar. By the end of October, the dollar was trading
narrowly about 6.5% lower against the Deutsche Mark and 1.5% lower against
the Japanese Yen from its early September levels.

In the EMS the Spanish peseta and the Italian lira declined
strongly. The Danish krone reached the lower limit vis-a-vis the Spanish
peseta in September and vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark in October. Tension
emerged in mid-October because of rumours of an EMS realignment giving rise
to substantial central bank interventions, some of which at the margins.
The tension abated towards the end of the period. Official interest rates
were increased in most EMS countries, effective 6th October; interest rate
differentials remained unchanged except for the Italian lira and the
Spanish peseta whose differentials vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark narrowed.

The Deutsche Mark firmed appreciably. Its effective rate vis-a-vis
the currencies of eighteen major industrial countries rose by 2.9%. Vis-a-vis
the currencies of the countries participating in the EMS exchange rate
mechanism, its appreciation amounted to 1.0%. The 1 percentage point increase
in key German interest rates effective 6th October led to a corresponding
rise in money market rates (day-to-day to six-month money). This resulted
in a narrowing of interest rate differentials vis-a-vis some currencies,
for example the US dollar, but no change vis-a-vis the majority of the EMS
currencies as most EMS central banks followed the Bundesbank's move.

During the first half of September the French franc remained firm
while it was later affected by substantial purchases of foreign currencies
by French companies for investment abroad. After a slight improvement at
the end of the month, the French franc was somewhat influenced by tensions
within the EMS. The increase in official rates effective 6th October and
the subsequent high level of domestic rates close to the upper limit (10.25%)

favoured the stabilisation of the French franc for the rest of the month.

- 3 -

The modest increase in the retail price index (0.2% in September, 3.42% on
an annual basis) had a positive influence on the market.

Due to the firming of the Deutsche Mark, the Belgian franc lost
some ground in the EMS. This movement took place despite substantial inter-
ventions by the Banque Nationale de Belgique. Several increases in the
official rates of the Treasury certificates, aimed at maintaining an
appropriate interest rate differential vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark, also
had limited effect. Effective 6th October the discount rate was increased
by 1 percentage point to 10.25% while the rate on advances was raised to
10.752 increasing by 1.25 percentage points.

The Dutch guilder lost a little ground vis-a-vis the Deutsche
Mark as the latter currency moved towards the top of the narrow EMS band in
September. Since then, however, there have been no significant changes in
exchange rates between the two currencies. Effective 6th October, the
Nederlandsche Bank raised its discount and lombard rate by 1 percentage
point to 7% and 7.75% respectively. |

The Danish krone continued to be the weakest currency in the
narrow band. In early September the Danish krone touched its lower
intervention point vis-a-vis the Spanish peseta; this led to modest inter-
ventions. In connection with the increase in German interest rates Danmarks
Nationalbank raised its lending rates by 1 percentage point to 10.50% and
11%. On Friday, 13th October the krone came under heavy pressure due to
rumours of an EMS realignment. The krone reached the compulsory intervention
rate vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark and substantial intervention sales of Mark
were made. During the remaining part of the month there was no need for
further interventions and the krone strengthened gradually in response to a
sharp rise in market interest rates. On 3lst October Danmarks Nationalbank
increased its lending rates to a unified rate of 12% with effect from
lst November.

The Irish pound remained steady in the upper half of the EMS band
during September. Capital inflows continued for most of the month and were
offset by purchases of foreign currency by the Central Bank. Capital outflows
re-emerged towards the end of September and intensified in October. The
Central Bank responded with substantial sales of foreign currency, by raising
its Short-Term Facility lending rate by 1 percentage point to 11%, effective
6th October, and by permitting the Irish pound to decline to the middle of
the narrow EMS band.
- 4 =

During the first half of September, the Italian lira continued to
appreciate in the EMS, reaching the upper limit of the narrow band. This
trend was partly contained by substantial interventions by the Banca d'Italia.
Since the beginning of October, changing expectations on the dollar and
monetary policy changes in some European countries resulted in a reversal
of this movement as the Banca d'Italia did not raise official rates. The
lira also depreciated somewhat because of rumours of an EMS realignment but
central bank interventions kept the movement within the narrow band. At the
end of the period the lira stabilised without further interventions as
market sentiment improved.
| In the first part of September the Spanish peseta firmed further,
driven by an increase in the positive interest rate differential, and reached
the upper limit vis-a-vis the Danish krone. Later on, sentiment towards the
peseta changed substantially, due to the round of interest rate rises in
other European countries, the rumours of a realignment in the EMS and the
uncertainty surrounding the result of the general elections. Consequently,
the peseta experienced strong downward pressures. After the election in
late October the Spanish currency recovered some ground. In all, it ended
0.2% lower with respect to the ecu.

After being sidelined for much of September, sterling fell sharply
against most currencies following the publication of worse-than-expected
trade figures for August. Aggressive intervention and a 1 percentage point
rise in base rates (to 15%) effective 6th October briefly stemmed the
downward pressure, but bearish sentiments resurfaced following renewed
speculation about a rift between the Prime Minister and the Chancellor.
Nervousness over the Government's political position and over fragility of
the equity markets called into question the continuation of a high interest
rate strategy, and the pound fell sharply. The weakness of the dollar subse-
quently helped sterling recover some of its losses, but the Chancellor's
resignation caused a further sharp reversal and although modest support was
provided, the pound fell to its lowest level against the Deutsche Mark
since March 1987 before stabilising. Over the two months, sterling's trade-
weighted index fell by 3.3% to 88.4 (1985=100).

The Greek drachma appreciated by 2.7% against the US dollar and
depreciated by 2.5% against the ecu. In effective terms the drachma
depreciated by 0.9% in September and by 1.1% in October.
The Portuguese escudo declined by 0.5% in effective terms in line
with the objectives defined by the authorities. Against the US dollar the
escudo rose by 42.

The Swiss franc strengthened by 5% against the dollar while
vis-a-vis sterling and the Japanese yen its value increased by 3 to 4 per-
centage points. Measured against the majority of the EMS currencies, the
exchange rate tended to be lower. On an export-weighted basis the value of
the Swiss franc rose by 0.6%. The Euro-franc rate went up from 7 3/8% to
roughly 7 7/8%. In reaction to the market developments and in co-ordination
with the measures introduced by other central banks, the official discount
rate was raised by 0.5 percentage point to 6% on 6th October. However,
central bank money supply was not tightened any further.

The Austrian schilling firmed by more than 6% against the US dollar.
Vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark it fluctuated by only 0.07%. Short-term liquidity
support was given in October with DM 1.8 billion of DM/schilling swaps with
an average maturity of ten days. In line with the corresponding interest
rate increases in most European countries, the discount rate was raised
from 5.5% to 6.5% and the lombard rate from 7.5% to 8.5% with effect from
6th October. The rate for short-term open market operations was also raised
from 6.5% to 7.252.

The Norwegian krone moved within a fairly narrow range of 112.00
to 112.50 measured by the basket index. The krone stayed mostly in the
stronger end of this range in September but weakened towards 112.50 during
October.

After a period of heavy inflows in September, partly due to non-
residents’ purchases of krona-denominated bonds, which at times brought the
index for the krona to its limit of 130, the Swedish krona weakened to
130.5 in the second half of October when interest rate differentials vis-a-vis
many foreign currencies narrowed.

In effective terms the Finnish markka continued to fluctuate
within a narrow margin. Market interest rates have increased by almost 22%.
The base rate was raised by 1 percentage point to 8.5%, effective
lst November.

The Japanese yen appreciated by 3.5% against the US dollar and
closed at 139.35 in September. This was due to the concerted action of the
central banks implementing the agreement of the G-/ of 23rd September. The

Bank of Japan stepped into the markets selling US dollars against Japanese
yen for a protracted period. However, the impact of these interventions was
absorbed by the markets which pushed the Japanese unit down to 142.15 in
October. Meanwhile, the yen depreciated somewhat against the ecu. Effective
llth October, the Bank of Japan raised the official discount rate by
0.5 percentage point to 3.75Z, taking into consideration the developments
of the exchange rate, interest rates abroad, domestic business activity,
prices and money supply, as well as a rise in market interest rates. Over
the period as a whole, the yen appreciated by 1.7% vis-a-vis the US dollar
while it depreciated by about 5% vis-a-vis the EMS currencies.

The Canadian dollar traded in a narrow range for the period under
review, appreciating slightly to close on 3lst October at US$ 0.8522. The
strength of the Canadian dollar continues to result from the capital inflows
associated with relatively high short-term interest rate differentials
vis-a-vis the United States, and an expectation among participants that
Canadian interest rates will remain firm in the near term. The currency's
strength has been tempered somewhat by concerns about Canada's current

account deficit which has been increasing in recent quarters.

II. INTERVENTIONS
A. Interventions in US dollars

Net dollar sales by the central banks amounted to US$ 22 billion
in September and October compared with net purchases of US$ 0.9 billion in
July and August. The major part of these interventions took place in the
last week of September and the first half of October. The main sellers were

the Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve Bank and the Bank of England.

B. Interventions in Community currencies and in private ecus

Interventions in EMS currencies and private ecus by Community
central banks amounted to the equivalent of US$ 7.2 billion (US$ 1.9 billion
at limit), compared to US$ 3.5 billion in July and August. The greater part
of interventions was sales of Deutsche Mark (US$ 2.8 billion); the main
seller was Danmarks Nationalbank. Intervention sales of ecus (US$ 2.3 billion)
were greater than in previous periods; the main sellers were the Banca

d'Italia and the Bank of England.

III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH UP TO 1OTH NOVEMBER

Exchange markets were quiet during the first days of November.
The dollar stayed in a narrow range; market participants remained cautious
against the background of narrowing interest rate differentials favourable
to dollar assets.

In the EMS the Deutsche Mark weakened slightly against most other

currencies.
-20

-24

-28

28.

EVOLUTION OF THE ECU,

1A

THE HIDDLE RATE OF THE CURRENCIES

PARTICIPATING IN THE EXCHANGE RATE MECHANISH OF THE EHS, ‘AND THE
CURRENCIES OF THE EEC CENTRAL BANKS WHICH DO NOT PARTICIPATE IN THAT

MECHANISH,

= See next page.

25.

20.10

ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST
DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

10.11.1989

-28
at’

-12

-16

24

1

EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS
PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE
RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

| { “A
~~ ~7 ~ ~ ~_- ~ / ~.
- py | ~ T= | | 1
\
-<w-- CHF | |
— —— CAD l 7
SEK l ; |
| 0 ee ee ee ATS
er NOK : , .
bo ceeee FIM | 3
: ! ! ee
! ! | | |
| | | ! |
| | | :
| ] |
: | | | |
|
| | | 1
! | | | :
| { | {
I ! ! —
| | |
ar | |
my | | ott!
{ * oe’ | dees. aa *,e* aed Pen os
| . ‘ | ae ‘, | meee : |
| “ . | : | ro i
| - ‘ee eee | ree ' <
| wh, en | 3 |
j Tet “et ee |
| = . |
| | ees evoke “ _-7
. le? | | a =~ .°
4 ‘ ‘ \ re, ‘ i
| \ ! \ y | . i |
. ‘ a / ‘ Ney ' ;
| ve 7% 3 | r) | \ i |
. v ‘ ‘ 7 ' \ o” .
| \ | ’ ° |
. \ , i . .
| ‘yes. oN ra | wen! | | |
| reer ONY i | | |
ay ‘. [Sees eg yen” . yt one! .
‘\ au” | wp tse’ oe 2? = Perse 4
es s~ | ‘so : |
! ‘ ! my . |
; ‘ ~ ‘ ' wry '
| 8 ON pee! | |
' Ce ad wag se: y) . .
| y, . give’ | {
| | ~4 Se a ; l
7 11.8 25.8 8.9 22.9 6.10 20.10 3.11
1989

" ECU 0,767254; GBP 0,5346; GAD 126,2002; ESP 107,8498; PTE 130,0242; FIM 3,945; CAD
1,302; CHF 1,2775; JPY 121,4501; SEK 5,795; NOK 6,233; ATS 11,129; middle rate of the
currencies participating in the EMS 0,77324. The middle rate of the currencies
participating in the EMS represents the daily average of the exchange rates of those
two currencies which have the largest divergence from their current bilateral central
rates, with a maximum fluctuation of 2.25%.

10.11.1989

B

-12

- 16

-20

-24
MOVEMENTS IN THE EMS PARITY GRID

[ — ee es een

DEH

-
ae
Ld
e*

waaccee ESP

1
'
‘ rer
' re
' a
t
a, Fees ~”
I
'
i}
i]
'
1
; ro)
' -
' °
N
t
t
' oO
t -
| 2
! o
i]
‘
'
i—-—
|
'
'
1
I
°
' N
‘ N
'
i]
?
‘
‘
’
'
‘
’ te)
i *
' @
'
t
'
'
toe...
'
t
|
i]
‘ t «@
t t .
Ww
' ‘
, ' “
‘ t
¢ ‘
‘ '
‘ !
‘ ‘
'
t
‘ ’ ae
Po -
' '
t
\ ’
’ '
' '
‘ ’
: '
Soyo.
t ' s
wo
~

- oO oO -
a

1989

10.11.1989
EVOLUTION OF THE DIVERGENCE INDICATOR*

a a

DKK |
aennenas (7 Saaeneennnaa poco bes seesaw eee eee ee I elataiaiietaiitiaiandaiaiiaieiaiiiee b----—= 75

eet

— 50
|

|

|

+

|
I
| t
25 ; : 25
| |
er mene | « ad i a | 1
! | ao |
0 a oe — 1 0
|" re ee rs |
se oY No |
IN _
x on
D7 | ™ \- |
\ 47 N IN
-25 |! rxa/ | ‘y , aN | -25
f | oN t
~\L7 | ! Y ae
| | |
| | | {
| } | J
-50 . -50
| l | m~. |
~ — ~ : ‘ F . -~_=-—
Met UT eT TNT ON nL ey | i arn ae
] | Vr ™ \/ | ~ “U7 vt
| | | . Pree |
ae ie eee lool nee es fs a ne re,
-75 /-++----------- “o-----+--- Serr ge pin --i-- 222-22 eee S leeieietatate Nae ane ene ee --- b---- -75
i I | |
| | I |
| | |
| | |
-100 -100
28.7 11.8 25.8 8.9 22.9 6.10 20.10 3.11
1989

* Tne divergence indicator provides a uniform measure of a currency's position in
relation to its ECU central rate. The maximum divergence spread is the maximum
percentage by which a currency's market rate against tne ECU may appreciate or
depreciate in relation to its ECU central rate; it is expressed as +/-100, the
divergence threshold being +/-75. The data which has been used to draw this graph are
the ECU rates against the different currencies, adjusted to eliminate the effect of
the fluctuation of the Italian lira, tne Spanisn peseta, the pound sterling and the
Greek dracnhma outside the 2.5% margin against the other currencies participating in
the EMS.

10.11.1989
EVOLUTION OF THE POUND STERLING, THE GREEK DRACHHA, AND THE
PORTUGUESE ESCUDO, ON THE BASIS OF THE HARKET RATES PREVAILING ON
31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECU*

[o.oo

1
| I
I ; ceteeene Lpeee ew een ene !
ro ‘ue ae “=e? sa wate. { I
' -— =? .
| | ‘8 |
Sette meen wots sy
| i .
ee eee : |
| | * adie a rs |
| |
| | ! | =
} . . |
| | |
| , . :
| |
|
|
: |
- | “4
!
|
|
|
|
i

"28.7 11.8 25.8 3.9 22.9 6.10 20.10 3.11

1989
* GBP 0,696793; GRD 164,483; ESP 140,566; PTE 169,467.

4A

10.11.1989
4B

EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS

PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION,

ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE

RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECU*

- ae®eaP@qaa*%oaq

! 4 YN |
_ -~- ern G < : ;
| a v . \ , | |
: | _ | | |
r | | : re :
| | / ‘ oe JPY \ | / \ |
; CHF . + 32
, ne WZ ia Ne \ |
3 CAD \ | |
| | _ Z. | r™ y A
rf | SEK : aa a4
I~ NZ Gn a me ATS vo-4 |
| NOK |
Le. eee | | ;
| | eee ee FIu | : : 2A
: | |
PONS | |
7 SN | 24
| sO Ow Nay |
/ \ | 3 |
/ \ | ae | |
7 n i | \. ; / \ | -
t -
17s | Vrain / \ |
- 1 1 | 4 7 7 \ ~ : 1
| : ; 7
3 : | | 16
! | |
| | : |
. } | a
. 3 | | 12
|! | | |
Peareeee’ *” ee ie rr LL Li in ; -_ |
Gt joe.
Teen tent tee eens : seenst 3
— | |
| | ;
} |
; |
4 !
: |
: |
1 oes eS pened nee
{ , ~
J ewe we eee wee ete nere”
|
{
; -4
|
|
i
l

1989

20.10

3.11

* uSOD 1,30335; CAD 1,69696; CHF 1,66503; JPY 158,292; SEK 7,55292; NOK 8,12378; ATS

14.5050;

FIM §,14172.

10.11.1989
