Confidential

(Translation)

MINUTES*
OF THE 238th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 12th SEPTEMBER 1989 AT 9.30 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Bank of
Greece and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by
Mr. Papademos, Mr. Karamouzis and Mr. Brissimis; the Governor of the Banque -
Nationale de Belgique, Mr. Verplaetse, accompanied by Mr. Rey,
Mr. Michielsen and Mrs. de Wachter; the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank,
Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Rieke; the Governor
of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio, accompanied by Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran;
the Governor of the Banque de France, Mr. de Larosiére, accompanied by
Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the Governor of the Central Bank of
Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the
Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi, accompanied by Mr. Dini and
Mr. Santini; the President of De Nederlandsche Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accom-
panied by Mr. Szasz and Mr. Benard; the Governor of the Banco de Portugal,
Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo Marques and Mr. Amorim; the
Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by
Mr. Crockett and Mr. Price; the Vice-President of the Commission of the
European Communities, Mr. Christophersen, accompanied by Mr. Carré and
Mr. Schmidt; the Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute,
Mr. Jaans; Mr. Kees, Secretary of the Monetary Committee. Also present at
the meeting was Mr. Dalgaard, Chairman of the Group of Experts. The
Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul,
Mr. Scheller and Mr. Giles, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan also

attended.

er yep ssyppenene

* Final text approved at the meeting on 14th November 1989, which
incorporates some drafting changes.
I. Approval of the minutes of the 23/th meeting

The Committee approved the minutes of the 237th meeting, on the
understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be incorporated

in the final text.

II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:

- Preparation by the 'Dalgaard Group" and discussion by the Committee
of Alternates;

- Statistical charts and tables

A. Statement by Mr. Dalgaard

The "Monitoring Group" had focused its attention on matters relating
to the Italian lira and the Spanish peseta, after briefly discussing the
situation of the dollar. After weakening slightly from mid-June onwards,
the dollar had strengthened again since early August to a level of DM 2;
almost the same level as the peak recorded in June. This trend was
attributable to a number of factors, in particular the considerable
confidence in the dollar, which stemmed perhaps from the fact that for two
and a half years it had on average seemed more profitable to invest in
dollars than in Deutsche Mark or yen. The interest rate differentials in
favour of the dollar were relatively narrow, more so than early in the
year, and thus were not the reason for the dollar's strength. The dollar
was, however, supported by market expectations that the US economy would
continue to grow and that monetary policy would therefore not be relaxed.

As far as the short-term outlook was concerned, the possibility could not

be ruled out that signs of an appreciable slowdown in the US economy or

poor foreign trade figures might lead to a sharp fall in the dollar. This
might then create problems for the EMS exchange rate mechanism, given that
the ensuing deterioration in the balances of payments in Europe would not

be sustained equally easily by the countries concerned. However, it seemed
more likely that growth would continue in the United States and that interest
rates would remain at their present level. Renewed upward pressure on the
dollar could not be ruled out, and this would not be helpful to the adjustment
process given the US fundamentals. Opinions differed as to possible courses

of action. Some thought that it would be necessary for the central banks to
show that they wished to keep the dollar exchange rate below DM 2.03, its
June peak, to prevent it from rising above that level again. Others considered
that intervention had little likelihood of success if the Federal Reserve
and the Bank of Japan, whose enthusiasm had so far only been lukewarm, did
not participate wholeheartedly.

The heavy interventions by the Banca d'Italia had been discussed.
Very strong growth in Italy coupled with too weak a fiscal policy necessitated
a tight monetary policy and led therefore to high interest rates, which
attracted capital. The Banca d'Italia had allowed the lira to appreciate
slightly - by around 4% since autumn 1988 - which assisted price stability
but was bad for competitiveness. This appreciation had been halted at a
level corresponding roughly to the upper limit of the narrow band, which
was in fact a way of shadowing the narrow-band currencies. Some experts had
found that pursuing this policy was probably more difficult than actually
being in the narrow-band system, where the fact that the rate could not
rise further would limit expectations. The experts at the Banca d'Italia
were not convinced by this argument. In fact, very substantial interventions
- amounting to about US$ 5 billion since early July - had been necessary to
halt the decline of the lira, and the Banca d'Italia was aware that such
interventions could not continue for long. It was expected, however, that
fiscal policy would soon be tightened: the budget for 1990, which would be
presented by the end of September, should contain measures in that direction,
and others should already produce an effect in the fourth quarter of 1989.
If this did occur, interest rates, and hence also the lira exchange rate,
should weaken. This was precisely the reason why the Banca d'Italia did not
wish to see a further appreciation of the lira now, when it was hoping that
the rate might soon come down again. The Banca d'Italia would, however,
reconsider its policy if the measures to tighten fiscal policy did not work
out as planned.

The situation in Spain was in some respects similar to that in
Italy: growth was buoyant, while fiscal policy was inadequate and therefore
had to be augmented by a tight monetary policy. The high interest rates had
at times resulted in very large intervention purchases (of the order of
US$ 27 billion in 1988 and 1989) and a substantial appreciation of the peseta
(of around 10%). Lately, the situation had appeared more balanced. Interest
rates were still high, but it was expected that they might gradually come

down, for, over the months, fiscal policy had become less expansionary, and

- 4 -

measures to tighten it had been taken in July. Finally, it was expected

that the Government would be re-elected at the forthcoming early election

and that it would tighten fiscal policy. This was probably the reason why

no significant intervention had been necessary since early August. Moreover,
the Banco de Espana had contributed to this development by allowing the
peseta to move very close to its upper limit, thereby reducing possible
exchange rate gains and increasing potential losses. On 8th and 11th September
interventions had been carried out at or near the limit in Copenhagen and
Madrid. It was to be hoped that these interventions were exceptions and did
not signal the beginning of new inflows of funds into Spain.

At the other end of the band the Danish krone was close to its
limit with the peseta. The fundamental position in Denmark had not changed.
The Danish krone was stable and had even firmed slightly against the Deutsche
Mark; its relative weakness within the mechanism had lasted for some time,
reflecting the sluggish growth of the economy, which called for interest
rates to be as low as international conditions permitted. The Danish
authorities had raised interest rates following the increase in Germany in
order to maintain differentials; it would be more problematic if it were
necessary to adjust to the very high level of Spanish interest rates.

The experience with the Italian lira and Spanish peseta showed
that it was possible to retain some independence with regard to monetary
policy for a while. Both countries had kept interest rates higher than the
international situation required, thereby attracting inflows of funds, to
which they had reacted by letting the exchange rate appreciate and carrying
out substantial intervention purchases. It was obvious, however, that such
a situation could not go on for very long. Both countries were fully aware
of that: it appeared that the situation was now more or less under control
in Spain and that it should improve in Italy with the new budget.

The "Monitoring Group" had also discussed intervention techniques
and the choice of intervention currencies, particularly in connection with
the interventions by the Banca d'Italia. Substantial purchases of dollars
were clearly not advisable when the US currency was firm, while at first
sight the obvious choice would be the Deutsche Mark, which the German
authorities hoped would strengthen. However, the Deutsche Bundesbank had
hesitated to agree to substantial purchases, arguing in particular that the
Deutsche Mark was at the top of the narrow band, that the accumulated Deutsche

Mark might be resold later at an awkward moment and that it would be

preferable to purchase weaker currencies, like the Danish krone. Some experts
had remarked that the markets for these currencies were limited while that
for the Deutsche Mark was very broad and could for that reasoh absorb sizable
interventions without any major effect. In actual fact the Banca d'Italia
had purchased Deutsche Mark, within the limits authorised by the Deutsche
Bundesbank, roughly the same amount of dollars, thereby neutralising the
effects on the US dollar/Deutsche Mark exchange rate, and smaller amounts

of ecus, French francs and Danish kroner.

The Banco de Portugal had also purchased dollars, as it did
regularly, but in larger amounts than usual (more than US$ 1 billion in
August).

Overall, net purchases of dollars had been recorded for the July-
August period despite the strong and rising trend of the dollar and despite
concerted action to limit its appreciation. The experts had not come to any
definite conclusion regarding this situation but considered that better
co-ordination was necessary.

The experts had only been able to touch upon other important but
perhaps less urgent issues. The continued high current-account surplus in
Germany, for instance, was causing concern, especially since a reduction
was not very likely in the near future, given the depreciation of the Deutsche
Mark in real terms. The Deutsche Mark exchange rate was still dominated by
capital outflows. After the abolition of the withholding tax long-term
capital outflows had stopped, but there had been massive outflows of short-
term capital to countries with relatively high interest rates, such as
Italy. Had it not been for these outflows, the strength of the German economy

should have led to a firming of the Deutsche Mark.

B. Statement by Mr. Papademos

The Alternates had focused their discussions on the policy problems
and dilemmas faced by certain Community countries which were experiencing
inflationary pressures as well as budget and/or current-account deficits
and whose currencies were appreciating against those of countries with a
low rate of inflation and a current-account surplus. The main reason for
discussing this topic was the continued strength of the Italian lira and
the Spanish peseta.

In Italy the monetary authorities, faced with an inappropriate
policy mix, had had to accept high interest rates and the subsequent

strengthening of the lira in the fight against inflation, but this was at

- § -

the expense of a deterioration in international competitiveness. The
appreciation of the lira would have been even greater had the Banca d'Italia
not intervened. Fiscal policy was inadequate for curbing the excessive
growth of domestic aggregate demand, and monetary policy was overburdened,
pursuing several separate objectives.

In Spain the appreciation of the peseta was also related to the
tightening of monetary policy since July, which was aimed at moderating
domestic demand growth and inflationary pressures. The Banco de Espana had
allowed the peseta to reach the upper limit of the wide band against the
Danish krone without any major interventions. The appreciation of the peseta
was not, however, attributable to the policy mix to the same extent as in
Italy, for the fiscal situation in Spain was developing favourably, with
the public sector borrowing requirement projected to fall to 2.5% of GDP
this year.

In connection with these developments a number of policy problems
had been discussed by the Alternates: firstly, what could be done to improve
the policy mix in certain countries; secondly, how long the seemingly
paradoxical behaviour on the part of the exchange markets would last,
i.e. whether the situation had become unsustainable; thirdly, the desirability
of interventions as opposed to exchange rate changes; and, finally, the
choice of intervention currencies.

With regard to the first issue, namely the policy mix, the Italian
Alternate had noted that after the presentation of the new budget by the
Government at the end of September, it was expected that fiscal policy
would be tightened very soon. If the Government's budgetary programme were
translated into effective measures, the market would be convinced that the
public sector deficit would be brought under control, and this would allow
some easing of monetary policy. Although the fiscal situation in Spain was
not as serious as in Italy, efforts should be made to improve it. Budgetary
reforms were expected if the present Government won the next election. More
generally, the view had been expressed that governments which did not tackle
fiscal problems adequately should be pressured into moving in the right
direction. One Alternate, however, had pointed out that the relationship
between budget deficits and current-account deficits was not one-to-one and
that, consequently, fiscal austerity would not necessarily lead to an

improvement in current accounts.
The Alternates had agreed that it was not possible to forecast
accurately how long the exchange markets would continue to behave in a
paradoxical fashion and that the markets did not yet consider' the situation
to be unsustainable, although it could become so in the long run. The markets
might, however, suddenly change their views if they judged the economic
imbalances to be potentially unsustainable, and it was thus felt, that
corrective measures should be implemented as quickly and as smoothly as
possible.

With regard to the desirability of interventions, it had been
pointed out that if high-inflation countries allowed their currencies to
appreciate further, countries with relative price stability would import
inflation, and thus interventions could be considered desirable. Particular
reference had been made to the Italian situation, and some had suggested
that if the lira kept within the narrow band of the exchange rate mechanisn,
its appreciation would be limited. The Italian Alternate had questioned the
idea that the lira’s participation in the narrow band would solve the problem,
given that capital flows in Italy related to the financing of a buoyant
economy and were not speculative; he had agreed, however, that it was
necessary to pursue a flexible intervention policy.

The Alternates had also discussed the choice of intervention
currencies. One Alternate had wondered why the Deutsche Bundesbank was
opposed to the use of the Deutsche Mark as an intervention currency when
such interventions had no monetary effects and other countries outside the
exchange rate mechanism could use the Deutsche Mark without restrictions.
The German Alternate had stated that the Bundesbank did not prohibit the
use of the Deutsche Mark as an intervention currency but only imposed limits
on amounts. There were three main reasons for this policy. Firstly, when
market forces were strong and put pressure on the exchange rate, the latter
should be allowed to fluctuate in order to increase the exchange rate risk
and thus discourage large capital flows. Secondly, if the Deutsche Mark was
appreciating and other central banks had accumulated large quantities of
that currency, it might be tempting to intervene to slow down the appreciation,
which would run counter to fundamentals. Thirdly, if the peseta was near
the top of the wide band, interventions in Deutsche Mark could create problems
for currencies within the narrow band, and it would therefore be preferable

to employ weaker currencies for interventions.
Finally, the Alternates had discussed the prospects for economic
performance and policies in Germany, where, as they had noted, GDP was
growing at a rapid pace while the trade surplus with the other Community
countries was increasing and that with the United States was decreasing
appreciably. A growing trade surplus could not be sustained indefinitely. A
revaluation of the Deutsche Mark was one policy option, but an improvement
in external adjustment would entail the curbing of domestic demand in
countries such as the United Kingdom, Italy and Spain. If growth continued,
measures would have to be taken to ensure that inflation was not rekindled.
Despite the current moderate pace of inflation in Germany, macro-economic
conditions were such that a resurgence of inflationary pressures should not
be ruled out. Monetary policy should remain cautious in future, and a
tightening might be required. Monetary growth was very close to the 5% target
but would not be allowed to overshoot it this time. The present economic
situation was in fact very different from that in 1986-87, because most
countries, including Germany, were currently experiencing rapid economic
growth and inflationary pressures. Responding to questions, the German
Alternate had indicated that the recent change in the rediscount rate had
no fundamental monetary implications and represented a_ technical
readjustment. Capital flows had recently turned around, resulting in net

inflows, but short-term capital outflows were substantial.

C. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. Pohl wondered whether, in the situation that had just been
described, Italy and Spain might not consider abolishing their restrictions
on capital movements or at least speeding up their liberalisation. Such a
policy would be more appropriate than excessive recourse to interventions,
which created problems for countries whose currencies were relatively weak
in the narrow band, such as Denmark.

Mr. Ciampi pointed out that the lira had strengthened in August
and that the interventions had been intended to curb this appreciation,
which would otherwise have been even greater. In a few months the lira had
appreciated against the Deutsche Mark by 4Z% in nominal terms and 6% in real
terms. The Banca d'Italia did not look for a strong lira, but a number of
factors had contributed to its strengthening. It was necessary make the
most of this development, and, in particular, the appreciation of the currency
had been used to combat inflation and thus take the place of a fiscal policy

that was not appropriate. Results had already been achieved in that the
-~ QO -

rise in consumer prices, which in the space of one year had accelerated by
2 points to stand at 7%, had slowed down since August, and it was hoped
that it would return to an annual rate of 6% within a few months. However,
the strengthening of the lira obviously tended to depress the trade balance,
and it was thus necessary to weigh up the pros and cons of a strong lira.

The Italian Government had committed itself to take fiscal policy
action aimed at reducing the public sector borrowing requirement. This
action, which should be approved by the Government by the end of September,
was in two parts: the first concerned the 1990 budget, which should come
into effect on ist January 1990 after the adoption of the finance law by
Parliament; the second related to measures which would be implemented as
from Ist October 1989 with a view to curbing domestic demand, particularly
consumption. A strong lira and a tight monetary policy were therefore
exerting pressure both on the Government, forcing it to take action, and on
firms, ensuring that they would exercise caution in the collective
bargaining that would be commencing shortly.

As far as intervention policy was concerned, Mr. Ciampi thanked
the Bundesbank for the understanding it had shown in daily contacts but, as
Mr. Papademos had indicated, it would be helpful for the experts to
reconsider the question of the flexibility of interventions. The Banca
d'Italia had diversified its interventions by including ecus and Danish
kroner and had acted as if the lira had been in the narrow band. This was
one way of putting pressure on the Government and of convincing public
opinion that it was desirable to abandon the broader band and apply the
narrow one.

Referring to the remark made by Mr. Pohl, Mr. Ciampi cast doubt
on the idea that bringing forward the liberalisation of short-term capital
movements would remedy the situation. Indeed, one of the reasons for the
current strength of the lira was precisely the liberalisation measures
which had already been taken; there was thus reason to believe that
liberalising monetary flows immediately, instead of with effect from
ist July 1990, would only attract more capital to Italy and would not
therefore improve the situation. The markets had confidence in the Italian
real economy, the lira and the EMS and did not expect any early
realignment.

Mr. Rubio stated that, as Mr. Dalgaard had mentioned, fiscal
policy had been tightened in Spain in recent months, which should enable

the public sector deficit to be reduced to 2.5% of GDP in 1989 compared
- 10 -

with 3% in 1988 and 42 in 1987. The Government could be considered to have
done what it could for the immediate future. Moreover, the Prime Minister
had announced that the budget for 1990 would be tougher than‘the 1989 one
and that an early election would take place at the end of October. However,
fiscal measures alone would certainly not be able to solve all the problems,
for the current public sector deficit was relatively moderate compared with
other countries, and experience had shown that even with a.smaller deficit,
or even a surplus, the same problems existed in certain countries. Monetary
policy had therefore also been brought into play and had been tightened.
There were, however, limits for interest rates and reserve ratios, which
could not be increased disproportionately. Last July the Banco de Espajfia
had asked the banks to restrain the growth of their lending and to reduce
the rate of increase from 22% in the first half to 12% in the second half
of the year. It was still too early to predict the outcome of this action,
but there was hope. In July there had already been a deceleration in the
growth of broad money, and this movement had continued in August. The economy,
which was clearly overheating, should therefore gradually calm down, and
the curbing of demand should make it possible to lower interest rates and
ease the tensions affecting the peseta.

In this context the liberalisation of capital movements would
certainly not be a solution. The majority of capital imports were invest-
ments, and therefore the liberalisation of short-term capital movements
would not have any effect. Capital exports might be encouraged, but the
essential measures had already been taken in this area, and complete
liberalisation of lending in pesetas to non-residents would surely not have
any impact, given the very high interest rates. It should also be noted
that interventions had become much more modest in August, which was
reassuring.

In conclusion, Mr. Rubio did not think there were any alternative
policies at the moment: efforts to check domestic demand should continue,
and the right moment should be awaited before starting to bring down interest
rates, which did not, however, seem possible before the election at the end
of October.

Mr. Tavares Moreira said that the Banco de Portugal had indeed
purchased dollars in July and particularly in August, when the total had
exceeded US$ 1.2 billion. The structural weaknesses and rigidities of the
Portuguese economy were the reason for using the exchange rate as an

instrument of adjustment. In fact, the escudo had appreciated considerably
- 1li -

in real terms despite the gradual devaluation which was being undertaken
but which only partially offset the interest rate differential of approxi-
mately 7% vis-a-vis the Community average. Real interest rates were
relatively low in Portugal and were even slightly negative in the case of
rates on time deposits. The Banco de Portugal had resold on the market a
large proportion of the dollars purchased to correct the composition of its
currency portfolio. It was probable that the central bank would continue to
purchase currencies, but it planned to diversify and revise its intervention
policy and would keep the other central banks informed within the framework
of the "Dalgaard Group".

The Portuguese authorities had recently taken an important measure
to liberalise capital movements by henceforth authorising residents to
purchase foreign securities. This measure would change a situation that had
existed for about eighty years, but was not expected to have much effect in

the short run.

III. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EEC Ministers of Finance
on developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen
countries participating in the concertation procedure during
July and August and the first few days of September 1989

The Chairman took note of the Committee's adoption of the
“concertation report", which would be sent to the FEC Ministers of Finance

in the usual way.

IV. Exchange of views on the preparation of the first stage of economic
and monetary union

The Chairman drew attention to the draft letter to the Commission
President Mr. Delors, which had been submitted to the Governors and which
concerned the amendments which they proposed be made to the draft Council
Decision approved on 28th July.
After remarks had been made by certain Governors, the text of the
letter was amended slightly as follows:
- the article “the" was inserted before "stability" in Article 3,
paragraph (1);
- the words "redraft of the" were inserted in point 2 of the letter

before "1964 Council Decision";
- 12 -

- the omitted paragraph of the original 1964 Council Decision was
reinstated in its initial wording, viz. "In carrying out its
tasks, the Committee shall keep under review the trend of the
monetary situation both inside and outside the Community" "Dans
l'exercice de ses fonctions, le Comité suit l'évolution de la
situation monétaire dans la Communauté et en dehors de celle-ci".
Mr. Christophersen stated that the Commission intended to adopt

the formal proposals for the Decision the following week, at its weekly
meeting on 20th September 1989, and he offered a number of remarks, in
particular on the textual amendments proposed by the Governors. It was
important to avoid conflicts between the various bodies, and it was therefore
expedient to insert, in Article 3, paragraph (1), the words “within their
competences", to indicate the existence of other bodies that were competent
in the area of banking supervision. It was also appropriate to reinstate
the idea contained in the present 1964 Decision that "the Committee shall
keep under review the trend of the monetary situation both inside and outside
the Community." |

Mr. Christophersen referred to the report of the "Delors Committee"
and the establishment by the Committee of Governors of three sub-committees,
dealing respectively with monetary policy, foreign exchange policy and
banking supervision. He understood that the Committee of Governors did,
indeed, intend to set up these three sub-committees; a reference could have
been made to them in the Council Decision, but it was sufficient for them
to be included in the Committee's rules of procedure, provided that
institutions such as the European Parliament or the Council of the European
Communities, which might raise questions on this subject, could be notified
thereof. .

The Chairman reminded the meeting that on Monday the Governors
had discussed certain matters relating to the preparation of the first
Stage of economic and monetary union. It was necessary to continue the
exchange of views and, in particular, to specify the mandate to be given to
the Alternates for the coming months. The most urgent matters appeared to
be the organisation of the Committee of Governors and the rules of procedure.
Mr. Ciampi had had a note circulated which was concerned primarily with an
economic secretariat or research unit, and Mr. Hoffmeyer had transmitted a

letter regarding the operating mechanisms for monetary policy co-ordination.
- 13 -

Mr. Pohl pointed out that the Alternates should not confine them-
selves to the two documents referred to by the Chairman; they should draw
up a list of the questions to be examined with a view to decisions which
the Governors would in due course be taking in a wider context.

Mr. de Larosiére agreed with Mr. Pohl; the Alternates should not
restrict themselves to taking into account the documents already distributed
but should, on the contrary, look at all the problems arising and aim to
provide a background for the Committee's discussion, probably in November,
so that the Governors could provide the necessary guidelines. The questions
appeared to be fairly straightforward. Firstly, it was necessary to examine
the establishment of an economic research unit, its structure, its composition
(number and qualifications of its members), its duties and how they would
tie in with the existing duties of the groups of experts so as to ensure
insofar as possible that they did not overlap, the work programmes to be
undertaken, which authority the members of the unit would be attached to
administratively, and the logistical role of the BIS. Secondly, it was
necessary to study the suggestions put forward in Mr. Hoffmeyer's letter,
which related more to the substance of what might be a more harmonious
operating framework for monetary policy co-ordination. These ideas were
very interesting: a number of FEC countries were using quantitative criteria
for their monetary policy, and it would be-useful to see how these criteria
could be, if not harmonised, at least more closely related. Tables of
equivalence could, perhaps, enable comparisons to be made.

Mr. Ciampi endorsed the remarks made by Mr. Pohl and
Mr. de Larosieére; he pointed out that the note which he had distributed did
not claim to be a precise proposal or an exhaustive list of questions but
simply a contribution which raised problems and posed questions which would
have to be studied seriously. This note could also be considered as a
contribution to the fundamental issues raised in Mr. Hoffmeyer's letter, in
that it proposed an instrument which should serve to strengthen the way in
which the Committee of Governors operated and its effectiveness.

Mr. Duisenberg, speaking in his capacity as President of the BIS,
said that the BIS was prepared to co-operate and provide any assistance the
Committee of Governors might desire in setting up its organisation.

On behalf of the Governors, the Chairman thanked Mr. Duisenberg

for his remarks regarding the BIS.
~ 14 -

Mr. Rubio also thanked Mr. Duisenberg for the initiative he had
taken and pointed out that relations with the BIS were an important question,
on which the Alternates should not decide in haste, for the Governors would
have to discuss the matter among themselves, in conjunction with the other
questions to be examined.

Mr. Jaans observed that in the preparatory work intended for the
Committee's November meeting thought should also be given to the impact
which the creation of an economic secretariat or research unit would have
on the work of the Alternates and the Governors. Once there was an additional
source of output, there arose the problem of how the committees concerned
would assimilate the material and of whether the work of an economic
secretariat might not be frustrated. The question of whether a two-hour
meeting once a month would be sufficient in future therefore had to be
addressed.

Mr. Hoffmeyer reminded the Governors that, on his initiative, a
report by the “Group on the harmonisation of monetary policy instruments"
dating from 1976 had been forwarded to them by the Secretariat and that
this document should be taken into account by the Alternates.

Mr. Pohl stressed that any decision to be taken by the Governors
regarding organisational matters was conditional upon the ECOFIN Council's
approving the text relating to the 1964 Decision as proposed by the Governors.
If there were major changes to the drafts with which they were already
familiar, even with regard to the text of the 1974 Decision on convergence,
the Committee would have to review the question.

Mr. Christophersen said that he did not anticipate any difficulties
regarding the 1964 Decision. At all events, any changes to the Commission
proposal would have to be approved unanimously by the ECOFIN Council, and
the Member States were unlikely to adopt a text which was at odds with the

opinion of the Commission and that of the Governors.

V. Exchange of views on the items on the agenda of the international
meetings held in Washington

The Chairman noted that there were no comments.

- 15 -

VI. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee:
- Procedure concerning the review of the formal rules relating to

‘

the official ecu

The Chairman pointed out that on 8th September 1987 the Governors
had agreed that the central banks would henceforth accept settlements in
ecus of claims in the very short-term financing mechanism in excess of
their obligation (50%) and up to 100%, as long as this did not result in an
unbalanced composition of reserves and no excessive debtor and creditor
positions in ecus emerged. it had also been agreed that, after two years of
experience, the formal rules relating to the official ecu would be subject
to review.

As this two-year period had elapsed, it was suggested that the
review be undertaken in December and that the group of experts under the
chairmanship of Mr. Dalgaard be asked to carry out the preparatory work in
good time for the Committee's meeting, which was to be held on
12th December 1989. This schedule would enable the experts to complete this
task in parallel with the annual review of developments in the use of the
private ecu, which would also be on the agenda for the December meeting.

The Chairman noted the Committee's agreement with his proposal.

Before closing the meeting, the Chairman remarked that the Governors
always relied heavily on the work and advice of the Alternates and that it
was therefore sad to have to bid farewell to one of them, namely
Professor Gleske, who was participating in a Committee meeting for the last
time. He was happy to say, however, that contact with Mr. Gleske would not
be lost as he had agreed to serve again as a member of the Board of
Directors of the BIS.

The Chairman thanked Mr. Gleske on behalf of the Committee for
the outstanding contribution which he had made over the past ten years and
which had in fact spanned the last thirty years if account was taken of his
close association during this long period with international and, in
particular, Community monetary activities. All the Governors would cherish
a vivid memory of the valuable wisdom and judgement which had always

characterised Mr. Gleske's participation in the Committee’s work.
~ 16 -
VII. Date and place of the next meeting

The Committee's next meeting would be held in Basle on Tuesday,

14th November 1989 at 9.30 a.n. |
Annex
Committee of Governors of the 12th September 1989
Central Banks of the Member States

of the European Economic Community Confidential

BRIEF REPORT ON
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

JULY AND AUGUST 1989

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of
the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation procedure!
and briefly describes their interventions during July and August and the

first few days of September 1989.

I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main feature of the foreign exchange markets in July and
August 1989 was a clear depreciation of the US dollar during July followed

by an equally marked resurgence during August.

The US dollar declined on two occasions when market participants
anticipated that further reductions in US interest rates would narrow
favourable interest differentials. The first was at the beginning of July.
The second, after a brief mid-month recovery, was in the latter half of
July, bringing the dollar to the lows of DM 1.8430 and Yen 135.30 on
2nd August. Subsequently, the dollar trended higher as new economic statistics
suggested that US economic growth was continuing at a more sustainable rate
and price data brought into question how rapidly further downward adjustments
of US interest rates might materialise. The US monetary authorities and

foreign central banks intervened to resist the dollar's rise. Nevertheless,

1 The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.

-2?2-

the dollar moved back up to close the two-month period approximately 0.52
higher against both the Deutsche Mark and the yen.

Within the EMS there were no tensions and the respective positions
altered moderately. The Spanish peseta, which entered the exchange rate
mechanism in June, almost reached the upper limit of the wide band against
the Danish krone. The Italian lira stabilised in the upper part of the
narrow band as a result of massive intramarginal interventions of the Banca
d'Italia during August.

While the Deutsche Mark firmed somewhat vis-a-vis most of the
currencies officially quoted in the Federal Republic, its weighted index
recorded a slight decline of 0.5% over the two months under review to stand
at 173.7 at the end of August (1972=100). The end-June increase in key
interest rates thus had no visible impact on the exchange rates. A weaker
tendency was recorded against most of the European currencies, whose positive
interest rate differential vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark was considered to be
sizable compared to the perceived exchange risk (sterling, Spanish peseta,
French franc and Italian lira).

The French franc firmed progressively vis-a-vis most currencies
of the EMS, showing an average rise of 0.7%. This development became more
pronounced from mid-July onwards due mainly to securities purchases by
non-residents and increased foreign exchange sales by exporters.

During the whole of July the Belgian franc was characterised by
marked stability. In the course of August the Belgian franc tended to
appreciate gradually vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark and the Dutch guilder.
However, at the end of the period under review a slight decline set in due
to the narrowing of the interest differential between the Deutsche Mark and
the Belgian franc. The Banque Nationale de Belgique pursued a cautious
monetary policy, only lowering the rate on 3-month Treasury certificates
once - by 0.05 percentage point to 8.45% on Ist August.

The position of the Dutch guilder vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark
underwent little change as both currencies remained in the upper part of
the narrow EMS band.

The Danish krone remained stable and continued as the weakest
currency in the EMS band. During the period as a whole interest rates
declined slightly.

The Irish pound appreciated in the upper half of the EMS band

during July, as, following the rise in official interest rates at end-June,
substantial net capital outflows gave way to modest net inflows. The
currency remained steady in the upper half of the EMS band during August,
with substantial capital inflows being offset by net purchases of foreign
currency by the Central Bank.

In July, the Italian lira appreciated significantly, due to a
seasonally favourable current account, reaching the upper limit of the
narrow band. In August, as short-term capital inflows resumed, the Banca
d'Italia intervened, purchasing large amounts of US dollars and various EMS
currencies, in order to contain the upward trend of the lira and to keep it
close to the top of the narrow EMS band.

The Spanish peseta firmed during the first part of July, after a
round of monetary tightening, which consisted mainly of an increase of
0.75 percentage points in the intervention rate for overnight funds to
14.52 on 6th July and an increase of 1 percentage point in the reserve
requirements to 19%. Later on, the peseta stabilised close to the upper
limit of the wide band through the end of August. On the whole, it finished
1.3% higher against both the ECU and the US dollar.

Sentiment towards sterling improved considerably during July as
UK economic data tended to confirm the growing impression that the UK economy
was cooling. However, rumours that the Bank of England had been restraining
the rise sparked a sudden fall at the beginning of August and, as the feeling
developed that UK interest rates had peaked, the pound dipped to mid-month
lows. Well-publicised official support arrested the decline and attitudes
towards sterling became more positive towards the end of the period. This
was despite disappointing UK trade figures for July which, with the help of
prompt overt intervention, were quickly seen as probably an aberration.
Sterling's trade-weighted index rose by 1.4% to 91.5 (1985=100).

The Greek drachma fluctuated within a wide range against the
US dollar, while it remained relatively stable versus the ECU. On balance,
it depreciated both against the US dollar and the ECU by 0.3% and 0.42%
respectively. In effective terms, the drachma depreciated by 0.2% in July
and by 0.1% in August.

Net inflows of capital, together with the objectives defined by
the authorities for the exchange rate policy of the Portuguese escudo,
resulted in large net purchases of foreign currency by the Banco de Portugal.
The escudo depreciated by 0.5% in effective terms and by 0.2% against the

US dollar in the course of these two months.
The Swiss franc depreciated slightly against all major currencies.
Compared to the US dollar it lost roughly 1%. Measured by the trade-weighted
index it depreciated by 1.2%. The Euromarket rates stagnated at a high
level of around 7.252.

The Austrian schilling weakened vis-a-vis the US dollar by 0.4%.
Against the Deutsche Mark it fluctuated in both months by 0.1%. In July
there were fairly large capital inflows.

The Norwegian krone showed a slightly weaker tendency and ended
the period 0.2% weaker in effective terms. Norges Bank intervened on several
occasions buying or selling foreign exchange in order to limit the short-term
fluctuations.

High interest rates and the decision to abolish the main parts of
the foreign exchange control from lst July led to a strong demand for the
swedish krona for most of the period under review. The krona strengthened
as the Riksbank's index fell from 130.50 to 130.15 and the Riksbank was
forced to intervene on several occasions.

The Finnish markka remained relatively stable close to the strong
end of its fluctuation band until mid-August. Towards the end of the month
it eased slightly and the short-term interest rates rose by almost one per-
centage point.

The Japanese yen appreciated against the US dollar to Yen 138.40
in July due to expectations of lower US interest rates. However, these
expectations faded somewhat in August reflecting the so-called “soft landing"
of the US economy. This pushed the yen down to Yen 144.28 in August. The
Bank of Japan entered the market at various times, selling US dollars against
Japanese yen to shrug off the dollar-bullish momentum. Meanwhile, the yen
depreciated slightly against the ECU throughout July and August.

- The Canadian dollar appreciated to a 9-year high of US$ 0.8548 in
early August, before easing back to close the month at US$ 0.8484. Over the
period, the currency strengthened by 1.5% against the US dollar. Attractive
Canadian/US interest rate differentials and expectations that Canadian
monetary policy would remain firm brought about strong foreign investor
demand for Canadian securities as well as renewed activity in Euro-Canadian
issues. Late in the period, the publication of a worse-than-expected current

account figure for the second quarter caused the currency to ease.

II. INTERVENTIONS

A. Interventions in US dollars

‘

Dollar interventions resulted in net purchases both in July and
August, totalling US$ 0.9 billion compared with net sales of US$ 15.5 billion
in June. The net figure was the result of gross purchases of US$ 6.5 billion
and gross sales of US$ 5.6 billion.

The most important buyers were the Banco de Portugal and the
Banca d'Italia. Major sellers were the Bank of Japan and the Federal Reserve

Bank.

B. Interventions in Community currencies and in private ECU's

Interventions in EMS currencies and private ECUs corresponded to .
US$ 3.5 billion in July and August compared to US$ 0.4 billion in June.
Most of the interventions were Deutsche Mark purchases primarily carried
out by the Banca d'Italia; there were also some purchases of French francs
and Danish kroner. Substantial purchases of private ECU were carried out by

the Banca d'Italia and the Banco de Espana.

III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH UP TO 8TH SEPTEMBER

The release of positive US labour market statistics resulted in a

further firming of the dollar despite some intervention sales.
-24

-28

EVOLUTION OF THE ECU, THE MIDOLE RATE OF THE CURRENCIES
PARTICIPATING IN THE EXCHANGE RATE MECHANISM OF THE EMS, AND THE
CURRENCIES OF THE EEC CENTRAL BANKS WHICH DO NOT PARTICIPATE IN THAT
MECHANISH, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST
DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

| |
| |
EMS
—— Ecu | |
| GBP | ! |
| _ _ — GRD | ! |
J} 0 ee ESP | |
| eter nees PTE |
1 oy | |
i] fy ,
boty | |
ly \ | ly |
' / : \/ \
+ ' a, ,\
‘ ' | \ | i / / | \ |
" l . i | ‘A\ / 1 1 |
16 ¢ \ \/ | | wi |
| ! al rn | |
; iN ¥ ~ . J |
| i / Vy 1 4 \ |
| he | M | ; t |
| ‘! | ! \ |
/ 4 :
| | AN (‘V
i, ‘ I . | NA A
fn IN wort. VN 470
i A l \y |. ve | 4 ~ \y
: a ‘ : ' \
1 fale vy - | M
1 AAYAN AY ! | a\y
20 if fy “ \ TAN il | |
a7 fo ia - | .
por OU, | | a
an Wy ! : | RAN a
- VAMP: iA '\ |
. : i \ a Mv/ | \ |
| : | ,? ~ \ / vA |
| : i, \ / 1 yw y
' ‘y \ \ f \) { ;
ty vil Poy |
| If / \ |
| \/ \ |
 # “ /. ~ \-
yooial ane | NZ I
Vv \ an / d | | v ]
roy vy
by, i VY ry ! ! an
~ \ / |
\ /
\ f | l
; NT ! | |
Vv |
26.5 9.6 23.6 7.7 21.7 4.8 18.8 1.9
1989

° See next page.

7.9.1989
1B

EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS
PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE
RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

1989

* ECU 0,767254; GBP 0,5346; GRO 126,2002; ESP 107,8498; PTE 130,0242; FIM 3,945; CAO
1,302; CHF 1,2775; UPY 121,4501; SEK 5,795; NOK 6,233; ATS 11,129; middle rate of the
currencies participating in the EMS 0,77324. The middle rate of the currencies
participating in the EMS represents the daily average of the exchange rates of those
two currencies which have the largest divergence from their current bilateral central
rates, with a maximum fluctuation of 2.25%.

7.9.1989

MOVEMENTS IN THE EMS PARITY GRID

weeenee ESP

w-sweew ew eww Bee ew wen ew eww ew eww ewe ew B]| | ow

18.8

4

23.

1989

7.9.1989

EVOLUTION OF THE OIVERGENCE INDICATOR*

100

100
75 75
50 50
25 25
0 0
-25 -25
-50 - 50
-75 -75
- 100 - 100
26.5 9.6 23.6 7.7 21.7 4.8 18.8 1.9

19839

* The divergence indicator provides a uniform measure of a currency's position in
relation to its ECU central rate. The maximum divergence spread is the maximum
percentage by which a currency's market rate against the ECU may appreciate or
depreciate in relation to its ECU central rate; it is expressed as +/-100, the
divergence threshold being +/-75. The data which has been used to draw this graph are
the ECU rates against the different currencies, adjusted to eliminate the effect of
the fluctuation of the Italian lira, the Spanish peseta, the pound sterling and the
Greek drachma outside the 2.5% margin against the other currencies participating in

the EMS.

7.9.1989

4A

EVOLUTION OF THE POUND STERLING, THE GREEK DRACHMA, THE SPANISH
PESETA AND THE PORTUGUESE ESCUDO, ON THE BASIS OF THE MARKET RATES
PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECU*

26.

1989

° GBP 0,696793; GAD 164,483; ESP 140,566; PTE 169,467.

7.9.1989
EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS

PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION,
RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECU*

* USD 1,30335; CAO 1,69696; CHF 1,66503;

14,5050;

FIM 5,14172.

1989

ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE

JPY 158,292; SEK 7,55292; NOK 8,12378; ATS

7.9.1989

4B

40

36

32

28

24

20
