(Translation)
MINUTES *
OF THE 233rd MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 14th MARCH 1989 AT 9.30 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Bank of
Greece and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by
Mr. Papademos, Mr. Karamouzis and Mr. Brissimis; the Governor of the Banque
Nationale de Belgique, Mr. Godeaux, accompanied by Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen;
the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank, Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by
Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied
by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Rieke; the Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio,
accompanied by Mr. Linde and Mr. Durdn; the Governor of the Banque de France,
Mr. de Larosiére, accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the
Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady
Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi,
accompanied by Mr. Dini and Mr. Santini; the President of De Nederlandsche
Bank, Mr. Duisenberg; the Governor of the Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares
Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo Marques and Mr. Amorim; the Governor of
the Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by Mr. Crockett and
Mr. Price; the President of the Commission of the European Communities,
Mr. Delors, accompanied by Mr. Mingasson and Mr. Dixon; the Director General
of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr. Jaans. Also present at the meeting
were Mr. Raymond and Mr. Dalgaard, Chairmen of the Groups of Experts. The
Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul,

Mr. Scheller and Mr. Giles, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan also attended.

The Chairman opened the meeting by welcoming Mr. Andrew Crockett,
Executive Director of the Bank of England, who was participating in the
Committee's work for the first time, and by calling the Governors’ attention
to the fact that the European Monetary System was celebrating, or rather

had the previous day celebrated, its tenth anniversary. He added that he

i
* Final text, identical to the draft, approved at the meeting on
lith April 1989.
}
ho
1

had not had the privilege of being present in that same room ten years ago
at the signing of the agreement between the central banks, but that some of
the founding fathers were there today and must indeed feel that they had
taken part in an important event in the monetary history of Europe.

On the previous day, Monday, in Brussels, the ECOFIN Council had
marked the occasion of the first ten years of the EMS. President Delors had
presented an interesting and positive assessment of the system and the Chairman
of the Committee had made a few remarks emphasising the major role played
by the EEC central banks in its successful development. A written version
of the Chairman's statement and copies of the Commission's communication
were distributed at the meeting.

Mr. Delors observed that since the ECOFIN Council was meeting on
13th March, ten years to the day after the Furopean Monetary System had entered
into operation, it had wished to mark the occasion. In its communication
the Commission had emphasised the role of the EMS as a stabilising factor
and one which had contributed to economic convergence, though the process
of convergence was not yet complete. Three phases had been identified in
the ten years of the system's existence. A first phase, from 1979 to 1983,
during which realignments had been frequent because divergences in economic
performances had been very marked. A second phase, from 1984 to 1987, during
which convergence had improved but the EMS had been, as it were, bombarded
from outside by the sharp fluctuations of the dollar. The communication
stressed the importance of the Basle Agreement of September 1987 concluded
by the Governors, which had made it possible to strengthen the system's
defences. In effect, the system had stood up well since the autumn of 1987,
in particular in the face of the dollar's decline. Some even thought that
it had entered a phase of great calm with no further realignment. However,
it was as well to be cautious about the future while recognising that the
EMS had made a large contribution to the European structure and that, without
its success, it would have been more difficult to gain acceptance for the

prospect of a single market without frontiers in 1993.

I. Approval of the minutes of the 232nd meeting.

The Committee approved the minutes of the 232nd meeting, on the
understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be incorporated

in the final text.

II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:

- Preparation by the '"Dalgaard Group" and discussion by the Committee
of Alternates;

- Statistical charts and tables.

A. Statement by Mr. Dalgaard

In December and January the dollar had been relatively strong,
but in February and early March its performance had been more mixed. Appar-
ently, the market no longer believed that the US currency would remain
permanently on an upward path, and it had consequently stabilised at around
DM 1.85. This could be explained by a number of factors:

- disappointment regarding the new US Administration, and in parti-
cular the abandonment of all hope of a swift reduction of the budget
deficit;

~ increasing doubts, despite the 1/2 point rise in the discount rate,
about the Fed's will or ability to tighten monetary policy sufficien-
tly;

- growing fears concerning inflation;

- a general loss of confidence in high-yield currencies, including

the dollar, owing to a greater awareness of exchange rate risk.

Interest rate differentials had played a very important role in
determining exchange rate levels. In December-February interest rates had
risen more rapidly in Germany than in the United States and this trend had
been expected to continue. This had led to a decline in the dollar in February.
The decision by the Deutsche Bundesbank in early March not to raise official
rates had come as a surprise to the market, which had expected a rise in
view of the relative firmness of the dollar, the increase in prices in Germany
and the rise in repo rates. Most of the European central banks had welcomed
the Bundesbank's decision, which had enabled them to avoid further rate
increases. There were several reasons for that decision. The increase in
prices in Germany had been due essentially to the rise in official prices
and taxes and so did not call for a further tightening of monetary policy.

The fundamentals continued to be favourable and capital exports should
gradually decline since it could be expected that the effect of the with-
holding tax in Germany would be judged more calmly and real interest rates

were rising. External considerations had also played a role. Many trading
partners were at present trying to dampen domestic demand by tightening
monetary policy, which should reduce demand for German exports. These various
factors should combine to strengthen the Deutsche Mark in the long run.

German policy might, however, be reappraised if the rise in prices
led the trade unions to make wage claims that risked triggering cost-push
inflation and if the country's trading partners did not manage to reduce
their imports from Germany and so achieve the necessary balance-of-payments
adjustment. This could happen if high interest rates in those countries caused
their currencies to strengthen, hindering the required reduction in imports.

On its tenth anniversary the situation within the EMS was good;
there were no expectations of a realignment in the near future and no tensions
among member currencies. This had been the case for some time now, despite,
more recently, a sharp contraction of interest rate differentials. Differen-
tials were narrower between the Deutsche Mark and virtually all the other
currncies participating in the exchange rate mechanism, most notably the
Danish krone with a decline from 4 percentage points a year ago to 1 1/2
points at present.

This development was the result of a fall in interest rates in
Denmark and a rise in Germany and elsewhere; it reflected differences in
economic situations; Denmark was now in its third year of virtually zero
growth, while most other European countries had experienced sustained growth.
The very wide interest rate differential which had existed a year ago had
been clearly excessive from the point of view of the exchange markets; it
had induced much larger private capital imports than had been necessary to
finance the current-account deficit, despite the Danish krone's relatively
strong position in the EMS. As the interest rate differential had narrowed
the krone had weakened within the EMS and in February it had stood very close
to its lower intervention point. However, the market had remained calm through-
out this period. The central bank had intervened only on a few occasions on
a very modest scale. This calm had only been. possible because of overall
market confidence that there would be no realignment in the short term. The
experts had thought that the Danish krone's proximity to its intervention
point might give rise to problems for the whole of the EMS as it might trigger
undesirable reactions on the market. There had been such experience in the
past, but it had not been repeated this time, either in Denmark or in the

other EMS countries.
The Italian lira had recently been more volatile then the other
currencies; it had appreciated by 2 1/2% between September 1988 and mid-
February 1989, largely owing to wide interest rate differentials. Its upward
trend had come to rather an abrupt halt around mid-February in the wake of
commercial demand for foreign exchange and the introduction of a reserve
requirement on Italian banks' foreign currency borrowing. It had then weakened
by 1 1/2Z% in the space of two weeks, only to recover again following the 1
point increase in the discount rate in early March. The discount rate had
been raised on domestic grounds. The fundamentals had deteriorated recently:
the trade deficit and inflation were rising and banks' domestic lending was
growing rapidly. The Government was trying to tighten fiscal policy but this
was difficult and took time. In the meanwhile the Banca d'Italia had had to
tighten its monetary policy.

The French franc had performed well despite a continued fall in
interest rate differentials. It had weakened a little up to the end of
February but had since firmed notably, primarily because of the positive
development of the fundamentals. Recent foreign trade and price figures had
been good. The decision to abolish the remaining foreign exchange controls
on the corporate sector, including banks, had tended to further strengthen
confidence in the French franc.

The "Monitoring Group" believed that the positive situation within
the EMS was attributable to increasing convergence as well as to the fact
that the central banks were making more flexible use of the instruments
available, principally the exchange rate and interest rates depending on
the circumstances, which had made it possible to limit intervention.

The UK economy still showed no clear signs of cooling off. Interest
rates had remained high but stable, leading to a narrowing of differentials
which had been one reason for the weakening of sterling in late February
and early March. As the authorities did not wish the currency to fall too
far, the Bank of England had intervened quite heavily for a few days when
its rate vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark had dropped to 3.165. It had subsequently
stabilised, with the market awaiting the presentation of the budget on 14th
March.

The peseta had been rather more stable. Domestic demand in Spain
was still buoyant but measures had been taken in early February to limit

capital inflows and the financial markets had stabilised somewhat. The

exchange rate had changed little, interest rates had risen but more or less

in step with those elsewhere and there had been little intervention.

B. Statement by Mr. Papademos

The Alternates had concentrated their discussion on three issues:
the relative stability of the foreign exchange markets in recent weeks,
interest rate policy in the Federal Republic of Germany, and the causes and
implications of the current-account imbalances in the Community.

The dollar had fluctuated against the Deutsche Mark and other
European currencies within a relatively narrow range in recent weeks; it
had been influenced by changes in interest rate differentials and market
perceptions of the stance of macro-economic policies over the coming months.
Some Alternates viewed the present level of the DM/dollar rate as satisfactory;
others considered that it was still high and did not contribute to the adjust-
ment process. It was felt, however, that the current level was acceptable
in that domestic conditions did not appear to justify a further rise in German
and other European interest rates and interventions could not have significant
effects in the present circumstances.

The Alternates had expressed satisfaction with the stability of
the EMS in the past month despite the narrowing of interest rate differentials
between the Deutsche Mark and a number of other participant currencies. The
Bundesbank's decision not to allow a further rise in interest rates had been
welcomed by the Alternates. By not raising the lombard rate, contrary to
market expectations, and by announcing a lower fixed rate for repurchase
agreements, the Bundesbank had sent a clear signal to the markets. These
decisions had been justified because monetary policy had already been
tightened considerably, with short-term interest rates almost twice as high
as a year ago. The acceleration of inflation in January had been viewed as
an aberration, due to the introduction of excise taxes, and had been taken
into consideration when interest rates had been set earlier. Moreover,
because the German economy was export driven, a rise in interest rates could
not contribute much to slowing down aggregate demand; this could be achieved
only through a reduction in imports by Germany's trading partners. It had
been noted, however, that tight labour market conditions in certain sectors
and high capacity utilisation might exert upward pressure on wages at the

end of the year.

Despite a fall in interest rate differentials, the French franc
had performed well, influenced by improved fundamentals, for example the
lower inflation differential with Germany and the lifting of foreign exchange
controls. The French experience was a further demonstration that measures
to liberalise capital movements accompanied by appropriate macro-economic
policies could result in a strengthening of the currency. In addition, long-
term interest rates in France were lower today than they had been a year
ago, which reflected the success and credibility of anti-inflation policies.

In Denmark, the authorities had not allowed domestic interest rates
to rise because of continued weak economic growth and because the reduced
interest rate differentials were not viewed as inconsistent with balance-of-
payments equilibrium. Other policies had been employed to correct imbalances.
As a result of the narrower interest rate differentials the Danish krone
had remained close to its lower intervention point without, however, being
subjected to excessive pressure requiring interventions.

In the view of one Alternate the recent relative stability of the
EMS might prove to be deceptive. Balance-of-payments disequilibria and
divergences in inflation performances seemed likely to worsen and this could
cause problems, especially if interest rate differentials could not be employed
to bring about equilibrium.

The Alternates had discussed some of the causes and implications
of the current-account disequilibria in the Community. It had been pointed
out that capital flows induced by high interest rate policies pursued by
countries with overheated economies could cause and sustain current-account
deficits. The appreciation of the currency and the modest short-term impact
of high interest rates on economic activity could produce such an outcome.
It had been argued that current-account disequilibria would not matter when
financial integration was complete and the Community had a common currency.
Other Alternates had disagreed with this view and had stressed that even if
current~account deficits were easily financed by the market they did have
employment and output effects and if they persisted they would also have
financial implications. Moreover, financial integration did not imply that
current-account imbalances were unimportant as long as inflation differentials
existed and exchange rates were not fixed.

Finally, the Alternates had endorsed a proposal by the Group of
Experts to proceed with the testing of the use of the concertation tele-

communication system for data transmission.
C. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. Ciampi had a few comments to make on the situation in Italy
and in particular on the reasons for the discount rate increase, the principal
ones having already been mentioned by Mr. Dalgaard. Domestic demand in Italy
was strong and the economy was in a cycle of very vigorous expansion. Since
1984 the annual rate of growth had exceeded 3% and in 1988 it had reached
4%. Last year domestic demand had been particularly strong, in both the
investment and the consumer sectors. The rate of capacity utilisation had
been very high, order books were well stocked and bank lending had risen by
almost 20Z in a year. The public sector deficit was still large and its impact
pro-cyclical, hence the need for measures, firstly, to bring the deficit
within limits structurally consistent with a reasonably managed economy and,
secondly, to dampen domestic demand, which was plainly overheated. The Govern-
ment had taken a number of initiatives in late 1988 but these were insufficient
to offset the deterioration in the public finances. More would have to be
done; in particular expenditure must be curbed, which would hit sensitive
sectors such as pensioners, health and transfers to local authorities. Public
sector wage demands must therefore be resisted. The will and the acknowledged
need to act had not yet been translated into concrete measures, and in the
meantime there had been disturbing signs of a deterioration. Inflation, which
had stabilised in 1988 at an annual rate of 4.5-5%Z, had accelerated and in
February had been running at an annual rate of 6.3% on a consumer price basis.
The trade balance had also worsened, not so much because exports had slackened,
but because of a sharp increase in imports, confirming the buoyancy of domestic
demand. Against this background, pending fiscal measures, the Banca d'Italia
had proposed monetary measures. Firstly, a reserve requirement had been set
against non-resident deposits with Italian banks, primarily so as to end
the asymmetry in the treatment of fund-raising at home and abroad. The system
of Treasury bill auctions had been reformed with the abolition of the floor
price. The new system had first been used for 3-month bills and had been
extended to 6 and 12-month paper. Italy had not joined in the round of interest
rate increases in January as differentials with the other currencies were
large and the lira firm. In early March, however, the discount rate had been
raised for the essentially domestic reasons already mentioned. The objective
was not to strengthen the lira, though obviously a strong currency could

only support a policy of disinflation.
Mr. Pdhl wished to come back briefly to the Commission's communi-
cation to the Council entitled "The EMS ten years on". After glancing through
the text he was astonished at its content, its style and its tone; he was
also rather taken aback by the statement made by the Chairman of the Committee.
The EMS was based on an agreement between the central banks and the Commission
had no competence in its management; it was therefore surprising that it
should present a communication to the Ministers marking the first ten years
of the system's existence without first consulting the Governors and asking
their opinion. What was more, certain passages of the communication, for
example those on the role of the ECU or the institutional aspects, were
one-sided and raised serious objections, while the role of convergence, by
contrast, was given too little prominence.

Mr. Delors expressed surprise at this criticism, since in its
communication the Commission made no proposal and had no intention of inter-
fering in the management of a mechanism which lay within the sole competence
of the central bank Governors. The text was modest and restrained and it
was inconceivable that the Commission should not be able to comment on
experience with the EMS, express satisfaction at its success and compliment
the central banks on the role they had played. Contrary to what had happened
in 1984, since then the Commission had always refrained from making proposals
regarding the EMS and interfering in matters which were the sole responsibility
of the Governors. The President of the Commission had himself always been
very discreet and he therefore could not accept a criticism which seemed

unjustified.

III. Adoption of the Committee's report to the EEC Ministers of Finance on
developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen countries
participating in the concertation procedure during February and the
first few days of March 1989.

The Chairman noted that the Committee approved the "concertation
report'', which would be sent to the FEC Ministers of Finance in the usual

Way.
a 10 -

IV. Examination of Report No. 34 prepared by the Group of Experts chaired
by Mr. Raymond on current monetary policies in EEC member countries.

A. Statement by Mr. Raymond

In the previous report, last November, the experts had presented
an in-depth examination of the economic and monetary situation in the Community
and of ways of promoting convergence among member countries. The Governors
had wished to have this “stock-taking" before formulating monetary policy
for the year ahead.

The present report took note of the policies set and, in conclusion,
tried to assess the compatibility of national objectives. The experts had
of course also reported on the new measures adopted since November 1988.

Compared with their November report, the experts had revised their
projections for growth and inflation upwards, both for the current period
and for 1989 as a whole. They had confirmed that the international balance-
of-payments adjustment process was marking time.

Within the Community, as elsewhere, inflation rates were accelerating
somewhat. The acceleration was apparent even in those countries where inflation
had been lowest, from which, on the basis of figures available in mid-February,
the Group had concluded that convergence was improving somewhat. It was possible
that with the more pessimistic data reported in the last few days by those
countries outside the exchange rate mechanism this conclusion would have to
be revised. All in all, however, the experts had felt that underlying inflation
expressed in terms of unit production costs should be kept relatively well
in check in 1989 and 1990 as a whole.

Divergences in current~account performances continued to widen
within the Community. The German surplus was still very large. Growing and
in some cases already high deficits existed outside the area of the narrow
fluctuation band, either as a result of overheating or because of a deterio-
ration in the public finances in countries where they were in any case already
relatively unfavourable.

The report noted a tightening of monetary policy in a number of
Community countries since November, partly for domestic reasons (such as a
resurgence of inflationary pressures or strong growth of the monetary and
credit aggregates) and partly influenced by exchange rate considerations.

Among the countries participating in the exchange rate mechanism only Denmark,

Ireland and - until early March ~ Italy had not raised interest rates.

- 11 -

On average, short~term interest rates had risen by approximately
1.5 percentage points in nominal terms between October and February. The
increase in long-term rates had been less, pointing to relative confidence
on the part of the markets in the central banks' responses. Adjusted for
inflation, long-term interest rates had not on the whole changed very signi-
ficantly since last October (except in the Netherlands and Spain, where they
had firmed): the weighted average for the Community had remained close to
47Z, the lowest level for eight years.

The experts had examined the monetary policies announced for 1989.
Quantitative objectives had been set in Germany, France, Italy, Spain,
Portugal and Greece. In the first three countries - Germany, France and
Italy - the current objectives differed little from those set for 1988. In
the other three they reflected the authorities' desire to tighten their
policy stance.

In the United Kingdom the monetary strategy would be set in mid-
March, just before the beginning of the next financial year on lst April.

Belgium, Denmark, Ireland and the Netherlands had stressed that
they continued to give priority to the objective of exchange rate stability
within the EMS.

The Group had concluded that the monetary policies announced for
1989 everywhere aimed at containing developing inflationary pressures, but
that they would contribute only modestly - if at all - to reducing inflation
differentials between member countries and, as far as could be seen, would
not promote the adjustment of current-account disequilibria.

As the Group had already noted on several occasions in earlier
reports, a more marked differentiation in the policies pursued would obviously
be desirable, and at present this applied above all to interest rate policies.

However, as Report No. 33 had made clear, there were a number of
obstacles to such a strategy:

- those countries in current-account surplus and with the lowest
inflation rates saw no scope at present for pursuing a more expan-

Sionary policy in view of the recent increase in inflationary

pressures, so that the whole burden of effort would rest with the

others;
- precisely in those countries where current balances and inflation
would warrant even more restrictive action, various factors placed

a limit on the scope, or the willingness, to raise interest rates

further, either social factors (high unemployment), budgetary factors
- 12 -

(the burden of interest on the public debt) or exchange rate factors,

i.e. capital inflows attracted by a high yield.

The report reaffirmed the desirability of adjusting the policy
mix so as to avoid placing the full burden of correcting the disequilibria,
particularly in current balances, on monetary policy.

As Report No. 34 was essentially an updating of the November report
it had been compiled in a single meeting of the Group, and the in-depth
discussion of means of increasing convergence had not been reopened. On the
whole, the various groups of countries, those in surplus, those in deficit,
those with high inflation and those with low inflation, felt that they had
very little room for manoeuvre, and they had continued to defend the positions
described to the Governors in Chapter III of last November's Report No. 33,

to which reference could be made.

B. Statement by Mr. Papademos

The Alternates had thanked Mr. Raymond and the Group of Experts
for their excellent report. It was the first report in the new series of
such analyses requested by the Governors last November and as such it was
the forerunner in the process of a more systematic and fundamental analysis
of monetary policies in the Community.

It had been agreed by the Alternates that the report highlighted
the principal factors, outlined below, affecting monetary policy at this
juncture.

The danger of the upward inflationary trend should not be under-
estimated. Most of the latest data suggested that demand pressures continued
to be strong and in some countries inflation might exceed even the revised
forecasts of Report No. 34. This was worrying and becoming more visible to
the market. If inflationary pressures were not contained at an early stage,
it could ultimately prove very costly to re-establish price stability. The
question had been raised whether monetary policies might have to be tightened
further to contain this inflationary tendency. So far, there appeared to be
no need for a further general tightening of monetary policies, although the
circumstances were not the same in each country.

The present degree of differentiation of monetary policies between
the EEC countries was not, by itself, capable of reducing external imbalances.
The Alternates considered that such imbalances would not be sustainable in

the longer run. An attempt to correct them by relying on monetary policy

- 13 -

measures alone might not be sufficient. Monetary policies might have to
face conflicting domestic and external considerations since a rise in interest
rates induced capital inflows which led either to exchange rate appreciation
or to a loss of control of the monetary aggregates. In some countries, the
possibility of implementing tighter monetary policies was confined by other
constraints, and there was a clear need for a better policy mix. In addition,
it had been observed that the effectiveness of interest rate policies was
not uniform throughout all EEC countries.

The Spanish Alternate had pointed out that recent evidence on the
Spanish economy was not very encouraging. Monetary growth continued to over-
shoot the target range for the year despite the loss of foreign exchange
reserves. Preliminary estimates for the first two months of the year showed
rising inflation and a continuing worsening of the trade deficit. Complications
with the constitutionality of certain aspects of the existing income tax
laws along with the current political confrontation between the trade unions
and the Government added to the problems. Pressure for wage increases was
substantial and unit labour costs were likely to increase in 1989.

Some Alternates had noted that in some countries there appeared
to be a close relationship between the emergence of inflationary pressures
and the strong expansion of monetary aggregates in previous years. Although
initially linked to a shift in money demand partly associated with financial
innovations, the rapid monetary growth had contributed to the inflationary
pressures being experienced now.

More generally, two points had been stressed:

- the present emphasis on exchange rate stability should not overshadow
the need to make progress in the area of convergence; and
- the problem of convergence, especially the elimination of external
disequilibria, was not likely to be resolved unless the policy

mix was changed.

The Chairman added a few comments on the situation in Greece. The
growth of the broad monetary aggregate had slackened slightly in 1988 from
1987 but had considerably exceeded the target. This overshooting had mainly
been due to the budgetary difficulties; the public sector borrowing
requirement had risen by 3% of GDP to some 16%. Monetary policy had been
fairly restrictive to judge by real interest rates, which had risen and
which in the summer of 1988 had stood at almost 10%. A greater proportion

of the government borrowing requirement had been covered by the non-bank

-~ 14 -

sector. Fiscal policy for 1989 provided for a deficit about the same in
terms of GDP as in 1988, which meant that monetary policy would again have
to bear most of the burden of adjustment. It would therefore be necessary
to pursue a policy of high real interest rates, which, obviously, would add

to an already heavy public debt service burden.

VY. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee.

There was no other business.

VI. Date and place of the next meeting.

The next meeting would be held in Basle on Tuesday, 11th April 1989
at 9.30 a.m.

Annex

Committee of Governors of the 14th March 1989
Central Banks of the Member States

of the European Economic Community Confidential

BRIEF REPORT ON
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

FEBRUARY 1989

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of
the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce-~
dure! and briefly describes their interventions during February and the

first few days of March 1989.

I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main features of the foreign exchange markets in February
1989 were:
- a weakening of the US dollar against all currencies except the
pound sterling and the Canadian dollar;
- a strengthening of the Deutsche Mark vis-a-vis all other currencies
in response to rising German interest rates and a general weakening
trend for high yielding currencies;

- a continued absence of tensions in the EMS.

The US dollar shed some of the strength it had displayed at the
end of January and early February, as optimism about the new administration
and investment prospects in the United States began to fade. Concerns
increased about the magnitude of the inflation problem in the United States

with economic data revealing continued and surprising strength. At the same

\ The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.

time, expectations grew that monetary conditions abroad would be tightened.
The mid-month report of a slight improvement in the US trade deficit in
December offered little encouragement and the increase in the discount rate
by 0.5 percentage point to 7.0% also had little effect. As dealers adopted
a more cautious attitude, the dollar declined to close on balance 2% lower
against the Deutsche Mark and 1.6% lower against the yen.

There were still no tensions within the EMS. The major changes
were a fall of the Italian lira in the second half of the month and a further
weakening of the Danish krone to a position close to the lower limit.

The Deutsche Mark firmed markedly vis-a-vis all currencies
officially quoted in Frankfurt. Its weighted index vis-a-vis fourteen major
industrial countries (1972=100) rose from 167.5 on 3lst January to 169.1 on
28th February. Probable contributory factors were that greater account was
taken of the fundamentals and that interest rates in the Federal Republic
rose sharply.

The French franc remained stable for most of the period under
review. The rise in domestic interest rates contributed to this, as did the
publication of encouraging statistics for January (narrowing of the trade
deficit to Fr.fr. 2.8 from 4.8 billion in December and a rate of retail
price increase of 0.4%, or only 3.3% on an annual basis).

Against the background of a general rise in interest rates on the
major currencies the Banque Nationale de Belgique also found it necessary
to raise the rate on short-term Treasury certificates several times and to
intervene moderately to support the Belgian franc.

The Dutch guilder strengthened somewhat vis-a-vis most EMS
currencies, and remained in the upper part of the intervention band. On
balance the exchange rate with the Deutsche Mark was almost unchanged,
notwithstanding a decrease in the interest rate differential.

The Danish krone remained the weakest currency in the EMS band.
The interest rate differential vis-a-vis the international markets narrowed
further as interest rates in Denmark rose less than in most other countries.

The Irish pound weakened slightly but remained well within the
upper half of the EMS band. Net outflows of currency over the month resulted
in net sales of foreign currency by the Central Bank of Ireland.

Capital inflows led to a further appreciation of the Italian lira
in the EMS during the first half of the month. Following the announcement

of the extension to foreign currency borrowing of the 25% compulsory reserve

- 3 -

requirement on banks' liabilities, the lira began to weaken in the third
week of February also as a result of narrower interest rate differentials
and of a strengthening of the Deutsche Mark. The Banca d'Italia conducted
smoothing interventions throughout the month on both sides of the market
but ended up as a net buyer of Deutsche Mark.

Sterling suffered bouts of professional selling amid fears of a
narrowing in its favourable interest rate differential. Persistent downward
pressure was encountered during the latter part of the month, on concerns
about the UK trade figures for January (released on lst March) which contri-
buted to the nervous atmosphere. Sterling's trade-weighted index fell by
2.4% to 95.8 (1985=100).

The Greek drachma came under some pressure during the month. It
depreciated vis-a-vis the ECU by 0.72 while against the US dollar it appre-
ciated by 0.7%2. In effective terms it depreciated by 0.62.

The Spanish peseta lost some ground in the wake of the exchange
control measures introduced on list February and in spite of a further
1 percentage point rise in the intervention rate for overnight funds to
13.4% on 3rd February and a 0.5 percentage point rise in the three-month
repurchase agreement rate to 13Z on 6th February by the Banco de Espana. It
ended 0.7Z lower with respect to the ECU and 0.7Z higher with respect to
the US dollar.

In effective terms the depreciation of the Portuguese escudo was
0.25%, in line with the foreign exchange policy defined by the authorities.
Against the US dollar the escudo increased by 0.82.

The Swiss franc stabilised at a low level. Despite a slight decline
against the EMS currencies it showed an increase in value of 0.4Z on an
export-weighted basis. This rise is attributable to the tendency of some of
the other currencies to weaken. Vis~a-vis the US dollar the Swiss franc
strengthened to the extent of roughly 2%. The interest rate increase in the
domestic money market continued at only a slower pace; consequently the
interest rate differential in favour of other currencies broadened.

The Austrian schilling strengthened by 1.9% vis-a-vis the US dollar,
with a monthly spread of 3.7%. Against the Deutsche Mark it fluctuated by
only 0.062.

Continued stability of the Norwegian krone in the first few weeks
of February gave room for a further 0.5 percentage point reduction in Norges

Bank's overnight lending rate from 11.5% to 11.0% effective 14th February.

However, towards the end of the month the krone showed a tendency to weaken
somewhat and during the month the krone depreciated by 0.5% in effective
terms. |

The Swedish krona weakened towards the middle of the month due to
a narrowing of the interest rate differentials against foreign currencies.
The Riksbank withdrew liquidity from the market and interest rates rose
over the whole yield curve. The krona stabilised at an index level of about
131.0.

The Finnish markka depreciated slightly in effective terms. Short-
term interest rates fluctuated rather widely during the period but on average
they were at slightly lower levels than in January. |

The Japanese yen appreciated by 1.6% against the US dollar to
close at Yen 127.15, reflecting an increased market perception that a curtail-
ment of the US budget deficit was not as imminent as expected. Meanwhile,
the yen depreciated by 0.5% against the Deutsche Mark.

The Canadian dollar stood at US$ 0.8344, to show a decline of
1.3% over the month vis-a-vis the US dollar and one of 1.62% in effective |
terms. At the beginning of the month the Canadian currency reached its
highest level for seven years against the US dollar under the influence of
net inflows of foreign capital. Towards the end of the month, however, it
declined in response to the publication of figures pointing to a deterioration
in the trade balance and indications that the current account for the final
quarter of 1988 would post a large deficit. The weakness in the second half
of the month of a number of other currencies carrying high interest rates

also served as a backdrop to the Canadian dollar's decline.

II. INTERVENTIONS
A. Interventions in US dollars

Net sales of US dollars amounted to US$ 3.3 billion, compared
with US$ 4.1 billion during the month of January. Of the net sales only
US$ 0.8 billion were against Deutsche Mark compared with US$ 4.1 billion in
January. The Banco de Espafia, the Bank of Canada and Norges Bank were the

major sellers, while Finlands Bank was the largest purchaser.

B. Interventions in Community currencies and _ in private ECUs

Interventions in EMS currencies and private ECUs by Community
central banks amounted to the equivalent of US$ 1.9 billion compared with
US$ 4.2 billion in January 1989. The interventions consisted mainly of
purchases of Deutsche Mark, with the Banca d'Italia and the Banco de Espana

being the main buyers.

ITI. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 10TH MARCH

The dollar strengthened in the first days of March due to lower
European interest rates. Following the release of the US employment data
the US dollar strengthened further.

Sustained intervention underpinned the pound sterling.

Within the EMS, against the background of a fall in German
interest rates, the Italian lira and the French franc firmed. The Banca
d'Italia raised the discount rate from 12.5% to 13.5% and in France the

remaining exchange controls for companies and banks were lifted.
1A

EVOLUTION OF THE ECU, THE MIDDLE RATE OF THE CURRENCIES
PARTICIPATING IN THE EXCHANGE RATE MECHANISM OF THE EMS, AND THE
CURRENCIES OF THE EEC CENTRAL BANKS WHICH DO NOT PARTICIPATE IN THAT

MECHANISM, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST
DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

oe

©

-12

-20
25.11 9.12 23.12 6.1 20.1 3.2 17.2 3.3

1988 - 1989

* See next page.

10.33.1989
1B

EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS
PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE
RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*

25.11 9.12 23.12 6.1 20.1 3.2 17.2 3.3

1988 - 1989

* ECU 0,767254; GBP 0,5346; GRO 126,2002; ESP 107,8498; PTE 130,0242; FIM 3,945; CAO
1,302; CHF 1,2775; JPY 121,4501; SEK 5,795; NOK 6,233; ATS 11,129; middle rate of the
currencies participating in the EMS 0,77324. The middle rate of the currencies
participating in the EMS represents the daily average of the exchange rates of those
two currencies which have the largest divergence from their current bilateral central
cates, with a maximum fluctuation of 2.25%.

10.3.1989
MOVEMENTS IN THE EMS PARITY GRID

'
'
I
I
I
4
|
I
t
I
!
t
t
1
1
t
I
!
t
1
|
4
!
t
’
4
i}
4
|
!
(
|
J

ee

20.

23.12

12

9.

25.11

- 1989

1988

10.3.1989

EVOLUTION OF THE DIVERGENCE INDICATOR* ,

25.11 9.12 23.12 6.1 20.1 3.2 17.2 3.3
1988 - 1989

* The divergence indicator provides a uniform measure of a currency's position in
relation to its ECU central rate. Tne maximum divergence spread is the maximum
percentage by which a currency's market rate against the ECU may appreciate or
depreciate in relation to its ECU central rate; it is expressed as +/-100, the
divergence threshold being +/-75. The data which has been used to draw this graph are
the ECU rates against the different currencies, adjusted to eliminate the effect of
the fluctuation of the Italian lira, the pound sterling and the Greek drachma outside
the 2.5% margin against the other currencies participating in the EMS.

10.3.1989

4A

EVOLUTION OF THE POUND STERLING, THE GREEK DRACHMA, THE SPANISH
PESETA AND THE PORTUGUESE ESCUDO, ON THE BASIS OF THE MARKET RATES
PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECU*

o?
of

-8
25.11 9.12 23.12 6.1 20.1 3.2 17.2 3.3
1988 - 1989

* GBP 0,696793; GRD 164,483; ESP 140,566; PTE 169,467.

10.3.1989
EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS
PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE
RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECU*

’
=
Pe ed Tod ee alia heeeedie i Tod

weneke : awst

-8
25.11 9.12 23.12 6.1 20.1 3.2 17.2 3.3
1988 - 1989
* USD 1,30335; CAD 1,69696; CHF 1,66503; JPY 158,292; SEK 7,55292; NOK 8,12378; ATS
14,5050; FIM 5,14172.

10.3.1989

4B

28

24

20
