Confidential
(Translation)
MINUTES *
OF THE 231st MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS
OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 10th JANUARY 1989 AT 9.30 a.m.

Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Bank of
Greece and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by
Mr. Papademos, Mr. Karamouzis and Mr. Brissimis; the Governor of the Banque
Nationale de Belgique, Mr. Godeaux, accompanied by Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen;
the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank, Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by
Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied
by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Rieke; the Governor of the Banco de Espafia, Mr. Rubio,
accompanied by Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France,
Mr. de Larosiere, accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the
Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady
Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi,
accompanied by Mr. Dini and Mr. Santini; the President of De Nederlandsche
Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr. Szasz and Mr. Boot; the Governor
of the Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo
Marques and Mr. Amorim; the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton,
accompanied by Mr. Loehnis and Mr. Price; the President of the Commission
of the European Communities, Mr. Delors, accompanied by Mr. Costa, Mr. Mingasson
and Mr. Dixon; the Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute,
Mr. Jaans; the Secretary of the Monetary Committee, Mr. Kees. Also present
at the meeting was Mr. Dalgaard, Chairman of the Group of Experts. The
Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul,

Mr. Scheller and Mr. Giles, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan also attended.

a
* Final text, identical to the draft, approved at the meeting on
14th February 1989.
I. Approval of the minutes of the 230th meeting.

In view of the late distribution of the draft the Chairman proposed
that approval of the minutes be held over until the next meeting in February.

In the meanwhile the suggested amendments could be passed on to the Secretariat.

II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the
EEC based on:

- Preparation by the “Dalgaard Group" and discussion by the Committee
of Alternates;

~ Statistical charts and tables.

A. Statement by Mr. Dalgaard

The most notable development on the exchange markets since the
December meeting had been the renewed firmness of the dollar following its
decline in October and November. The dollar's appreciation had been partic-
ularly marked in early January; on 9th January it had shown a rise of 52%
over the end of November, to a level about the same as that observed during
most of 1987 but lower than that of summer 1988. Continuing growth in the
United States and consequent expectations of further increases in US interest
rates appeared to be the main reasons for the dollar's recovery. The US
authorities seemed fairly content with their currency's present level,
although the strong appreciation in early January had prompted the Fed to
undertake some intervention. Within the EEC, the Deutsche Bundesbank was
not very pleased with this development; it believed that, with a widening
German current-account surplus, the depreciation of the Deutsche Mark was
the contrary of an appropriate adjustment, and it had responded by selling
over $2.5 billion since the beginning of December. The greater part of
these sales did not represent traditional intervention but a more discreet
rechannelling of dollar receipts. The increase in German interest rates had
also been a response to the development of the Deutsche Mark.

The other EEC central banks seemed more concerned about the dollar's
fluctuation than about its present level. The sharp appreciation on 9th
January had, however, led to substantial concerted intervention in dollars.

The future performance of the US currency remained very difficult
to predict; it would depend to a large extent on the rate of growth, interest
rates and the trade balance in the United States and on the new Administration's

economic policy, particularly on the fiscal front. If US growth was sustained
interest rates could rise further, pushing up rates in Europe as well; if
growth slowed US interest rates could fall and this could lead to a weakening
of the dollar. |

The yen had attracted much less attention on the exchange markets
recently; it had moved less than the Deutsche Mark vis-a-vis the dollar and
was now close to its end-1987 level. It had, however, appreciated by some
10% vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark in 1988 and in early January stood at a
record level against that currency.

The situation within the EMS had been generally calm; two years
after the last realignment there seemed to be less expectation of a parity
adjustment today than for a long time. The main event in December had been
the increase in German interest rates and its repercussions on other currencies.
As could be seen from the graphs drawn up by the Secretariat, short-term DM
interest rates had risen by about 1/2 percentage point and long-term rates
a little less. The direct effect had been to reduce the interest rate differ-
ential in favour of other EEC currencies; a number of these had come under
pressure, some intervention had been necessary and their exchange rates had
weakened slightly. The French franc, the Belgian franc and the Dutch guilder
had been particularly affected and the response in the three countries
concerned had been the same: seeing, after one, two or three days, that the
intervention alone was not able to remedy the problem, they had raised
interest rates in order to restore differentials vis-a-vis the Deutsche
Mark, and this had sufficed to relieve the tensions. Ultimately, the increase
in German interest rates had been transmitted in full to interest rates in
the countries in question. However, the main impact had been on short-term
rates, and long-term rates had, for example, continued to decline in France.

In the other countries participating in the exchange rate mechanism
the repercussions of the German measures had been less marked. In Denmark
the krone had weakened slightly but interest rates had remained unchanged
and no intervention had been necessary. In Italy interest rates had not
risen, so that the differential vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark had narrowed.

The lira had nonetheless firmed and moved back into the narrow band. This
positive performance was due to the continuing high level of interest rates
maintained for domestic reasons and to increased capital inflows as a result
of the liberalisation measures taken in the autumn. The effect of these
measures had been to raise confidence in the Italian economy and the central
bank had been able to demonstrate to the market that a two-way risk attached
to the lira.
Overall, there was at present great confidence in the stability
of exchange rate relationships within the mechanism and interest rate movements
therefore assumed great importance. The increase in DM interest rates had,
for example, been enough to create problems for several currencies, though
these problems had quickly been resolved with the restoration of interest
rate differentials.

Outside the EMS exchange rate mechanism two currencies, sterling
and the peseta, presented a number of similarities. In both of the countries
concerned the economy was overheating, fiscal policy had not been able to
calm economic conditions and a restrictive monetary policy was bearing the
burden. Interest rates had therefore risen, attracting inflows of capital
which pushed up the currency. The peseta had appreciated by 3 to 4% since
the beginning of December and in 1988 as a whole the Deutsche Mark had
depreciated in real terms by about 10Z against the peseta and sterling.

Table 3 of the monthly series of “concertation" statistics showed
the central banks' activity in the private ECU market. The growth in investment
in private ECUs described in Report No. 64 had continued; in December 1988
alone the central banks' holdings of private ECUs had increased by some 2
billion; half of this amount had been accounted for by the Banca d'Italia,
and the Bank of England had also added to its holdings with the sale of ECU
Treasury bills. The central banks of Spain, Portugal and Norway had also
purchased private ECUs against other currencies, probably in order to diversify
their reserves. In 1988 as a whole the central banks' holdings of private

ECUs had risen by 7 billion, from 4 to 11 billion.

B. Statement by Mr. Papademos

Following Mr. Dalgaard's summary of the discussion which took
place earlier at the EEC Monitoring meeting, the Committee of Alternates
focused their attention principally on three topics:
- the recovery of the US dollar and its implications for the adjustment
process;
- recent developments within the EMS;

- the Spanish peseta and economic policies.
1. The US dollar

With regard to the recent strengthening of the US dollar, some

Alternates stated that the value of the dollar was still at a reasonable

level, while others thought it was relatively high. It was not easy to
assess whether the recent recovery was a temporary phenomenon or a precursor
to a longer-term appreciation of the currency. US fundamentals have not
changed and it was thought that much would depend on the policies to be
pursued by the new American administration.

Scepticism was expressed, however, as to whether market partici-
pants had taken full cognizance of the long-term effects of the fundamental
structural imbalances between the world's major trading nations. The situation
could not be sustained indefinitely.

The view was expressed that the present dollar/DM rate would
appear to be acceptable to the American authorities. A depreciation of the
dollar below this rate would intensify inflationary pressures since productive
capacity in the United States was almost fully utilised. On the other hand,
an appreciation of the dollar above this rate would have adverse effects on
the current account.

The appreciation of the dollar has not facilitated the bilateral
adjustment process, which had now slowed down appreciably and was therefore
cause for concern, especially for the German authorities.

It was also noted that the exchange rate was an appropriate instrument
or adjustment only to the extent that imbalances were of a fundamental and
not of a cyclical nature. Thus a devaluation would not help improve the
balance of payments in the United States and the disequilibrium has to be

corrected by measures of domestic policy.
2. The EMS

Increases in the short-term interest rates in the United States
had led the German authorities to raise the Lombard rate by half of one
percentage point. The rise in German interest rates had provoked what appeared
to be a competitive upward trend in a number of European countries aiming
at preserving interest rate differentials. The fact that some countries
followed suit in order to stem the flight of short-term capital demonstrated
the sensitivity of capital flows to changes in interest rate differentials.

The German Alternate pointed out that the Deutsche Mark had
depreciated in 1988 by 4.5% in real terms on a trade-weighted basis. It had
depreciated in the region of 10% against the pound sterling and the Spanish
peseta. As a result, exports had risen faster than imports and the German
authorities had to use interest rates as a means of preventing a further

depreciation of the Deutsche Mark. He also stated that under present
- § -

conditions, the Bundesbank would not wish to see a further rise in rates.
The return to a fixed rate tender, instead of the American auction systen,
had been used to provide the market with an unambiguous signal of its
intentions. However, the possibility of an increase in the near future was
not excluded, in particular if the Deutsche Mark continued to depreciate
against the dollar.

According to some Alternates, the role of the exchange rate in
the adjustment process has probably been over stated. Domestic demand in
Europe had grown, but not necessarily at a uniform rate and it was noted
that had the United Kingdom and Spain been members of the EMS, then their
currencies would not have been allowed to appreciate to such an extent.

Furthermore, it was generally felt that there should be some kind
of concerted action within Europe vis-a-vis the dollar and that such action
might, as in the past, have a favourable impact on the markets which are at

present unsure of the intentions of central banks.

3. The Spanish peseta and economic policies

The Spanish Alternate reviewed certain recent developments in the
Spanish economy. The Spanish peseta strengthened markedly as a result of
rising interest rates against a background of strong growth. The high growth
rate in 1988 was accompanied by a building up of inflationary pressures.
The appreciation of the peseta is seen as a powerful instrument to combat
inflation, despite the negative effect on the increasing current account
deficit. It remains debatable how long the present policy could be maintained,
but it was considered sustainable for the forthcoming year. Fiscal policy
has been contributing to the adjustment process, although perhaps not
sufficiently. The recent relaxation of exchange controls was applauded by
the Alternates, and it was mentioned that, owing to the high interest rates,
it would probably stimulate capital inflows rather than induce capital

outflows.
4A. Interventions in EMS currencies

In addition, the German Alternate reminded his colleagues of the
written agreement existing among the EEC central banks regarding intervention.
It was pointed out that, prior to an intervention, the intervening central
bank should first discuss the matter with the central bank whose currency

is to be used in the transaction. Such conduct is essential to ensure that

the use of that currency in interventions will not jeopardise the cohesion

of the EMS.

The Chairman thanked Mr. Dalgaard and Mr. Papademos for their

statements and noted than the Governors had no comments.

III. Adoption of the Committee's report _to the EEC Ministers of Finance on
developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen countries
participating in the concertation procedure during December 1988 and
the first few days of January 1989.

"concertation

The Chairman noted that the Committee approved the
report", which would be sent to the EEC Ministers of Finance in the usual

way.

IV. Exchange of views on the Committee's work programme for 1989

The Chairman pointed out that an outline work programme for the
Committee for 1989 (see annex) had been distributed at the same time as the
draft agenda for the meeting. Before asking Mr. Papademos to report on the
Alternates!’ discussion, he noted that the programme was based on decisions
or commitments already undertaken by the Committee and also contained a
number of items that were still open. It was not, of course, definitive, as
it was impossible at this stage to predict all the questions which might
arise and which the Chairman or the Governors would wish to examine or the

subjects on which the Committee might be asked to give an opinion.

A. Statement by Mr. Papademos

The Alternates reviewed the Work Programme of the Committee for
1989. There was general agreement on the proposed outline.

The Alternates discussed certain procedural issues relating to
the forthcoming re-examination of the ECU basket (items 3 and 8 of the
outline). In this context, it may be useful to recall that the revision of
the composition of the ECU should be determined by the Council by September,
acting on a proposal from the Commission after consulting the Board of
Governors of the EMCF and the Monetary Committee. However, it is not yet

clear when the Board of Governors will have to submit its opinion on this
matter. Indeed, the date will depend on the calendar for the review of the
composition of the ECU basket. As already pointed out in Report No. 64 of
the Dalgaard group, there is the idea of proceeding in two stages, i.e. the
Council would announce the new weights some months before the basket is
effectively changed. In this case, the Board of Governors might have to
deal with the matter before September.

There will be greater clarity with respect to the calendar after
the Governors have discussed the Dalgaard group's new report on the expected
impact of the revision of the ECU on the markets. The Commission representative
pointed out that an opinion from the Governors on the procedure to be followed
and the calendar would be much appreciated.

Finally, it was noted that the Work Programme, on subjects related
to the strengthening of the EMS and monetary integration, would have to be
finalised after the completion of the Report of the Delors Committee and
the meeting of the European Council in June. Furthermore, it was mentioned
that, apart from the follow-up of the Delors Committee Report, the Committee
of Governors could assess the functioning of monitoring and co-ordination

of monetary policies following the implementation of the Basle/Nyborg agreement.

B. Discussion by the Committee

Mr. de Larosiére thought that, given the importance that the
markets were increasingly attaching to the definition and composition of
the ECU, an examination of this question only at the Governors' meeting on
12th September 1989 appeared too late. It would be better to take up the
question of a re-examination of the ECU basket earlier, for example in June
or July. It was a matter of great importance for the markets, for the function-
ing of the financial system in Europe and for the activities of the financial
centres. It would therefore be preferable to take the decisions fairly
quickly so as not to leave too much uncertainty in this respect.

Mr. Godeaux wondered whether the Governors needed further time
beyond the study which the '"Dalgaard Group" was to present in February. On
the basis of that study, i.e. Report No. 65, the Committee could discuss
the question of a re-examination of the ECU basket in depth.

The Chairman pointed out that, concerning the re-examination of
the weights of the currencies making up the ECU, which appeared as item 8
in the outline work programme, it was suggested in a footnote that it might

take place earlier, in May, June or July, depending on the procedure and

calendar adopted by all the parties concerned. Mr. de Larosiére's proposal
was therefore quite acceptable and apposite. With reference to Mr. Godeaux's
comment, the Chairman said that the Committee would indeed be discussing

the question of a re-examination of the ECU basket on the basis of Report
No. 65 of the "Dalgaard Group" in February; the Governors could then decide
whether it was necessary to come back to this question again at a later

meeting.

V. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee.

There was no other business.

VI. Date and place of the next meeting.
The next meeting would be held in Basle on Tuesday, 14th February
1989; it would begin at 10 a.m., or at 9.30 a.m. if the work of the "Delors

Committee"” made it necessary to bring it forward.
“6861 euUNF UL LT EDUNOD VUeEadoung
Gy}; Fe “se ~NDpysed uy ‘aBsawa Aew ydaypym S}UBWdO|SASP B2YY UO PUBSdap [11m SAOUABAOH JO 29S WWO)
3yy AQ UOLPeUPWEXKO 41,84 !$,,.aG8zyZ,WWO) S$iOl1aqg, a4}3 AQ paipnys Buyeq A, yYUasasd aie S24;d0} asayut (Pr)
“JOWFA BY JO SYOUIYAAOH JO Pyeog ay. PuUe BSI2}wwoy AyeYauow ayy
Buy XI Nsuod 39z53e VO;SSpwwo) ayy wWOuy [esodosd e uo Bupyzoe (tdunoy ayy Aq vaHe, Sti _NDZQA UY Jo UO,SEABI
eB uO YVO}S DEP *BLGl 4A8quadcsagqg ysl JO QL/OBIE ‘ON (3335) vos reINBey teIuNOD yo Z a1:5434e 03 GBuypuarody
"389S28Q NRF Fur JO YVOPJeEULWeXB-|as BY 4OY PaYdope JYepual;ed pue aunpadosd 84} YO puadap ([ [tm SEYY NG
pebuessue aq 3yuByW ‘AItne so auner ‘AeCw '83epP sap ,yueo uy “sjaquwaydasg Aq paya;idwor aq ysnw MOLAR SUL (€)
“SAOUIBAOH pue sazyYeUuIsy|y 39yy Aq pauywexa uaaq yak you sey
Yt JNQ SaPBpLOd AueyYyauow uo EE "ON YIOdaYyY YI4M PEIeINII}D SEM ORG 48GQ04I9Q YI~Z Pa YeP ayOU y (Zz)
“39HSeQG NDZ FY yO YVO}JeULWexa-|a4 BuiwodyAs0Jj ayy JO JFDedwy Alay, By sayy uNy Saupwexa oy
,dNOI9 PseeG( eg, Buz PaR_AUE S4OUUaADH $O BIFPWWOD BY4X *yB9 "ON FZ4AOdSY JO VO}SSNIASip ayy Buirmol yoy (t)

SOEVAUTAY(yY JO BSZPZPpwWWOD
Sazyeusazyt~y JO A287} wWwWo
SOPUIALY{[ Y JO BAP}wWwo)

Jaquwuaydas
Aew
ydjsew

Burzyaaw j~enuve JWI ayy -
Buy .sew NIAOIRZ [ewsoguy ayQ -
Gup2eew G2aRRZPWWOD) WLYayUT |ayy -
, 7T4uOyY VOL PeURd|aIG
*SA9PPOW JHYIO “ll

NDA BPeEAsd ayy

»9ON0O4yH pseeb\eg,, 3O YUSUdO|[SeAaP |yy YO MBLABI | eNuuy ‘g|

Jaquacsag
Syjadxa j3O dnody

(p)uopyzyeuBayuy Aueqauow
SOPCUIBY(Y JO BIYY,WWOD

“uwnyny Pue SwW3 8uz go Buzyuay WBuasyzs 6
NDZ Fu Vy SaypIuassng

SOPeEUIAYLY yO BAzP_WWOD $O SYUBypam |YY JO VOL JeUWexa-aYy -g

(€)Aequaydas

(e8.ep pa ,epdn + saded #jA90YS) AD}{Od Dywouoss soy SUO}}ZeEDE, Gwy

».ONOUH PuowAey,, Aew pue exsueupy JBEiQGQnd Uy SzPUuawWwdO|,aAag ‘7
uuew(ayx30g “ug BINJINGAYS Seu aBbueyoxa ayy ut
saBueyd 40 8A,yDadsSJad w4uay-yaBuUO] “9
J+aQuaaon SOFIIUNOD JAA UE SABLDELod Ayueyauow

«dGNOIH PuowAey,, pue Ainge ‘yosew JO YVOPPEUPLPIO-OD Pue sj}UuawdoO|aaag ‘gs
(Z)(@y0u | ed,B6o | opoy zap)

SuUOPPUBAI| UL
wGNOIUDH PuowAey,,

Auenuqeay PASp | fF4IBRSUN PUB pasy (tL4aIs ‘yp
(1L)384seq N3QR S4Y Jo UOLZeEULWex|a-By

»9ON0IH pseeb,eg,, Bupwodyzysoy BY JO YOedGwW] “EC

Auenugqag
~GNOIH Pyueeb,eg,,

SWS 842 YULYUEM SPUBWAO|aASapP
SAVBUIAY(y JO BAaYL},wWWOD

Buy yaew Ayyyuow yseg AseZauow Ppue D,wouodsa yo Bujysoxypuop +z

SOVeULAaYLY JO BB} WWO) Ausenuer 6861 403 awweuBosud y4i0M ‘1

repre ep Se

:Aq auop
89Q OF YIOM AYOYeIYBDIIG

B98} }WWOD) BYY AQ
UOLJPeULWRex|a sO} |aeQG

PaIapPp}sSuoOD aq Oy saydoy

| |
| |
| |
i
|
| |
| I
|
| |
| |
|
| |
| |
|
[
|
| |
| |
| |
| I
| SAIVEUIBYLY JO BARZP_WUWOD | Lp4dy
|
| |
|
}
|
| |
| [
| |
| {
| |
| {
{
| |
| |
{ \
| |
|
|
| |
enn

* — i ee le ee ee i ee ee
— ——

686 YOS SYONHSAOD JO 3SLLIWWOD BHL YOS AWWNVYDOUd YOM SNTIULNG

WEpueyauaas

Ay};UNWWOD DypWOUNDR URadouNnyA ayy jo
S825 saquaW ayy 4O SHUeGg | e43UAD
Ply JO SSOUSBAODH JO |azPzYpWWOY

YJCUP Pasyiaay

xouUuy 686i Asenuer uIG

Annex

Committee of Governors of the 10th January 1989
Central Banks of the Member States

of the European Economic Community Confidential

BRIEF REPORT ON
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES
WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE

DECEMBER 1988

This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of
the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce-
dure? and briefly describes their interventions during December 1988 and

the first few days of January 1989.

I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS

The main features of the foreign exchange markets in December 1988
were:
- a recovery of the US dollar, which regained its early November
level;
- a continued high degree of overall stability in the EMS, with on

balance only slight variations in positions in the EMS band;

a further marked strengthening of the Spanish peseta.

The US dollar gradually firmed against all major currencies during
the month. Throughout much of the month, the dollar benefited from statistics
which provided evidence that US economic growth was continuing. The dollar
was also supported by rising short-term US interest rates and year-end
corporate demand for dollars in increasingly thin holiday markets. The
dollar closed the month about 22 higher against the Japanese yen, the

Deutsche Mark and sterling.

1 The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland,
Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.
i
i)
{

In the EMS the French and Belgian francs came under some pressure
in the middle of the month as German interest rates rose; the respective
central banks countered this by increasing interest rates to restore the
differential vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark, and the situation subsequently
stabilised again. The Italian lira continued to be fairly firm, while the
Danish krone weakened slightly.

The Deutsche Mark depreciated by 1.9% against the US dollar
despite some rise in market rates. On 15th December the lombard rate was
increased by 0.5 percentage point to 5.5%. The Deutsche Mark was broadly
unchanged against other currencies overall, so that its weighted index
(1972 = 100) declined only to 169.9% from 170.4% at the end of November.

The French franc, which had been affected by the unwinding of
positions at the beginning of the period owing to the narrowing of the
interest rate differential vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark, recovered appre-
ciably thereafter. The raising of the key rates by the Banque de France on
14th December and the encouraging economic forecasts for 1989 were the main
factors behind this improvement.

Although the Belgian franc had performed well at the beginning of
the period, enabling the Bangue Nationale to acquire foreign exchange on
the markets, around mid-December onwards it was temporarily affected by
pressure, mainly on account of the narrowing of the interest rate differential
vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark. The Bangue Nationale thus intervened with the
sale of foreign exchange and given the general upward movement in interest
rates, it also decided to raise its official rates in two stages. The
discount and lombard rates were thus increased to 7.75% and 8% respectively.
In the last two weeks the Belgian franc staged a recovery, enabling the
central bank to resume its purchases of substantial amounts of foreign
currency and even to lower the Treasury bill rates for several maturities.

On the whole, the position of the Dutch guilder in the upper part
of the EMS band underwent little change. There was a slight weakening
vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark due to a further narrowing of the short-term
interest rate differential in the first part of the month. Coinciding with
similar moves elsewhere, the Nederlandsche Bank raised its discount and
lombard rates with effect from 16th December by 0.5 percentage point to 4.5
and 5.25% respectively.

The Danish krone weakened slightly and ended the month well below

the middle of the EMS band. Money market interest rates were relatively
stable, leading to a decline in interest rate differentials vis-a-vis other
EMS currencies.

The Irish pound remained relatively stable in the upper half of
the EMS band. Net inflows of foreign currency over the month resulted in
net purchases of foreign currency by the Central Bank of Ireland.

Following persistent capital inflows, the Italian lira continued
to appreciate; from the middle of the month onwards it fluctuated around
the lower margin of the narrow band. To contain the expansion of the
monetary base the Banca d'Italia did not counteract this upward trend and
made only limited interventions in EMS currencies in order to smooth the
movements of the lira.

Sterling was in strong demand at the beginning of December in the
wake of November's 1% rise in UK base rates, but, by mid-month, it had
surrendered its gains amid expectations of European interest rate rises.
In the quiet markets which prevailed over the Christmas period, sterling
lost ground to the dollar, but strengthened against most other currencies.
Sterling's trade-weighted index fell by 0.8% to 77.7 (1975 = 100) and 97.4
on the new basis (1985 = 100).

The Greek drachma depreciated by 1.9% against the US dollar but
remained unchanged vis-a-vis the ECU. In effective terms the drachma
depreciated by 0.42.

The Spanish peseta continued its appreciation during the period,
ending 2% higher with respect to the ECU and virtually unchanged with respect
to the dollar. The strength of the peseta was caused by both long-term and
short-term capital inflows, fostered by a further rise in interest rates
intended to moderate the expansion of domestic demand. On 13th December the
Banco de Espana raised its intervention rate for overnight funds by 1 per-
centage point to 12.4%; it also raised the three-month repurchase agreement
rate from 11.75% to 12% on 7th December and to 12.5% on 13th December.

In effective terms the depreciation of the Portuguese escudo
amounted to 0.2% in December and 3.5% for the whole of 1988, in line with
the foreign exchange policy defined by the authorities. Against the
US dollar the escudo weakened by 1.72.

After firming temporarily in October and November, the Swiss franc
weakened again in December. It depreciated by 3.3% against the US dollar
and by 1.5% vis-a-vis the major European currencies. On an export-weighted

basis the decline amounted to 1.7%. Euro-Swiss franc rates stabilised at a
higher level between 4.5Z and 5%. In mid-December the money supply target
for 1989 was fixed at 2%. At the same time the discount and lombard rates
were raised by 0.5 percentage point each to 3.5% and 5.5% respectively.

The Austrian schilling weakened by 1.9% vis-a-vis the US dollar,
with a monthly spread of 3.9%. Against the Deutsche Mark it fluctuated by
only 0.1%. On 16th December the lombard rate was increased by 0.5 percentage
point to 5.5%. The sharp decline in the foreign exchange position of the
Oesterreichische Nationalbank is attributable to the purchase of Miinze
Osterreich AG for Sch. 8 billion. In order to avoid a temporary surplus of
liquidity on the domestic money market, this amount is being invested in
foreign currency in the interim and will be used in the course of the year
to service the country's foreign debt.

The Norwegian krone showed a tendency to appreciate during the
course of the month. Norges Bank's overnight lending rate was reduced by a
further 0.4 percentage point to 12% with effect from 5th December, a move
which was widely anticipated in the market. The demand for kroner also
gave room for further intervention purchases, enabling over half of the
sudden reserve reduction in mid-November to be recovered.

The Swedish krona was stable on the strong side of the index
band. In the middle of the month some capital inflows occurred as a result
of non-residents' operations.

The Finnish markka fluctuated, in effective terms, within a nar-
row band. Towards the end of the month it firmed slightly in the thin
pre-year-end market as short-term money market rates rose marginally.

The Japanese yen depreciated by 2.22 against the US dollar to
close at Yen 124.90 per US dollar. This movement was in line with a slightly
less bearish sentiment towards the US dollar, reflecting the higher oil
prices, wider interest rate differentials between Japan and the United
States, and year-end dollar remittances by subsidiaries of US multinational
corporations. At the same time the yen also weakened slightly against the
ECU.

The Canadian dollar fluctuated over a wide range, ending the
month at US$ 0.8386, down 0.4% over the period. After touching a seven-
year high of US$ 0.8444 early in the period against the background of strong
positive sentiment in favour of the Canadian dollar following the federal

election on 21st November, the currency weakened by mid-month to a low of

US$ 0.8278 in response to commercial year-end demand for US dollars and

profit-taking on the speculative investment inflows which had underpinned
the Canadian dollar's recent strength. Subsequently, the Canadian dollar
firmed in seasonally thin trading, reflecting the completion of corporate
year-end requirements for foreign currency and renewed investment inflows

from abroad.

Il. INTERVENTIONS
A. Interventions in US dollars

Central bank interventions in December were sharply lower than in
the preceding month. Net purchases amounted to US$ 0.6 billion, compared
with US$ 7.9 billion in November. The largest interventions were those by
the Bank of Canada, which carried out both sales and purchases, giving net
sales of approximately US$ 0.2 billion. The Banque de France was also a

relatively major seller.

B. Interventions in Community currencies and in private ECUs

Interventions in EMS currencies by Community central banks, at
the equivalent of US$ 1.4 billion, were virtually the same as in November
(US$ 1.3 billion).

The interventions were almost exclusively in Deutsche Mark. On a
net basis the largest purchases were reported by the Banque Nationale de

Belgique, while the largest sales were made by the Banque de France.

IIT. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 6th JANUARY

In the first few days of January the dollar initially weakened,
but thereafter appreciated beyond its end-1988 level on further evidence of
continued strength in the US economy. The situation remained stable in the

EMS.
1A

EVOLUTION DE L'ECU, OU COURS MEDIAN OES MONNAIES PARTICIPANT AU
MECANISME DE CHANGE OU SME ET ODES MONNATES DES BANQUES CENTRALES DE
LA CEE NE PARTICIPANT PAS A CE MECANISME, SUR LA BASE DES COURS
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986 VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*

a’
Ww

28

24

20

12

30.9 7.10 14.10 21.10 28.10 4.11 11.11 18.11 25.11 2.12 9.12 16.12 23.12 30.12

1988

* Volr page suivante.

6.1.1989

oe

EVOLUTION DES MONNATES DES BANQUES CENTRALES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A
LA CONCERTATION, SUR LA BASE DES COURS RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986
VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*

30.9 7.10 14.10 21.10 28.10 4.11 11.11 18.17 25.11 2.12 9.12 16.12 23.12 30.12

1988

* ECU 0,93425; # 0,6773; OR 138,7601; PTA 131,8700; ESC 146,0995; FIM 4,7925; $Can
1,3805; FS 1,6215; Yen 159,7993; KAS 6,7750; KRN 7,3975; Sch 13,6520; cours médian
des monnaies participant au SME 0,92913. Le cours médian des monnaies participant
au SME représente la moyenne journali@re des cours des deux monnaies a marge de
fluctuation de 2,25% qui se sont 6éloignés le plus de leurs cours-pivots bilatéraux

actuels.

6.1.1989

1B

oe
MOUVEMENTS A L'INTERIEUR DE LA GRILLE DE PARITES DU SHE CALGULES SUR
LA BASE DES COURS DE L'ECU DANS LES DIFFERENTES MONNATES
PARTICIPANTES

of

30.9 7.10 14.10 21.10 28.10 4.11 117.11 18.11 25.11 2.12 9.12 16.12 23.12 30.12
1988

6.1.1989

wv
100

75

50

25

-25

-50

-75

- 100

EVOLUTION DE L'INDICATEUR DE DIVERGENCE*

100

75

50

25

-75

- 100

30.9 7.10 14,10 21.10 28.10 4.11 11.11 18.11 25.11 2.12 9.12 16.12 23.12 30.12

1988

* L'indicateur de divergence a pour but de mesurer, sur une base comparable pour
toutes les monnaies participant au mécanisme de change européen, la position d'une
monnaie vis-a-vis de son cours-pivot ECU. L'écart maximal de divergence est le
pourcentage maximal par lequel le cours de marché de 1'ECU dans chaque monnaie
peut s'apprécier ou se déprécier par rapport Aa son cours-pivot ECU; il est exprimé
par +/-100, le seuil de divergence étant +/-75. Les données qui ont servi de base
a l‘établissement de ce graphique sont les cours de l'ECU exprimés en termes de
diverses monnaies, cours qui sont toutefois corrigés des effets des fluctuations
de la lire italienne, de la livre sterling et de la drachme grecque au-dela de la
marge de 2,25% vis-a-vis des autres monnaies participant au SME.

6.1.1989
EVOLUTION DE LA LIVRE STERLING, DE LA DRACHME, DE LA PESETA ET DE
L'ESCUDO PAR PAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE RELEVES
LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*

of

-16
30.9 7.10 14.10 21.10 28.10 4.11 11.11 18.11 25.11 2.12 9.12 16.12 23.12 30.12

1988

~ # 0,724942; DR 148,526; PTA 141,151; ESC 156,382.

6.1.1989

4A

-16
EVOLUTION DES MONNAIES DES BANQUES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A LA
CONCERTATION PAR RAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE
RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*

9 7.10 14.10 21.10 28.10 4.11 171.11 18.11 265.11 2.12 9.12 16.12 23.12 30.12

1988

* $EU 1,07038; $Can 1,47766; FS 1,73562; Yen 171,046; KRS 7,25181; KRN 7,91812; Sch
14,6128; FIM 5,12978.

6.1.1989

4B

oa?

20

16

12

-12
