
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

And I’m not quite there, President Lacker, regarding separating totally the level of our portfolio from the composition of our portfolio.
I think the composition of the portfolio had a lot to do with the effects we did have on the market, and I’m not sure we could change that composition without June 22–23, 2010143 of 213 having some tightening effect.
It would depend on the type of changes we’re talking about.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Bullard.
MR.
BULLARD.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support alternative B with some modifications.
Just as a general comment, this statement doesn’t mention the quantitative easing program.
I don’t think it’s wise not to mention the program in some capacity
—I don’t have language to do this
—because we’re thinking that we might have to adjust the program one way or another in the future.
If we leave it out, then it looks as if the program isn’t a tool.
You wouldn’t leave the interest rate out of the statement, so why would you leave the quantitative easing program out?
In paragraph 2, we use the phrase “substantial resource slack.” As I’ve said before, I think this puts too much emphasis on this factor.
My reading of the literature is that the empirical evidence is very mixed on this question.
The relationship between inflation and slack is tenuous at best.
Elevating this to a key policymaking pillar, which is what we’re doing by continually putting it in the statement, is a misrepresentation of what we know.
Slack can certainly be a factor, but there are many factors in a large economy that affect inflation.
Overemphasis on this factor did not serve the Committee well in the 1970s or in the 1990s, and I think it may not help this time either.
The U.K.
is a current example of a country with substantial slack by conventional measures, but which, nevertheless, has inflation above desired levels.
So I’m just reiterating that I’d prefer not to put so much emphasis on this in our statements.
I have one broader comment.
As we’ve been saying, the European sovereign debt crisis is one of the most serious threats to global recovery since the fall of 2008.
I was somewhat June 22–23, 2010144 of 213 alarmed to see that the adjustment of the date of tightening in terms of the interest rate on excess reserves in Tealbook B moved to 2013.
<START>That sounds way too long to me and creates a substantial risk that we’ll follow Japan, and possibly Europe, into a very long, near-zero interest rate era.<END>
If we think that the outlook has actually weakened that much
—I’m not sure I do
—then we should think about and analyze actions we can take through our quantitative easing program.
So I agree with President Dudley and others on this dimension.
If we do have to take further action, I would prefer not to go the MBS route, which I think we’ve exhausted at this point.
We can buy additional Treasuries.
<START>I’m fairly convinced that that would increase inflation expectations and put upward pressure on inflation, if the concern is that inflation is below target, and it also would be stimulative for the real economy.<END>
I don’t think we should take that action today, but if we were to see an additional adverse shock in the future, then, we should have a method of addressing it other than indefinite delay of the date of IOER rate increases.
<START>And I for one question the effectiveness of further delays in the increase in the interest rate on excess reserves in stimulating real activity and in keeping inflation near target.<END>
In models, that kind of thing works well, and it has, obviously, been recommended from the New Keynesian literature, namely, that policymakers should promise to stay at zero for a longer time.
But I’d question whether markets understand it that way and whether it’s having any impact at all on real activity.
I am doubtful that, in the event of further adverse shocks, stretching out the time before rates are increased will have any effect.
Quantitative easing, on the other hand, at least according to our staff analysis so far, does have an impact, so we should use that in a state-contingent way, either on the upside or the downside, as shocks come into the economy.
June 22–23, 2010145 of 213 Let me just elaborate a bit further on this.
In the New Keynesian model of Mike Woodford and others, which is the leading theory in this area, it is very important to take action continually in response to shocks that hit the economy.
The worst policy in that analysis, if you believe it
—and there are a lot of assumptions
—is the “no response” policy, no reaction to shocks.
In the model, that’s the interest rate peg policy
—policymakers just leave the interest rate at some level, and, as shocks come into the economy, they don’t react;
it’s a passive policy.
Why is it the worst policy, according to the model?
Because it’s the one that allows multiple equilibria, which means that many possible sets of prices and expectations can clear markets.
So you get this “anything can happen” result in the model if you follow this passive policy and you don’t react to the shocks.
To me, staying at zero for such a long time sounds a lot like the passive policy, where you do not react to shocks at all.
And if you’re also going to put quantitative easing on hold, then you would really not be reacting as shocks come into the economy.
People in policy circles have talked about this, namely, that such a passive policy somehow has been generating the kinds of bubbles that we’ve observed in the 1990s, and especially in this decade.
<START>To avoid that outcome, the recommendation would be to maintain an active policy through the quantitative easing program and to react in a state-contingent way to the shocks that come into the economy.<END>
I have one final comment on a separate issue.
The Chairman pointed out that, in our forecasts, everyone expects inflation to be low and unemployment to be high for the foreseeable future.
I will just point out that those forecasts are done under an assumption of appropriate policy.
<START>I always feel constrained not to say that I think inflation is going to be very high in the future, because I’m supposed to be making a forecast under the appropriate policy, and I think under the appropriate policy we should be able to hit whatever our inflation target is in the June 22–23, 2010146 of 213 medium term.<END>
<START>I don’t want to turn in a forecast that’s going to betray a lack of confidence in the rest of the Committee to follow the appropriate policy that’s going to help us hit inflation.<END>
So I’m not sure you can read off the forecasts that that there aren’t a lot of worries around the table about what inflation is going to be in the future.
<START>But I think everyone is saying that if you follow their policy or you follow the appropriate policy, you’ll get the inflation outcome that they want in the medium term.<END>
That’s the last point.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It’s interesting that we’re ending about a year’s worth of economic growth.
The recovery, of course, has gone through various phases, as President Fisher and others have noted, and the data have been mixed throughout.
Accordingly there has always been a degree of uncertainty with us.
I’ve been at this table many times in the past where uncertainty has caused us to wait.
Waiting is always attractive
—certainly, I’m attracted to it, as well.
I recall discussions earlier in this last decade about concerns of deflation, uncertainties regarding world events, just as we’re discussing here.
There’s always a good reason, and I don’t dispute that.
I, too, worry about employment.
Jobless recoveries seem to be becoming the norm, and the adjustments seem harsher.
<START>But my bottom line is that our dual mandate is a long-run mandate, and we need to go oh so carefully now to become less accommodative, because otherwise we may face the risk of adverse long-term consequences.<END>
My view is that the situation we’re coming out of was, in part at least and perhaps significantly, related to a period in which we kept rates very low in this world of uncertainty.
So, what is it we have here?
We have an outlook.
There are tail risks;
I recognize that.
And we tend to focus on those tail risks
—they scare us to death, but that’s what we tend to do.
However, the economy is growing, and the outlook suggests further growth.
That’s what we’ve all said
<START>—not June 22–23, 2010147 of 213 robust economic growth, but further growth.<END>
Inflation is modest, but our actions have effects on resource flows as well, imbalances, and long-term stability, some of which President Bullard referred to.
Europe is a concern, and we need to keep our eye on it and be prepared to act, of course.
But it should not drive our decisions today.
Asia is actually stronger and is a positive factor that we ought to take into consideration.
So I think it’s very important that we take this “extended period” language out, that we open up the possibility of selling assets as the economy evolves.
Taking the language out doesn’t mean we increase the funds rate.
I know it may have an implied tightening effect, but I think, with the right explanation, that opening up our options is something we have to think about very carefully.
As I said at the last meeting, we ought to begin to talk about a strategy going forward.
Yes, that would take away this very significant accommodation.
I believe there are consequences to maintaining the accommodating, and that’s my major concern.
Thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Lockhart.
MR.
LOCKHART.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support the policy of alternative B and most of the language.
I do want to point out a slight concern
—it may not amount to much.
<START>In the first paragraph of alternative B, it reads that, “Economic activity has continued to strengthen,” and I wonder whether there will be some inconsistency in the interpretation of the minutes with that word “strengthen.” One slight change could be to say that “the economic recovery continues to proceed,” which avoids the risk that people will think there was an inconsistency between the statement and the minutes.<END>
I think it’s particularly important at this juncture that the statement and the minutes align well, because the market is, in all likelihood, June 22–23, 2010148 of 213 going to react to the minutes.
The results of the forecast, as well as the tone of the meeting, could evoke quite a response, and it’s important that we make sure there’s consistency.
I favor the approval of the coupon swaps and the inclusion of it in the directive as proposed.
And, finally, I’d propose that we delay the statement by half an hour and cite the World Cup as our excuse.
I think this will add to the prestige of the Fed [laughter] and will, on a global basis, add to the credibility of our institution and have very positive effects on the efficacy of monetary policy going forward.
Let the transcript read that I’m kidding.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you for that clarification.
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Despite the talk around the table, I think the modal forecast for most of us is that a sustained, modest recovery is continuing, although the forecasts have been tempered ever so slightly
—not substantially at this point.
There clearly are upside and downside risks to that forecast.
<START>In my own case, as I mentioned yesterday, at the last meeting I did see the risks tilted to the upside, because I felt that the recovery was proceeding and because historical correlations suggested that it ought to be stronger than we were seeing.<END>
<START>I now treat them as balanced, so I changed the balance of risks.<END>
But I don’t think that’s a cause for changing policy at this point.
I’m actually quite worried.
Several others have touched on this, and President Lockhart just alluded to this
—part of our job is thinking about the what-ifs.
What-ifs can almost paralyze you in making policy decisions.
I think we have to be very careful to resist allowing that paralysis to set in.
Given the nature of the discussion around the table, I’m also somewhat concerned that the minutes not show a terribly bleak picture.
Considering that we haven’t June 22–23, 2010149 of 213 changed our forecast that much, painting a bleak picture of the uncertainty and risks around Europe and the euro zone could actually be detrimental to our cause and create uncertainty and a lack of confidence in the economy as a whole.
So I think we have to be careful not to talk only about the downside risks and the problems that might happen, but rather to focus on what our forecasts in fact do say.
And, speaking of forecasts, I’d like to reinforce President Bullard’s point about appropriate monetary policy under the assumptions.
<START>Certainly, in my own forecast, while I have inflation contained, I probably have a very different forecast of the underlying interest rate and appropriate policy than many others might have around the table.<END>
So I think we need to be careful about that.
I also share President Lacker’s view about the composition of our balance sheet
—I think our MBS holdings present important political risks to us going forward.
I think the longer we maintain large holdings of those, the more we reinforce the expectation that that’s the appropriate role of monetary policy, and we’ll be subject to pressure on that going forward.
We bought those
—as has been emphasized several times, and President Kocherlakota has made this point
—at a time when markets were in fact dysfunctional.
<START>And while there might have been a good reason for doing it at that time, I think it’s less clear that that’s necessary in the current environment.<END>
Yesterday we discussed option 2 for redeeming Treasuries and moving to a shorter-term duration of our Treasury portfolio, even though we may be maintaining the size of our balance sheet.
I think that it’s important for us to continue that discussion and that it will be helpful for you to lay the groundwork in your July testimony for the beginning of that message.
So I would encourage us to continue to pursue that.
I think we have some real challenges ahead of us, but I just want to emphasize that, despite the risks, our forecast is still in place.
<START>And we need to June 22–23, 2010150 of 213 continue our planning about how we will unwind ourselves from still extraordinary policy accommodation.<END>
I think we have to be very careful not to fool ourselves into a false sense of precision about the magnitude of actions that we take.
<START>Our ability to predict the effect on aggregate demand, or unemployment rates, from a move of 10 or 20 basis points, in reaction to either an asset sale or a decision on our part, is remarkably imprecise and completely unknown.<END>
After all, the 10-year Treasury note has fallen almost 50 basis points in the last two months, with no action on our part.
Given that we have so little ability to predict these effects, I think we shouldn’t tie our hands, worrying excessively about those sorts of moves.
I think President Hoenig was correct that we need to keep our focus on the long-term consequences of our actions.
And while the short term is surely important, again, we must not sacrifice the long term for the short term.
That’s what central banks are for and what monetary policy ought to be focused on.
I can live with alternative B at this point.
I do have one observation about the language, and that’s in paragraph 2.
I share President Bullard’s concern about using slack as the primary variable that policymakers look at.
I’ve talked about that for at least two years now, so I won’t mention it any more.
But I would say I’m puzzled by the insertion of the first sentence in paragraph 2 about energy prices.
I don’t know why we want to bring that into this discussion.
I’d be perfectly happy just to leave the statement as it was last time.
<START>Our ability to pick and choose certain relative prices over others to throw into the statement, to try to explain what’s going on, seems to me not very productive.<END>
So I would just as soon get rid of that first sentence and leave it as it was before.
And that’s my only suggestion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Evans.
June 22–23, 2010151 of 213 MR. EVANS.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree with alternative B, and I am fine with the coupon swaps.
I’d like to agree with President Bullard
—I think that he has a good point on including the size of our balance sheet as a tool of monetary policy in paragraph 3.
It does seem that we’ve spent a lot of time talking about a second tool of policy aimed at term premiums, and language indicating that the Committee has injected a large amount of liquidity through LSAPs and will maintain our target rate for the federal funds rate would be accurate in describing what our tools are.
It may be difficult to do, though.
Given our collective outlook and policy objectives, I continue to believe that substantial monetary policy accommodation will be appropriate for a good while, so I agree with the “extended period” language.
I take this stance, however, mindful of the many policy risks that we face.
<START>In particular, although I put little weight on some issues at the moment, it does seem that it would be proper due diligence to consider some criticisms about earlier periods of highly accommodative policy and ask if we’re sufficiently insulated from adverse outcomes this time around.<END>
<START>Specifically, I’m thinking about John Taylor’s arguments that policy remained too accommodative during the 2003–2006 period, which contributed to financial markets’ failing to price risks adequately.<END>
Are these same risks relevant today?
What actions would best safeguard against them?
Although our forecasts are underrunning our objectives, as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman
—and as did many others
—it seems natural to me that many are uncomfortable with our now 18-month-old policy of a zero federal funds rate and a pretty large balance sheet.
<START>As President Hoenig mentioned, the recovery is on, economic growth is okay, though it’s not robust, and zero seems like a very low interest rate for us to be targeting.<END>
But there is a bit of déjà vu of the earlier period right now.
We again have large-scale joblessness, and maybe some further job June 22–23, 2010152 of 213 losses coming
—who knows?
—even though economic growth has picked up.
Indeed, one reply to Taylor’s 2003 criticisms is that policy at that time does not look as accommodative if one focuses on Taylor rules that use labor data, like the unemployment rate, instead of output gap data, which he has emphasized.
How about today?
<START>Well, in the Tealbook, the labor-market-based optimal control rules may have the funds rate negative until 2013, so the labor market is contributing to that.<END>
And it’s possible, as others have mentioned, that there are structural elements to the high unemployment rate now and the labor market difficulties.
But even abstracting from that, looking at the output-based Taylor rules, they point to continued very low, zero funds rates for an extended period, into 2012.
And, as I’ve mentioned at other times, there are many other indicators of resource slack.
<START>So the downtrend in the inflation numbers is not consistent, in my mind, with us having experienced a large drop in potential output.<END>
<START>Slack in labor and product markets currently is sufficient to outweigh the anchor of inflation expectations at the moment.<END>
My point simply is this:
The projected output and inflation paths corroborate the labor market justification for our policy stance, in my opinion.
<START>And it’s hard to see the same forces building that John Taylor spoke of in that earlier period, 2003–2006.<END>
So I think that accommodation is a robustly appropriate policy at the moment.
I certainly agree with your observations, Mr. Chairman, that our policy choices should be symmetric with regard to our dual mandate goals.
I’ve said before, as Governor Kohn mentioned, that I would prefer a policy with an even lower interest rate, if that were possible
—it’s not.
And I do worry about the argument concerning diminishing returns for some of our policy actions.
I think that if we considered more large-scale asset purchases, we ought to talk June 22–23, 2010153 of 213 about that issue.
For example, would we be stimulating certain sectors of the economy, which already are struggling, like housing?
How would we deal with that?
Finally, I think the forward-looking language falls into this category, too.
There’s only so much we could get out of extending the “extended period” language.
In theory, yes, but, in practice, I’m doubtful
—I agree with President Bullard’s comments in that regard.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support alternative B. I think the uncertainties are too great to adjust our policy in either direction at this meeting.
<START>The economy is recovering gradually, but the European debt crisis and the resulting lower appetite for risk in financial markets are risks to the recovery.<END>
The inflation data continue to show a broad disinflationary pattern, and compensation data have been weak, and have led to yet another round of lower inflation projections.
<START>My baseline outlook is still consistent with alternative B, but, in my view, the risks for both inflation and output are weighted to the downside.<END>
I do think that these downside risks warrant discussion of actions we could take in the event of an adverse shock.
<START>While I’m still satisfied with the state of our exit strategy discussion, I do think we should devote some time to talk about policy alternatives that we have if the downside risks materialize.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Given the current situation, I support alternative B and the coupon swap as requested by Brian and the Desk.
June 22–23, 2010154 of 213 In terms of the statement itself, I think paragraph 1 will sound to markets a little stronger than expectations
—not a lot, but a little.
There’s some language in it that makes me feel a little uncomfortable.
Describing the E&S spending as appearing to rise at a robust pace sounds a little ahead of where our discussion has been.
But I don’t want to micromanage the statement.
In terms of the other policy considerations, building on what you said, Mr. Chairman, about diminishing returns of the QE regime, I would say we are past the point of diminishing returns.
The judgments we made on the size of our asset purchases were made amid a ton of uncertainty.
I don’t think any of us knew with precision what that optimal point was.
Looking back, it appears to me as though we went past the point where we were getting net benefits.
That judgment, and the different judgments we have on that question, should inform our moves in either direction for policy going forward, whether there’s more that should be done through the balance sheet or whether there should be a period of what I describe as opportunistic divestment of some of our MBS holdings, perhaps akin to opportunistic disinflation from central bank meetings of the past.
In order to have that discussion, though, about trying to find what the equilibrium level of our balance sheet is, it strikes me that the most important discussion, both for us and for the public to understand, is that we have multiple tools, not one.
I continue to believe that, if we were to announce at this moment that we were shrinking our balance sheet, it would likely bring forward expectations of a policy shift, because the public thinks that the size of the balance sheet is directly linked to policy rates.
<START>I don’t think that’s a proper understanding, so my policy predilection would be to try to describe as clearly as we can that we have multiple policy tools, and, consistent with the minutes from last time and your discussion, Mr. Chairman, it is still the case, I think, for most around the table that the policy rate is the predominant tool.<END>
June 22–23, 2010155 of 213 But there are other tools that might move, and we could imagine circumstances where the size and composition of the balance sheet might move in ways that doesn’t or ought not bring the policy rate expectations forward or back.
So I’ll say just a word on each of the three policies
—size, composition, and policy rate
—from my own perspective.
In terms of size, as you said, Mr. Chairman, it’s hard to know what we’d buy if we wanted to expand the balance sheet, and what benefits we would get.
<START>In terms of composition, I think that if we were to make a decision to buy Treasuries under an LSAP program, the consequences for our credibility, given the current fiscal question, would be very significant, so I would be quite allergic to that, given what we know now.<END>
<START>Finally, on the policy rate, I hope and expect that the Tealbook is wrong, that is, I hope that policy moves with greater force and greater speed than anticipated in the Tealbook.<END>
<START>But, again, given my own sense of when it’s going to move, and given the market’s reaction and understanding of what “extended period” means, “extended period” is fine in the statement as written.<END>
Just a final point:
I’ll join many of my colleagues in saying that the work done by staff in preparation for this meeting was really helpful, really extraordinary.
But I would also say that the staff work is a shared burden for all of us and for all of our staffs.
And I think there is incredible talent around the System, and it is very well funded.
So, as we think about new projects, I think that our staff here will continue to be doing a ton of work to prepare for these meetings, but I don’t think the burden should rest totally with them.
And I’d encourage my colleagues to think about work that can be done to inform your own thinking and the broader thinking by your own teams.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Duke.
June 22–23, 2010156 of 213 MS. DUKE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I favor alternative B and the coupon swap.
<START>I’d still like to see us normalize our balance sheet, including the duration of the Treasury portfolio, but I recognize that this is not the time to do so, and I’m cautioned by the potential that our next move would be further accommodation.<END>
<START>I’m actually frightened about the idea of getting memos from 12 different Reserve Banks.<END>
[Laughter] But the staff’s work has been incredibly helpful.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Tarullo.
MR.
TARULLO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I favor the policy actions in alternative B, but not necessarily all of the language.
Alternative B, as drafted, does not seem to me to reflect either what I described as my modal projection or the tail risks that many of us have talked about.
With respect to the tail risks, I am not sure it would be particularly helpful to specify those in our statement, and they will be evident in the minutes when they’re released in a few weeks.
But, with respect to the projections of the economy, I think that there was a palpable change in the attitude of the Committee, and I agree with Kevin that alternative B, paragraph 1, is had to say rather more upbeat than either the Tealbook forecast or what most of us around the table.
Initially, I was going to say I just favor the language in alternative A, but I only see two differences between A and B, one of which is the insertion of “in recent months” to “bank lending has continued to contract,” and that doesn’t strike me as a salient difference.
So I would favor more particularly the substitution of the last sentence of paragraph 1 in alternative A for the last sentence of paragraph 1 of alternative B. I thought that the effort in the first red insertion in paragraph 3 of alternative A
—if I understand it correctly
—to try to specify a bit more our reaction function was and is an interesting and good effort.
<START>I don’t think the language quite June 22–23, 2010157 of 213 captures probably what all of us would agree to, but I think it would be worth doing more along those lines for the next couple of meetings.<END>
The only other thing I’d say, Mr. Chairman, is in support of my argument for the sentence change in the first paragraph.
<START>I recall the debate last year, which included, to some degree, people around this table, between those who said that the mixed data we were seeing at the time were eminently characteristic of the early stages of a pretty strong recovery, and that we would pretty soon see things converging around stronger data more or less across the board, and those who predicted that this was going to be a halting recovery in which there were going to be potholes, or headwinds, or some other metaphor, looking out a fair time into the future, and thus we are going to continue to see a pattern that was sort of two steps forward, one step back.<END>
I think that, nine months later, that debate has been, at least in the medium term, clearly decided in favor of the latter camp.
So I think we’ve got to come to grips with the fact that, even in the modal forecast, this is not a lot of strength, and this does not promise anything close to the achievement of at least one side of the dual mandate, and, I suspect, increasingly, both sides of the dual mandate.
I don’t know how many years it takes before the high levels of unemployment that we all project constitute the long run rather than the short run.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
<START>Vice Chairman.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I favor alternative B, and I’m fine with the coupon swap as proposed by the staff.
That said, it wouldn’t take much in terms of weaker economic data, lower inflation, and further financial market distress for me to prefer alternative A. I am concerned, in particular, that any significant weakening in the economic data from here could raise fears of a double dip, and that, in turn, might increase the risk of further risk aversion and a further tightening of financial conditions, which would actually June 22–23, 2010158 of 213 make the double dip more likely.
I think that, in those circumstances, alternative A would be appropriate.
I’m not quite there yet, but it wouldn’t take much to push me there.
<START>If economic conditions deteriorated and financial markets were to tighten, it would be important at that stage for the FOMC to show that our toolbox was not empty and that we were still willing and able to act to lean against such developments.<END>
<START>I think a failure to act at that particular point would be quite dangerous, because it would reinforce fears that there was limited scope for further economic policy support, and that would create even greater fears of a double dip.<END>
In terms of escalation, I think we’ve laid out what the options are:
We could stop redemptions of agency MBS, we could restart a purchase program of Treasuries and/or agency MBS, we could change the language in the statement to try to commit to lower short-term rates for a longer period of time, or we could cut the IOER rate.
I think the bar to reinvesting maturing agency MBS should be pretty low, because that’s really just maintaining the status quo.
Letting the agency MBS run off is essentially a de facto
—very modest but, still, de facto
—tightening of policy over time.
I don’t think it’s going to be very stressful on the economy, but I don’t think the bar to reinvesting the agency MBS should be very high.
I do agree with Governor Warsh and others that bar to expanding the balance sheet should be considerably higher for a whole variety of reasons.
In terms of changing the language, although it’s an option, I don’t have any really great ideas that I think would be particularly helpful.
“Extraordinarily low for an extended period” is already pretty strong, and the market doesn’t seem to be off base in their expectations relative to our own expectations.
I suppose we could commit to some sort of price level target, so that any undershooting on inflation over the next couple of years would be reversed down the road, but, as we’ve discussed in the past, I think that has real communication difficulties right now.
June 22–23, 2010159 of 213 In terms of the interest on excess reserves that Governor Kohn raised as a potential option, I think it certainly should be examined, and I’d like to see a little bit more work done on what the costs and benefits of that are;
that is, how much market dysfunction we’d create by cutting the IOER rate further versus what the benefits would be in terms of the signal that we would be sending to markets.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you, and thank you all for your comments.
Let me just give a few thoughts, and then we can discuss some of the language suggestions.
On the substance of the policy, as I said in my earlier remarks, most quantitative analyses would put us at the zero bound, I think, at this point, including Taylor rules, optimal control exercises, and some micro-founded analyses.
It is true, as President Bullard pointed out when I made this point at the last meeting, that, in addition to our interest rate policy, we have language, and we have some QE.
On the other hand, we also have some financial headwinds, which aren’t incorporated in the typical Taylor rule type of analysis.
So on the substance, I think there’s considerable agreement that we should remain at the zero bound at least for now.
What are the risks to that?
First, of course, is inflation.
<START>The inflation data look very moderate, and inflation expectations seem to be flat to down.<END>
I didn’t hear much concern around the table, at least for the near term, about inflation risk.
The risk that has gotten more attention
—and President Hoenig has been particularly strong in advocating it
<START>—is the potential risk to financial stability from low interest rates over a long period of time.<END>
I’d like to make a few comments about that.
First, I remain at least somewhat skeptical of what I understand is the conventional view, namely, that too low for too long was an important contributor to the financial crisis that we recently experienced.
I gave a speech about this in Atlanta at the beginning of the year, which was backed up by staff research.
That June 22–23, 2010160 of 213 research, for example, showed that cross-national comparisons of monetary policy bore no relationship to housing price increases.
<START>It also showed that Taylor rule calculations of the type that John has done are extremely fragile and that alternative Taylor rules don’t show any particular problem with monetary policy in the early part of this decade.<END>
In particular, I would add that I think it’s a mistake to appeal to Taylor rules to talk about asset price bubbles, because Taylor rules are not designed to talk about that issue at all.
There’s no reference to them in the Taylor rule, which is entirely about the traditional employment and inflation objectives.
<START>So I would just appeal to you to think more about the premise that, I understand, is widely accepted, but that, I think, at best is uncertain.<END>
Moreover, I also think that, regardless of the source of the overheated financial conditions, a stronger regulatory and supervisory response could have avoided much of the bad outcomes that we had.
In regard to President Hoenig’s concern, I think it’s important to respond to it because, even if we’re uncertain about whether low interest rates lead to imbalances, there certainly is the possibility that they do.
Any fair-minded person would have to admit that, and therefore, it’s important for us to take that into account.
Again, I want to reiterate, as a number of people have done, the praise for the staff’s work at looking at various measures of imbalances.
I thought it was very helpful.
I think we need to expand those types of evaluations, and, as Governor Warsh did, I invite research staffs around the System to try to add their own cites.
<START>But I’m not sure what else we can do besides do our every best to analyze and assess whether imbalances are developing.<END>
I note that if we had applied the tools we use today in the late 1990s or in the early 2000s, we would have detected imbalances in stock prices and in housing prices.
Moreover, I think it’s very important that we continue to strengthen our supervisory tools and regulatory tools.
That process is already under way, and I see that financial regulatory reform is near June 22–23, 2010161 of 213 completion.
<START>I hope very much that we will have an additional set of surveillance and response tools available to address these concerns without distorting monetary policy to address them alone.<END>
In summary, I commend President Hoenig for bringing that issue to our attention.
I understand the concern.
I think even with the uncertainty about it, it is important for us to monitor that issue.
We are, indeed, monitoring it, and I think we should continue to do that.
I would also add that whatever early indicators there were of excess in financial markets, the European developments over the intermeeting period have offset a good number of them and have reduced risk preferences and have indicated less interest, for example, in carry trades.
<START>Again, I think we have to balance all of these concerns, but I hope we all agree that we’re not neglecting this issue as we discuss it.<END>
I have just a final point on this issue.
<START>There’s an awful lot of talk about how our policy is extraordinary and the zero interest rate is unprecedented, and so on and so on.<END>
That is true in one sense.
<START>But I think most of us around the table would agree that real interest rates are more important than nominal interest rates, and real interest rates currently are about minus 0.9 percent, using the 12-month core inflation rate as the inflation measure.<END>
<START>That is 50 basis points tighter than it was eight months ago and less negative than it was during the 2003–2004 episode, while, of course, unemployment was about 3½ percentage points lower.<END>
So it’s true that nominal interest rates are very low, but I hope that we can understand that real interest rates should at least be given equal attention.
Again, I believe that the substance should be that, for now, we should stay where we are and have a pretty much status quo policy and policy statement.
June 22–23, 2010162 of 213 I listened yesterday with great interest to the discussions about the balance sheet.
I will be checking back with you, depending on developments, about what I should or could say in the hearings in about a month.
I think those are all valid points, and, personally, I found it very illuminating to hear the discussion yesterday, so I appreciate that.
In terms of the statement and the preferences, virtually everybody agreed with alternative B. There were a number of suggestions.
Let me try to talk about a few of them and see if there’s any interest in making changes.
Both President Bullard and President Evans pointed out correctly that we don’t have any explicit reference to quantitative easing in this statement.
I looked back, of course, in the last statement and we had no reference to it there, either, so there’s no change from our previous statement in that respect.
We’ve only referred to our balance sheet when we’ve made some kind of change, but I think your point is a good one, and, in going forward, I think we ought to try to look for a way to emphasize that we have, as Governor Warsh said, two different tools, not just one.
While I’m addressing President Bullard, let me refer to his discussion of the issue of slack and inflation, and I understand there are mixed views about that.
I would venture the opinion that the last few months have been fairly kind to the slack theory.
At least core measures seem to be responding to slack, although, admittedly, in a short period of time, you can’t make a definitive judgment.
One thing we have proposed in this statement is to add a sentence about other factors
—as you mentioned, energy and commodity prices
—and to state that underlying inflation has trended lower.
The latter, of course, is simply a statement of fact and moves in the direction of saying “here’s something that we observe,” and it doesn’t say that underlying inflation has trended lower because of slack or any particular factor.
June 22–23, 2010163 of 213 President Lockhart, Governor Tarullo and Governor Warsh all raised concerns about the first paragraph, and I understand those concerns.
I guess my reaction to Governor Tarullo’s suggestion is that I think the last sentence still qualitatively describes the modal discussion around the table.
<START>I’m happy to be corrected on that, but I’m a little reluctant to change what is a fairly strong signal about the broad outline of the outlook at this point.<END>
Perhaps an alternative would be to address a couple of the other descriptive sentences.
Let me suggest two possibilities and then see what the reaction is.
First, in the second line it says, “Economic activity has continued to strengthen,” and I’m not sure that that’s actually wrong, President Lockhart, because that’s a level statement.
Activity is a measure of the level of GDP, and of course, it has continued to grow, but we could say “the economic recovery is proceeding,” which I think might be a somewhat less strong statement.
Second, Governor Warsh referred to business spending on equipment and software “rising at a robust pace.” A very simple fix to that would be to go back to the statement from the last meeting, which just said, “Business spending on equipment and software has risen significantly,” which is a fact about recent events and which would not be a change.
Let me get a sense of everyone’s reactions.
What about returning to the language from the previous meeting on business spending on equipment and software?
I’m seeing nodding.
Are there any who are opposed to that change?
[No response.] All right.
Why don’t we do that?
The other more significant change would be to change, “Economic activity has continued to strengthen,” to say, “Economic recovery is proceeding.” Could I have responses, views?
MR.
TARULLO.
Is it clear that that actually softens our sense of the recovery?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Well, it takes out the word “strong” and just says “proceeding.” June 22–23, 2010164 of 213 MR. TARULLO.
Right.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
But that’s the judgment I’m asking for.
MR.
TARULLO.
It doesn’t feel to me that
—I could interpret each one either way, so I’m sort of indifferent.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
Does anyone take a view or any other suggestion?
MR.
LACKER.
Plodding along.
[Laughter] MR. FISHER.
Muddling through.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Staggering along.
MR.
TARULLO.
I’d be in favor of any of those.
[Laughter] MR. EVANS.
I assumed you were not liking the word “strengthened.” MR. TARULLO.
That was actually more Dennis than me.
MR.
EVANS.
Okay.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Lockhart, let me ask you what you
— MR. LOCKHART.
I basically proposed what you just said, and that is the recovery continues to proceed or is proceeding.
So I favor that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
How many people favor saying that the economic recovery is proceeding and that the labor market is improving gradually?
Charles, Charlie Evans, Lockhart, Rosengren.
Jeff, you—?
did I see about four.
President Yellen.
Any others?
Who is in favor of keeping it?
MR.
FISHER.
We can just say economic activity continues.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
We’re going to wrap this up quickly.
Let’s do this again.
Please raise your hand if you’re in favor of changing “economic activity has continued to strengthen” to “the economic recovery is proceeding”?
How many are in favor of June 22–23, 2010165 of 213 that change?
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
That’s a pretty high number.
How many are in favor of the status quo?
Two, three, four, five.
Well, it looks like the bears have it.
[Laughter] We’re saying “The economic recovery is proceeding,” and we’re also changing the business spending back to the April language.
Is that okay?
Helpful?
PARTICIPANTS.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Bullard?
MR.
BULLARD.
On this issue of mentioning quantitative easing somehow in the statement, you do have paragraph 4 in alternative A, which is slightly different from paragraph 4 in alternative B, and it makes a little more reference to the fact that we will evaluate the balance sheet going forward.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I think that raises other issues that we’ve discussed before about what we want to signal about our balance sheet, but your point is noted.
MR.
TARULLO.
It may be an asymmetric interpretation MR. BULLARD.
Why is that?
It just says evaluate the holdings of securities.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Well, because it suggests, as we have discussed before, that we are looking potentially to near-term sales or purchases.
MR.
KOCHERLAKOTA.
It’s coming out of alternative A, though.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Well, that’s true.
That’s because it was including purchases MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.
It’s including purchases.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
I think I’m a little worried about that.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
It’s creating an unnecessary ambiguity, I think.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes, I’m a little worried about that one for now.
All right.
Michelle, do you have everything you need?
June 22–23, 2010166 of 213 MS. SMITH.
Yes, got it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Any other thoughts?
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
I had asked a question, Mr. Chairman, about whether we were crossing the line if we added what we heard from many people about the uncertainty about tax and regulatory requirements.
I just want some definition here.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I think referring to political uncertainty would be crossing the line.
<START>Putting in general uncertainty might be acceptable, but I’m not quite sure I see where to do that.<END>
Do you have a suggestion?
MR.
FISHER.
No, not for that specific reference, but it is going to come through in the minutes, and that’s sufficient.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
If there are no further comments, we’ll take the roll, please.
MR.
LUECKE.
This roll will encompass alternative B as printed on page 4 of the handouts for Brian’s briefing on policy alternatives, with the exception that the first sentence will refer to “economic recovery is proceeding” instead of “economic activity has continued to strengthen.” Second, it will refer to “business spending on equipment and software has risen significantly” instead of “equipment and software appear to be rising at a robust pace.” It will also encompass the directive as printed on page 8 of the handout.
Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes President Bullard Yes Governor Duke Yes President Hoenig No Governor Kohn Yes President Pianalto Yes President Rosengren Yes Governor Tarullo Yes Governor Warsh Yes June 22–23, 2010167 of 213 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
A couple of quick other items.
Brian Madigan will be stepping down before the next meeting, effective July 23, as the FOMC Secretary and Economist.
We would like to propose Bill English to succeed him as the head of the Monetary Affairs Division to fill that position for the rest of this year until next January when we will have our annual election.
If we move Bill to that position, that would leave open an Associate Economist position.
Bill and Jim Clouse have been alternating in that Associate Economist position.
So it would be natural to make Jim Clouse the Associate Economist for the Committee, and I’d like to propose that.
Any comments, questions?
MR.
FISHER.
May I just add?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
MR.
FISHER.
On behalf of, at least, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and I think all the Reserve Banks, I’d like to offer an appreciation for the way Brian has conducted himself.
He has been very respectful of the input of the Banks, and the courtesy
—punctilious courtesy would be the best description
—has been truly remarkable.
I hope it’s noted that his work is deeply appreciated, obviously, by the Board, but also by the Reserve Banks and their staffs.
PARTICIPANTS.
Here, here.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
MR.
MADIGAN.
Thank you very much.
[Extended applause] MR. MADIGAN.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you, Brian, for very good work, well done.
I need a motion on this.
MR.
KOHN.
So moved.
June 22–23, 2010168 of 213 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Kohn.
PARTICIPANT.
Second.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Without objection?
Seeing none, the last piece of business is to note that the next meeting is Tuesday, August 10.
I am about to adjourn the meeting.
The lunch for Governor Kohn will start at 1:00 p.m.
in the dining room upstairs.
We will now adjourn the meeting.
For those of you are interested, Brian Gross is prepared to give us a little bit of legislative update.
President Lacker?
MR.
LACKER.
Another kind of update.
This being the first instance that I can recall of a noteworthy athletic event occurring during an FOMC meeting, I thought I’d let you know that the U.S.
won 1 to 0.
[Applause] MR. KOHN.
Peeking at your BlackBerry.
MR.
LACKER.
I won’t say how I found out.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
The meeting is adjourned.
END OF MEETING June 22–23, 2010169 of 213
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 50
