
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

The goal is to drive down longer-term interest rates in hopes of stimulating loan demand, offsetting the propensity I reported on earlier for economic actors to hoard rather than invest.
Another desired benefit, as you outlined it yesterday, Mr. Chairman, to devalue the dollar to stimulate demand for our exports
<START>is—and I don’t think we should ever say that publicly And to one of you that I discussed this matter with, and whom I hold in the highest regard, it implies that we would also help ward off protectionism.<END>
The ultimate objective, of course, is to advance final demand and general employment for American workers, and to promote output growth.
November 2–3, 2010150 of 238 We are indeed in a liquidity trap or a bog, as Governor Tarullo says.
We already have low interest rates, and spreads against risk-free instruments are historically narrow.
Variations in interest rate levels are clearly not driving loan demand.
Loans are desirable and businesses borrow when they see an opportunity for a return on investment.
Even at the low rates that already prevail, businesses lack confidence in the prospect of earning a superior ROI by investing so as to expand their domestic workforce, in comparison to what they might earn from alternative investments abroad or by buying in their stock or cleaning up their balance sheets.
Consumers borrow when they believe it makes sense to shift consumption forward.
But after the sobering experience of the last three years, they are inhibited from doing so by a lack of confidence that their income streams in the future will be sufficient to cover their payment obligations.
On the supply side, we know that businesses are floating on a sea of liquidity.
Banks already hold over $1 trillion in excess reserves with us.
Their holdings of government securities as a percentage of their total assets are growing, as pointed out by Governor Duke in her comments yesterday.
Loans, as a percentage of assets, are declining.
<START>If we had a level of bank reserves or liquidity in the marketplace that was binding or inhibiting loan growth, I could understand the impulse to relieve that stricture.<END>
<START>Incidentally, I hope we can succeed, as you indicated, in getting away from the expression “QE,” but I doubt it.<END>
I have no doubt that asset purchases will increase the level of bank reserves, they will lower rates marginally in the short term, and they will add more liquidity to the markets, meanwhile weakening the dollar.
<START>The question for me is whether this works to the benefit of job creation for American workers and helping those most in need.<END>
You spoke in Jackson Hole, Mr. Chairman, of the need to weigh the costs and benefits of further accommodation.
Yesterday you November 2–3, 2010151 of 238 expanded upon that, and you acknowledged some of the costs.
But, like President Lacker and President Plosser and his referencing President Hoenig just now, I’m skeptical about many of the presumed benefits of further QE.
However, I’m certain of some of the costs.
<START>One cost will be the risk of placing our quasi-independence in jeopardy.<END>
We know that once a central bank is perceived as targeting government debt yields at a time of persistent budget deficits, the concern about debt monetization quickly raises its ugly head.
I expect the propensity to draw that conclusion has been enhanced by this congressional election.
Indeed, I believe that if the statement we discussed with Brian is unedited, we would be waving a red flag in the face of those who are our most volatile critics.
I realize that there are two other countries that are engaging in quantitative easing.
As you know, I just don’t buy the analogy between the U.S.
and Japan.
Let me give you a statistic, not for humor but to put this is in perspective.
More adult diapers are sold in Japan than children’s diapers.
It’s an aging society that is in no way comparable with the United States.
So the QE that I look at is that of the Bank of England.
But Governor King is offsetting the QE with an announced fiscal policy tightening that out-Thatchers Thatcher.
That is not the case here
—here, we suffer, just to stay with my diaper analogy, from fiscal incontinence.
If this were to change, then I would make a case for accommodation, but that is not yet happening.
And by providing monetary accommodation, I would suggest we are reducing the odds of fiscal discipline being brought to bear.
<START>I also see a risk of quantitative easing being accepted as the new normal.<END>
<START>Everything we know from monetary history tells us that, in times of crisis, we should open the flood gates.<END>
That is Bagehot 101.
We did that.
It worked to pull us from the maw of financial panic and economic ruin.
But this is neither a time of panic nor is it a time of emergency.
If we were to come to be November 2–3, 2010152 of 238 perceived as applying QE as part of our normal policy toolkit, I’m willing to bet that the markets will expect more, as was referred to earlier.
And, by the way, Nouriel Roubini is not alone in predicting QE3 and QE4.
Quantitative easing is like kudzu for market operators
—you’re familiar with this analogy because you’re a southerner, Mr. Chairman
—it grows and it grows and it may be impossible to trim off once it takes root in the minds of market operators.
<START>I might understand the case for accommodation if serious deflation were a clear and present danger.<END>
It is not, as I pointed out yesterday by citing the trimmed mean and by giving my anecdotal reports.
<START>I should add that, thanks to your leadership, Mr. Chairman, and the support of this Committee in engineering the liquidity measures implemented during the panic of 2008-2009, and by avoiding the policy errors of the 1930s, serious deflation has not happened<END>
—neither M2 growth nor inflation has fallen off the cliff.
And while nominal growth is less than desired
—I have actually trimmed back my estimates for the next several years
—and is very painful, nominal income is growing, however, incrementally.
It’s not shrinking.
<START>I’m skeptical about the purported benefits of a weaker dollar in exchange markets.<END>
Much of what we export is in the form of high-yield goods and services and in commodities like soybeans, for example, which we produce with enormous efficiency.
As Nathan pointed out, the recent statistics indicate that much, though certainly not all, of what we import is used to clothe and support lower-income earners, the very people who are suffering from high unemployment and lack of job creation, whom we endeavor to help as part of our dual mandate.
<START>The Walmarts, the Dollar General Stores, the Costcos, the Michaels, and other stores where the most affected people buy necessities are faced with a further squeeze on their margins, and they will likely react to higher import prices by driving productivity even harder, which means selling more while employing even fewer workers.<END>
As to warding off protectionism, from November 2–3, 2010153 of 238 what I’ve learned about that dynamic by serving as the Deputy U.S.
Trade Representative, much depends on the skills of the Chief Executive and congressional leadership.
And when push comes to shove, Presidents and good congressional leaders tend to steer the Congress away from its baser instincts.
Dollar depreciation, however, if viewed as a deliberate intention of U.S.
government policy, will work against us in terms of the rules-based system we have at the WTO and other rules that we have to limit the potential damage of protectionism.
<START>As to the proposition that higher prices of financial assets will liberate those most in need, I wonder if this is, indeed, true.<END>
We’re already seeing the beginnings of speculative activity in stocks and bonds and commodity markets and buyouts, and the rich are getting richer.
Woody Allen said once that being rich beats being poor.
Well, that’s true.
<START>It’s not funny, however, and I find no delight in it, and I see considerable risk in conducting policy with the consequence of transferring income from the poor, those most dependent on fixed income and the saver, to the rich.<END>
Senior citizens and others who saved and played by the rules are earning nothing on their savings, while big debtors and too-big-to-fail oligopoly banks benefit from their subsidy.
<START>Now, outside of monarchies, I know of no democratic system, and certainly no President on the right or the left, who would tolerate that kind of policy, let alone advocate it.<END>
And I expect a reaction against it that might lead to political retribution against us.
Then, there’s the issue of exit policy.
The more we engage in quantitative easing that moves us further out the yield curve and the more we load our balance sheet with price-sensitive assets, the greater the likelihood of our realizing a loss on our holdings.
So I ask you to consider the prospect of appearing before a House Banking Committee in, say, 2013, to report that the central bank of the United States has generated a loss
—this is a tail risk, but I think we need to consider it.
We believe the loss is not likely to happen.
We believe, according to Brian’s November 2–3, 2010154 of 238 excellent briefing
<START>—and, by the way, we appreciate what you do even though we beat up on you so often<END>
—that we can cover losses through the stream of income.
But there should be some more sensitivity analysis done on this front and not just a single point analysis of a 100 basis point reversal.
<START>The Committee might consider that we could be prescribing the wrong medicine for the ailment that our economy is suffering.<END>
Liquidity and abundant money are not the binding constraints on economic activity.
<START>The binding constraints are uncertainty about income and future aggregate demand, the disincentives fiscal and regulatory policies impose on decisionmakers, and the reluctance, given those disincentives, of employers to create jobs for our American people.<END>
The remedy for what ails the economy is in the hands of the regulatory and the fiscal authorities, not the Federal Reserve, and throwing another $600 billion to $1 trillion at the economy to see if it will generate a spark in the engine of the economy is, in my mind, a questionable tactic.
We are uncertain that it will lead to behavior that creates jobs or spurs final demand.
We can be certain that it will lead to a declining dollar that will encourage further speculation, that it will promote commodity hoarding, that it will accelerate the transfer of wealth from the deliberate saver and the unfortunate to the more well-off, and that it will place at risk the independence of this great institution.
Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I respectfully recommend that we not engage in any further quantitative easing, regardless of market expectations that we have created through our public statements.
Now, I expect the Committee will decide that the benefits of further accommodation outweigh the costs that I have outlined.
And, like the Texas Rangers, I will be gracious in defeat.
However, I do ask that we leave some room for adjustment in this endeavor in the case of an adverse reaction.
I have some editorial suggestions.
If you decide to adopt alternative B
—and I November 2–3, 2010155 of 238 want to record that I am firmly against it
—I’d first reiterate my suggestion regarding Brian’s statement;
specifically, to keep the markets from front-running us, I’d suggest using the phrase “up to” before the term “$600 billion” or “$75 billion,” or whatever the number is in A or B. I would also suggest that, in paragraph 3 of B, we change the words as follows.
Keep “To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery,” because, after all, that’s what we are trying to do
—we’re trying to increase employment and decrease unemployment.
<START>But then strike “and to return inflation, over time, to levels consistent with its mandate,” and say instead “while maintaining the firm commitment to keep inflation within levels consistent with its mandate.” I would do the same in the first sentence in paragraph 5, after it says “to support the economic recovery.” I would say, “…and to maintain inflation within levels consistent….” The reason for that is that I’m a firm believer in the dual mandate, but I know that it’s not just people of Tea Party inclination, but very serious critics, like Paul Volcker and others, who worry that we might overemphasize one mandate at the expense of the other.<END>
I’m a believer in the dual mandate, but I think we have to be mindful of the fact that there is a fear in the marketplace that there might be inflationary consequences of our actions.
<START>Emphasizing twice that we will maintain inflation “within levels consistent with our mandate” is the way to word it.<END>
Returning to Brian’s statement, in the first paragraph I would recommend “up to” an additional $600 billion, and “up to” $850 to $900 billion, and “up to” $110 billion per month.
In terms of your 35 percent rule, I’d say that the Desk may be allowed, on occasion, to move above 35 percent.
The reason for that is to keep the market slightly on its toes and to prevent front-running, and to give us a little leeway.
I also would like the “up to” phrase in there, because otherwise we’re binding next year’s Committee.
<START>That may be something some desire to do, but I don’t think it is the proper thing to do.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
November 2–3, 2010156 of 238 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
May I just make sure I understand your suggestion on inflation?
You said “To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery while maintaining inflation within levels consistent with its mandate.” MR. FISHER.
<START>“While maintaining its firm commitment to keep inflation within levels consistent…” I think that would be reassuring to the marketplace and also reassuring to our critics, who, I think, are going to turn up the volume.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today I know the Committee will adopt some version of alternative B as it goes through this process.
The markets are, as I said yesterday, 100 percent certain, and so am I. And Bill English has appropriately outlined the market’s reaction should we fail to act on alternative B, and that’s unfortunate and unpersuasive to me.
I acknowledge that we all want what is best.
<START>Certainly I do, and so I hope the Committee is correct and that I’m wrong.<END>
I strongly disagree with the course being charted here today.
The Committee takes this action expecting it will incent portfolio adjustments, thus changing relative prices and somehow spurring aggregate demand.
This will stimulate gross domestic product and reduce unemployment, as we pursue maximum employment;
<START>support higher but stable inflation;<END>
support lower but stable long-run interest rates;
and support stable long-run growth
—all desirable outcomes.
I, in contrast, see other outcomes, and they’re not unprecedented.
We have experienced them here recently.
They’re long-run consequences.
We may see some short-run improvement, but not long run.
There will be, I’m sure, in the end, a lot of givebacks.
Experience tells us that.
November 2–3, 2010157 of 238 This course sows the seeds of instability, in my opinion.
We’ll get more portfolio adjustments.
We’ll get, I think, portfolio distortions.
We may get some stimulus, but we’ll also get asset price inflation.
<START>And we’ll get higher longer-term inflation expectations in time as we continue on this course.<END>
<START>We’ll have more fragile, less stable GDP growth, and more fragile, less stable employment in the future, even though we may get some temporary reductions in unemployment.<END>
The economy is undergoing major and unavoidable rebalancings from past actions.
That includes the deleveraging of consumers and financial institutions encouraged by a period of very low interest rates.
Even though we are going through these adjustments, the economy is expanding.
For reasons I have given in prior meetings this year, I believe our funds rate target should be low but not zero, to encourage a better resource allocation than zero will get us.
Still, I clearly do not agree that we should undertake another LSAP.
<START>In the most general terms, the purported benefits are small and the risks are large, and I’ll outline three that are of particular concern to me.<END>
And I’ll state that my overall concern focuses on the longer-run effects of well-intentioned short-term actions, the accumulation of small effects that will eventually lead to problems.
<START>First, without clear objectives, we’re likely to keep the funds rate too low and our balance sheet too large, leading to further misallocations of resources and more imbalances down the road.<END>
Notice that I have said nothing yet about inflation.
Under an LSAP program, would we continue asset purchases until the unemployment rate is 9 percent, or maybe 8 percent, or maybe less?
Would we continue until near-term inflation rates climb to 2 percent or 3 percent, so we get an average rate that we would like?
Would we aim to reduce the 10-year Treasury rate to 2¼ percent, or maybe 2 percent, or less?
We will chase an open-ended commitment, I think, over time that introduces additional uncertainty and volatility into an already chronically November 2–3, 2010158 of 238 uncertain business environment.
Also, I agree that the tools are available, as has been pointed out here, to reduce excess reserves when the time is appropriate.
I do not believe that we will act at the right time or at the right speed
—that’s our practice
—because the Federal Reserve doesn’t have a good track record of withdrawing policy accommodation in a timely manner, no matter how much we say we will.
Second, we risk undermining the Federal Reserve’s independence, in my opinion.
When we are a ready buyer of government debt, we become a convenient source of cash for fiscal programs.
<START>During a crisis, that may be justified, but as a policy instrument, during normal or recovering times, it is a very dangerous precedent.<END>
Moreover, by purchasing $600 billion of Treasury securities, with the projected 2011 budget deficit of $1 trillion, we appear
—and I use that word advisedly
—to be monetizing more than half the deficit.
<START>Third, I think adopting another LSAP program risks over time letting inflation expectations become unanchored, no matter our admonitions to the contrary, thereby undermining our credibility.<END>
One of the objectives is to raise inflation in the near term while maintaining longer-run inflation expectations at about 2 percent.
That’s a policy that amounts to fine-tuning inflation expectations
—a variable we cannot precisely or accurately measure
—and it could easily lead to greater uncertainty and volatility and untimely higher inflation expectations.
<START>Moreover, with the balance sheet approaching $3 trillion, we risk undermining the public’s confidence in our commitment to long-run price stability, as well as contributing to inflationary expectations becoming unanchored and encouraging speculative investments<END>
—that’s almost certain.
<START>I believe that, by monetizing the deficit and by having long-run inflation expectations rising more than planned, we risk undermining our credibility as a central bank.<END>
In time, we November 2–3, 2010159 of 238 could see longer-term Treasury rates rise rather than fall, thereby negating one of the purported benefits of the policy.
<START>While I agree that unemployment is too high, I do not agree that inflation is too low or that there is a serious risk of deflation.<END>
Moreover, since the economy is recovering, it is most likely that the maintenance of the exceptionally accommodative policy rate that we have had so far will lead, over time, to moving our economy forward.
<START>If we ease further, or if we leave the accommodation there too long, we will overshoot, and that’s not consistent with our long-run mandates.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
It’s 11:00.
I understand that coffee is ready.
Why don’t we take 20 minutes for refreshments?
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Let’s recommence.
President Lockhart.
MR.
LOCKHART.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I don’t know if it’s great to be speaking after the break when everybody’s on a sugar high from the doughnuts.<END>
<START>[Laughter] I support the policy action in alternative B. I also support the implementation approach detailed in paragraph 3 of alternative B. I think it’s appropriate at this time to respond to evidence suggesting that the risks of further disinflation remain elevated.<END>
<START>I think risk management is the justification for the action, an insurance policy that has the intent of taking deflation risk off the table.<END>
As I said in the economy round, my sense is that the headwinds restraining the economy and the structural adjustments required may make further monetary stimulus through an LSAP program less effective than we would like.
I think it’s important, therefore, to be measured in our expectations about how much further stimulus can accomplish in the current environment.
There’s simply a lot of uncertainty associated with this policy action.
November 2–3, 2010160 of 238 I prefer an approach that preserves flexibility and stresses the conditionality of the policy and does not lock us into specific triggers for future action at this time.
I think paragraph 5 serves to make it clear that the pace and size of the program will be continuously evaluated as the economic outlook evolves.
That said, I agree with the suggestion that discussion of the decision framework associated with conditioning would be useful.
<START>I also want to add that, even though it’s not a consideration at this meeting, I remain sympathetic to the idea of using this moment to be more explicit regarding an inflation objective.<END>
<START>I am not entirely comfortable with the language in paragraph 2 of alternative B. It seems likely to me that changing the language to call out the unemployment rate specifically will inevitably invite the conclusion that we have a specific rate in mind and that we are introducing an unemployment target as a guide for future monetary actions.<END>
I’m sensitive to the fact that we are pursuing a dual mandate, of course, but, in my opinion, the language we have been using does appropriately honor the mandate.
Specifically, I think the statement that “Measures of underlying inflation are currently at levels somewhat below those the Committee judges most consistent, over the longer run, with its mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability,” makes it clear that we have a focus on labor markets.
<START>More importantly, it does so without risking overinterpretation of how much we can do about altering the path of the unemployment rate in the near or even medium term.<END>
Most of our forecasts suggest that the unemployment rate will remain above what anyone would call desirable levels, even after the pace of the economic recovery has improved.
I think the current version of paragraph 2 in alternative B may well create issues in exiting from that language.
The September language, it seems to me, still serves us well.
But if the Committee feels the need to put somewhat more emphasis on employment, I would suggest something closer to the language in the initial version November 2–3, 2010161 of 238 of alternative B that was circulated last week.
<START>A streamlined version of that would say something like, “The pace of economic recovery would likely be too slow to make acceptable progress toward maximum employment, and underlying inflation likely would remain undesirably low for some time, posing risks to the economic recovery.” Thank you, Mr. Chairman.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Evans.
MR.
EVANS.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
On the whole, I favor greater monetary policy accommodation to reduce our dual mandate losses.
The inflation outlook greatly underruns my assessment of our mandate-consistent objective, and resource slack is much too large.
We need to provide monetary conditions that support a clear downward trajectory for unemployment sooner than what is in the current outlook.
I favor additional quantitative easing along the lines described in alternative B. I might ultimately prefer a larger figure than the $600 billion in alternative B, but the stated intention to adjust the program as needed provides sufficient scope for adequate additional actions.
I would not really favor any language like “up to”
—if anything, I might favor “at least” $600 billion.
Having said this, I have a number of concerns about our strategy going forward.
My bottom line is that we can do better by providing greater clarity about our intentions.
There is reason to be skeptical that the magnitude of $600 billion in Treasury purchases will have a large effect on long rates, and others have spoken on that.
Although, Mr. Chairman, you made an excellent case last night, my own view is that LSAPs would be a more effective policy tool if they were combined with clearer communication regarding future monetary policy.
Real interest rates will decline further if the public clearly understands that the LSAPs represent part of a concerted plan to get inflation at least up to our objective.
Communicating our policy goals November 2–3, 2010162 of 238 would also clarify the conditionality of our “extended period” of low interest rates.
<START>This communication task would be much easier if we had an explicit inflation objective.<END>
Knowing our target, the public and markets could make credible inferences on their own about how long we will need to keep interest rates low.
We then would not need to use complex language such as that in alternative A. I continue to see big downsides to the status quo approach to describing our objectives.
I worry that our qualitative descriptions only paper over significant differences in objectives.
In the not too distant future, this qualitative approach will lead to much misunderstanding on the part of the public.
Those of us who were around for the communication subcommittees over the last 10 years remember how difficult it was to construct a qualitative statement that survived the stress tests we imposed on them.
Let me use the current statement as an example of such problems.
Consider the phrase “the unemployment rate is elevated.” First off, frankly, this seems a touch clueless to me at 9.6 percent, but I’m not going to talk about it anymore.
Imagine how this language is likely to evolve over time.
<START>If unemployment goes to double digits, which modifier of “elevated” becomes appropriate?<END>
“Really” elevated?
Next, what about when unemployment falls to 7.8 percent?
Will it still be “elevated?” I think so.
This is a tougher call.
If it’s simply high, does that mean it’s less important?
How will changes in modifiers be interpreted?
It’s going to be an issue.
<START>I think a reasonable statement would be one that expresses dissatisfaction with the lack of substantial evidence of a downward trajectory for unemployment over the next 12 months;<END>
I haven’t studied it, but that sounds more like the earlier language, as President Lockhart just mentioned.
<START>November 2–3, 2010163 of 238 I also am nervous about the statement of flexible review in paragraph 5 of alternative B, in which the Committee will regularly review the pace and size of its purchases and “will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.” I agree with the intent, but I simply don’t know how the public can draw meaningful inferences about our reaction function from this statement without more clarity on our inflation and unemployment objectives.<END>
And our differences of opinion have already been raised numerous times this morning.
<START>Finally, if you give any consideration to the view that today’s situation is both extraordinary and unacceptable, I don’t see how the “go slow” approach of Bill Brainard could be viewed as optimal or even best<END>
—I’m referring to some of the thoughts that you expressed last night, Mr. Chairman.
Our misses are large.
As I mentioned earlier, I think that bad policy would also lead to large misses.
<START>There’s great uncertainty about the effectiveness of our policy tools and whether they will enable us to begin the process of adjustment back to a better equilibrium.<END>
Some people have used the term “geeky”
—I prefer to call this “super rocket science.” [Laughter] The optimal control dynamics are screaming for robust approaches, that is, large, decisive actions in the face of potentially impotent tools.
But I understand that the truly large actions are not on the table today.
The reason I earlier poked at the language in alternative A that discussed inflation rising to our mandate levels is my concern about take-back risk, or smaller versions of 1937 risk.
For our policies to be effective, the public is going to have to expect that we’re going to be easing for some time;
that inflation is going to be returning to where it ought to be;
and that maybe we might even overshoot a little bit.
We can’t fine-tune that type of thing.
I think it will be a big problem for us to get the economy moving towards escape velocity if the November 2–3, 2010164 of 238 public worries greatly that a risk-averse Fed will not follow through with adequate actions to meet the dual mandate.
<START>In closing, I think your arguments, Mr. Chairman, for $600 billion in LSAPs are very strong.<END>
It does have a little bit of a threading-the-needle feel to me, and I would much prefer to be more aggressive.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
First Vice President Moore.
MR.
MOORE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I favor alternative B. I see two compelling reasons for resuming purchases of long-term securities at this point.
<START>First, we are currently falling well short on both of our mandates, and just as importantly, we’ve made no progress for more than one-half year now.<END>
<START>Moreover, even if we achieve the consensus forecast for economic growth in the upcoming periods, progress towards achieving our mandates will be painfully slow.<END>
As shown in the Tealbook simulations, additional monetary stimulus in the form of asset purchases will help us reach our goals sooner.
Second, I see a strong argument for taking out insurance against downside risks.
For example, at our current levels of unemployment and inflation, further negative shocks to the economy would be very costly.
Even in the absence of such shocks, there is a small but dangerous possibility that the slow trend of disinflation will continue, and we will slip closer to a Japanese-style period of stagnation.
After all, deflation in Japan developed only after many years of grinding disinflation.
<START>I do recognize that further asset purchases carry some risks, but I believe that the benefits of this action, both in terms of meeting our mandate and of managing risks, outweigh those concerns.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Kocherlakota.
MR.
KOCHERLAKOTA.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I remain concerned about doing more quantitative easing or doing another large-scale asset purchase.
First, I perceive the November 2–3, 2010165 of 238 expected benefits of further
—I’m going to keep saying “quantitative easing” because that’s what I’ve written here
—quantitative easing [laughter] to be small, especially in terms of inflation, but also in terms of unemployment.
The forecasts on pages 4 and 5 of the Tealbook Part A strike me as consistent with this view.
<START>Second, I believe that quantitative easing may well have significant downside risks.<END>
I will not go through these in great detail.
Others have spoken extremely eloquently about them:
<START>President Fisher, President Hoenig, President Plosser, President Lacker, all elaborated on these risks at great length and, I’m afraid, in a compelling way.<END>
But I will talk about one risk.
I think this is the most direct risk coming out of a large-scale asset purchase, because it’s what the purchase is all about, namely, to take duration risk out of the private sector and transfer it to taxpayers
—that is what the heart of the LSAP is.
We have to be thinking about whom we’re taking risk from and whom we’re transferring it to.
The essence of the LSAP relies on a segmented markets view of the world, where there are some people participating in bond markets and other people who have less access to it.
The people who are participating in the markets are the ones who benefit from this.
The ones who are not participating are the ones who don’t benefit.
This follows up on President Fisher’s eloquent description of the distributional consequences of our policies.
<START>Typically I would think the people who are participating in asset markets are wealthier and more educated, while the people who are not able to are less wealthy, less educated.<END>
In addition, while staff work has been thorough and very compelling on the asset pricing side, the ultimate macroeconomic impact of this risk shift has remained murky to me.
<START>Despite these concerns, and given your arguments yesterday, Mr. Chairman, and given the strength of consensus among the voters in the Committee, and I’ll emphasize the word “voters” here, I’m willing to go along with alternative B. Let me talk about ways alternative B November 2–3, 2010166 of 238 could be strengthened.<END>
First, the word “unacceptably” in paragraph 2 seems to imply considerably more control over the recovery process than we actually have
—I think we’re taking ownership for slow economic growth through that word.
I would recommend the word “disappointingly” or more simply the word “too.” Second, and more substantively, I would go along with President Pianalto’s recommendation of moving paragraph 4 from alternative A into alternative B, and I liked her rewording of it as well.
In general, it strikes me that an LSAP is not necessarily the most convincing tool that we have available.
I think forward guidance, as in paragraph 4 of alternative A, is a tool whose costs and benefits I understand better.
I think President Plosser’s suggestion of cutting the interest rate on excess reserves also is something that we should study more
—again, it could help us achieve our dual mandate.
We’re not competing with huge benefits on the table here
—the LSAP is not going to take us down to 5 percent unemployment
—so I think we have to explore all the possibilities.
My third suggestion relates to paragraph 5 of alternative B. It says we’re going to do this regular review of the LSAP based on incoming information.
I would like to suggest that, after “in light of incoming information,” we add the phrase “about the rate of progress toward its objective.” The idea is that, if we were in the lucky circumstances of seeing 1.3 million jobs created over the next six months
—which I think is unlikely, I have to admit, given my own forecast
<START>—that might lead us not to do further accommodation.<END>
So I want to put the focus on the rate of progress, not the levels.
<START>Finally, I really feel that this institution faces a credibility problem if we are not clear that we expect we are going in the right direction, but we expect our movement to be “limited,” “modest,” “small”<END>
—I don’t know what word you want to use.
I have not heard anyone around November 2–3, 2010167 of 238 the table suggest that we’re going to be making striking progress toward our dual mandate by adopting this program.
I think we should be clear with the public about that, and the way we can do that is in our communication through the minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Bullard.
MR.
BULLARD.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support alternative B generally.
I support the suggestions just made by President Kocherlakota to switch to the word “disappointingly” instead of “unacceptably,” and to include the phrase “about the rate of progress” in paragraph 5.
I also support the suggestions made by President Fisher to add “up to” in various places in the statement of alternative B. I distributed a memo that outlined my preferred approach to alternative B, which I’ll briefly recap here.
My preferred approach would be a threefold modification to paragraph 2.
The first sentence of the paragraph would be unchanged.
<START>Let me stress that I think the goal here is more satisfactory progress toward price stability and maximum sustainable employment, so I don’t think there’s very much doubt about what the goal is.<END>
The first change would be in the next sentence, where I would suggest announcing the pace of purchases, which is $75 billion per month.
<START>Then I would include a sentence that has some forward guidance, namely, “The Committee judges that, based on the current economic outlook, this pace of purchases will continue through the second quarter of 2011.” What I especially like about that is the phrase “based on the current economic outlook.” So we would be saying that, yes, we think this pace of purchases will continue on for a while, but we’re also aware that the error bands around our forecast are gigantic and lots of things can happen in the interim, not to mention the program could go badly, and we may want to reconsider.<END>
November 2–3, 2010168 of 238 If we did it this way, we would let the markets do the math and get away from the idea of putting a big number in the statement, which I do not like.
The markets are certainly good at math
—better than I am
—and they will substitute their own numbers, and they will also substitute their own forecasts for how they think the economy is going to evolve over the coming eight or nine months and make an assessment themselves of what they think the Committee will do going forward.
I think that’s the kind of dynamic we’d like to have, namely, the private sector assessing how they think the economy is going to evolve and, therefore, what they think the policy reaction will be.
In the meantime, we’d be making statements about how we see the economy evolving and how we see policy evolving going forward.
That’s the normal monetary policy dynamic that I think would be useful in this situation.
Finally, I would move the state-contingent sentence from the very end of paragraph 5 up to paragraph 3 immediately after the sentence I just discussed.
That sentence says “the Committee will regularly review…” and so on.
So right after providing the forward guidance, it would say the Committee will regularly review this decision.
This emphasizes the fact that everything depends on the data, and it might change going forward.
I see the tool statement in paragraph 5, “the Committee will employ its policy tools as necessary,” as reminding markets that we can and will use alternative tools if necessary, so I think it’s a bit out of place to put the sentence about the regular review in that paragraph.
<START>I thought that paragraph was intended to remind people that we’ve been very innovative during the whole crisis over the last three years, and we certainly remain determined to be innovative in the future should conditions deteriorate further.<END>
So I see the first sentence in paragraph 5 as not the state-contingent idea that I wanted to get across.
I would prefer that state-contingent idea to be in paragraph 3.
These edits are all minor, I would say, but that would be my preferred way to go ahead.
November 2–3, 2010169 of 238 Let me comment on a few other issues.
<START>On the question of so-called “LSAP” versus “quantitative easing,” I do not like the “large-scale” part of “large-scale asset purchase.” I think that smacks of a desire to surprise markets, which is hardly ever optimal policy.<END>
Unless you think that we’re in some kind of dire situation, I would not recommend that.
<START>The policy is a systematic response to shocks and to the state of the economy, so I prefer simply “asset-purchase program.” I don’t think it would be possible to get off the “quantitative easing” language, nor is it really necessary to do so.<END>
We can probably shape that language and define it as we wish.
I think that, as it stands now in markets, “quantitative easing” connotes an inflationary policy, frankly, and I think that works fine for our current purposes.
The Committee, in my view, is defending its implicit inflation target because we are on the low side of it.
I also see inflation expectations as the primary determinant of actual inflation.
So, to the extent that we’re able to push inflation expectations higher, I would expect that to have an effect on actual inflation;
<START>as the staff has emphasized repeatedly in the Tealbook, inflation expectations are acting as an anchor balancing slack effects that are in that model.<END>
I see the policy, more broadly speaking, as preventing us from falling into a deflationary-trap steady state like the one that Japan has been stuck in for some time.
I have argued that near-zero rates alone allow a disinflationary drift in expectations.
With near-zero rates for several years, which is what we’re looking at in all likelihood, and no other policy moves to supplement the zero interest rate policy, the Fisher relation
—that’s Irving Fisher, not Richard Fisher [laughter]
—dictates expectations of a mild deflation.
As I see it, this is exactly what has happened in Japan, and, even though we’ve been talking about it for a long time around this table, I’ve seen very little to dissuade me from this view.
I think we should take this theory more seriously than we already have.
It’s a very general argument that spans many different models.
November 2–3, 2010170 of 238 It requires only an inflation target, a Taylor rule, and a Fisher equation.
You can put any other favorite features that you want in your model, but, once you do that, you’ll still have a second steady state that looks exactly like what has happened in Japan.
For the U.S.
to move toward that type of steady state is a serious risk.
As I argued yesterday, nominal contracting in the U.S.
means that those contracts were set up based on an implicit inflation target of 2 percent.
If we went to minus 1 percent inflation, there would have to be some transition to that kind of a steady state.
That would further disrupt housing markets, in particular.
Also, I think that if the U.S.
went into that kind of a steady state, there would be global implications.
You might also get Europe into that steady state
—Japan is already there
—and then you’d be in a very difficult policy situation for a long period of time.
Therefore, I think it’s important to take preemptive action to avoid that outcome.
So far, what we’ve done ahead of this meeting suggests that this policy seems to be working, but I would be cautious and withhold judgment on that
—it’s unclear at this point, and we don’t know how well it will work going forward.
If we are able to get past this risk, we will face new challenges.
I’m very cognizant of those, and many voices around the table, including President Lacker, President Plosser, President Fisher, President Hoenig, President Kocherlakota, and others, have aptly articulated them.
Let me talk about just a couple more issues and I’ll be done.
On the issue of fed funds rate equivalence, I think I’ve come to the conclusion that this is probably not the right way to think about our QE policy.
I think that those calculations are too linear and too local.
They’re estimates around a particular point which are then extrapolated out for very large purchases.
I think nonlinearities are probably quite important in our policies.
These very linear, very local estimates of the effects of asset purchases tend to indicate that buying the entire outstanding November 2–3, 2010171 of 238 stock of Treasuries would have small effects.
I think that’s indefensible and surely not the right analysis.
So we need something better than what we’ve got on this dimension.
<START>On rationalizing missing both sides of our mandate, I’ve argued previously and a little bit this morning that this is not a good argument by itself.<END>
The fact that unemployment is high and inflation is low is nothing more than the impulse response that you would expect from a very large shock to the economy.
Furthermore, if we take our model forecast seriously, we’re going to continue to have high unemployment and inflation below target
—it takes a long time to return to steady state, especially when the recession is associated with a financial crisis.
I think President Lacker had exactly the right take on this:
It’s all about the pace of returning to the steady state
—President Kocherlakota, also raised this
—it’s not about the levels or the mere citing of the fact that unemployment is high and inflation is low.
On the risks to our policy, I agree with yesterday’s statement by the Chairman.
So I’m going to skip over any further comments on that.
Regarding the challenges going forward, I see three in addition to the many others that have been talked about here.
<START>I actually think our policy may be fairly successful on the inflation side<END>
—maybe too successful
—and we may end up overshooting our implicit 2 percent inflation target.
I think we have to think about how we might react to that situation in the coming quarters.
Unemployment will probably remain quite high, and, in that case, there could be a national discussion about stagflation
<START>—with inflation moving up and unemployment not moving very much<END>
—so we have to be prepared to confront that argument.
The U.K.
has that situation, to some extent, and the language they use in response says that their forecast is predicting a return of inflation toward target.
<START>As it stands right now, I’m not sure we’re in a good position to make that argument.<END>
November 2–3, 2010172 of 238 I think it’s also possible that this pace of purchases will prove to be a little heavy-handed, based on Brian Sack’s presentation earlier, and pushing the Desk to capacity in some sense.
We may have to be prepared to back off a little bit from that pace if we get market functioning problems.
I think we ran into some of that with the MBS purchases, especially late in that program, and especially with agency debt.
I’d want to be careful that that kind of thing is not then interpreted as a backing off of monetary policy.
Finally, let me just say that it has become a lot more popular now to talk about mandate-consistency around the table.
This was an issue that I thought had been settled long ago, but maybe it’s an appropriate time to revisit it.
It’s making me a little bit nervous.
<START>I think we could unintentionally ignite a debate on price stability that may not be wise.<END>
I think this Committee has come to the conclusion, mostly in the 1990s, that something like 2 percent was a reasonable number, and we could call that price stability.
<START>But it’s very reasonable to say that that isn’t really price stability.<END>
<START>Price stability must mean zero inflation, so I think it’s a little bit tricky to reemphasize these mandate issues that have long been settled.<END>
<START>We felt that providing price stability, as we think about it, is the best backdrop toward full employment, and I think we should probably stick with that and not stir up that debate again.<END>
But I’d like to hear others’ views on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I favor alternative B. You gave an eloquent, detailed, and very convincing defense of this alternative in your remarks yesterday, so I’ll just reiterate and emphasize my agreement with a few of the points you made.
First, the outlook for employment and inflation are dismal.
We will miss both objectives by a country mile for years to come.
Of course it will take considerable time after such a large November 2–3, 2010173 of 238 shock to attain our objectives no matter what, but optimal policy calculations call for much more stimulus
—as you explained in detail yesterday.
The pace of progress is inadequate.
Further, LSAPs are not a panacea, but they can make a meaningful difference.
We’ve seen a significant improvement in financial conditions on longer-term rates, equity prices, and the dollar during the intermeeting period as markets have increasingly built in the expectation that we will act.
The improvement in financial conditions we’ve already seen will help to support a stronger recovery and help to return inflation towards levels consistent with our dual mandate.
<START>If one stares at the graphs on page 5 of the Tealbook showing the paths of GDP and the unemployment rate under alternative policies, the benefits do look minor.<END>
But putting numbers on them, as you did yesterday, suggests a meaningful improvement.
You estimated that a $600 billion program would create about 750,000 jobs by the end of 2012.
A similar calculation suggests the program would raise output over the next two years by around $125 billion.
<START>Expanding our balance sheet may entail some risks, but the benefits are nontrivial, and I agree with your assessment that the risks are manageable, especially if we proceed cautiously.<END>
I also agreed with your comments concerning the possible impact of this policy on the dollar.
On balance, I believe that because it has a positive impact on U.S.
growth, our actions are not on net harmful to our neighbors.
A stronger U.S.
recovery, I believe, is very much in their interests.
Contrasting alternatives A and B, I prefer B. I think it makes sense to commit at the outset to a dose of purchases that we can be quite confident we will want to undertake and to attach greater conditionality to purchases beyond that level, so we can see how economic conditions are evolving once the program gets under way.
My expectation, based on a forecast similar to Tealbook, is that we should and will end up purchasing roughly $1 trillion of longer-November 2–3, 2010174 of 238 term securities;
but the $600 billion initial commitment, which, I guess, is the equivalent of around a 75 basis point cut in the federal funds rate, is a sufficient step for today.
<START>The wording in paragraph 5 leaves open the possibility of purchases beyond $600 billion and suggests a bias towards ease, but it doesn’t lean too heavily in that direction.<END>
It also leaves open the possibility that if the data surprises are sufficiently strong to the upside, we might not complete the intended $600 billion of purchases.
But I think the bar for us to stop short of $600 billion should be quite high.
I would not, therefore, want to add “up to” to qualify $600 billion in paragraph 3.
I see both pros and cons to altering the “extended period” language along the lines of A4.
On balance, my preference is to leave well enough alone.
A4 slightly improves the clarity around our “extended period” commitment by setting out conditions that would be required for us to raise the funds rate target before mid-2012.
But, because mid-2012 appears to be the modal market forecast for liftoff, the statement will not push out market expectations very much.
<START>And the wording of the conditions around that promise still leave plenty of scope to keep markets guessing how high exactly is “elevated,” and what data would convince us that inflation expectations are no longer well anchored.<END>
Of course, it’s hard to be more specific because, as a number of you have emphasized, we haven’t agreed about such matters among ourselves.
I think our current language is working quite well, in the sense that incoming data surprises move market expectations about liftoff in ways that seem appropriate, and those reactions have been working to strengthen the transmission mechanism.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
November 2–3, 2010175 of 238 MR. WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll begin with my views on policy.
I’ll end with a discussion of my vote.
In between, I’ll discuss some of the broad themes you and others raised about of why we’re moving in this direction and try to provide a countervailing view.
<START>I’ll talk about some of the additional risks to this approach that haven’t been mentioned in any great detail, and I will ask for a modest change in the statement.<END>
First, my views on policy.
As I said when we met by videoconference, my views are increasingly out of step with the views of most people around this table.
The path that you’re leading us to, Mr. Chairman, is not my preferred path forward.
<START>I think we are removing much of the burden from those that could actually help reach these objectives, particular the growth and employment objectives, and we are putting that onus strangely on ourselves rather than letting it rest where it should lie.<END>
<START>We are too accepting of dangerous policies from others that have been long in the making, and we should put the burden on them.<END>
I can think, Mr. Chairman, of a tough weekend that the Europeans had, particularly your counterpart at the ECB, in the spring or summer, when we all knew that the European Central Bank, rightly or wrongly, was going to take action.
But Jean-Claude Trichet did not take action until very late that Sunday night, until the fiscal authorities did their part.
He thought that if on Friday night he were to say all of the things he’d be willing to do, he’d be taking the burden off the fiscal authorities.
He chose to wait.
I think we would be far better off waiting.
If we proceed on this path, as I suspect we will, I would still encourage you to put the burden where it rightly belongs, which is on other policymakers here in Washington, and to do so in a way that is respectful of different lines of responsibility.
Like some around the table, I think the risk-reward trade-off in this exercise is poor.
The benefits strike me as small and fleeting.
The risks strike me as unknown, uncertain, and November 2–3, 2010176 of 238 potentially large.
If this were some one-off game and we were in the final state, I suspect we could get away with it.
There wouldn’t be huge benefits.
There wouldn’t be any reputational consequences.
There’d be no effect on others, and we could take all of their behavior as given.
But it is not.
This is a game that will be run many times over in the ensuing months and, I’m afraid, years, and if we run this game long enough, the risks that I and some others have talked about, I’m afraid, materialize.
will Thus, if you do take us in this direction, the policy must be to see if we can’t get in this game and out of this game before these risks materialize.
Let me talk broadly about a few themes about why some think this will be effective, and provide my own views.
I won’t talk in the language of the academy, but I will talk in the language of markets.
I’ve heard three themes.
One is that we’re going to get financial markets to provide a lot more benefit to the real economy, and we’ll get a virtuous circle.
Higher asset prices will end up driving more consumer wealth, more confidence.
Business leaders and consumers will feel better, and that will find its way into the real economy.
In my view, that’s a risky proposition.
I do not think of financial markets and the real economy as separate, as exogenous to one another.
They are two ways of looking at the same underlying phenomena.
And my own view, Mr. Chairman, is that sometimes financial markets get ahead of the real economy.
Sometimes the real economy gets ahead of financial markets.
But when one gets too far away from the other, it is usually pretty ugly when they ultimately converge, and I am skeptical that we can persuade and convince asset prices to do the hard work that needs to be done on the real economy side for anything more, perhaps, than a fleeting period.
I am skeptical that further lowering risk-free rates across the curve will last long enough for these confidence and wealth effects to find their way into the real economy.
November 2–3, 2010177 of 238 My own take on the capital markets, Mr. Chairman, as you know, is that we’ve had these “risk on” and “risk off” days.
Markets don’t seem to me to be making hard decisions that they like this asset and not that, that they like this country and not that, that they like this industry and not that.
Instead, they seem to be making judgments based on us.
They seem to be full of confidence some days, and in full retreat on others.
So I worry about putting too much burden on the financial markets to do the work of dragging up the real economy.
I think that is a risky proposition.
<START>Second, there’s an argument about increasing inflation and the benefits that could bring.<END>
In my view, this attacks a risk that is not predominant with a tool that is not fine-tuned in an environment that is not conducive.
I’ll call this argument the nominal revenue argument.
This argument says that, with higher inflation, businesses are going to have higher revenues.
They’re going to feel better because their top line is moving.
They’re then going to be more inclined to invest more.
They’re going to grow capital expenditures.
This will happen everywhere around the economy, and we’ll be in a better place.
I don’t believe it.
I don’t believe that will lead to lower unemployment.
I don’t think those CEOs will be fooled that their costs haven’t increased as much as their revenue.
I think they’ll be very focused on their profit margins.
And, as some have said, I don’t think that we really do have much of a deflation problem.
<START>If the judgment of the majority of this group is that we do, it strikes me that there are better tools, more effective tools, for raising inflation and inflation expectations than buying these longer-term assets.<END>
I can imagine that a speech or two by the Chairman of the Federal Reserve
—with your credibility, your insight, and your persuasive abilities
—would do much of the hard work that this balance sheet expansion is doing.
<START>November 2–3, 2010178 of 238 The third argument that I’ve heard is about foreign exchange, and I think even those who do believe that there are real benefits in terms of net exports from weakening the foreign exchange value of the dollar, are hesitant and rightly so to say those words in public venues.<END>
They don’t consider that to be politically correct.
I think there’s a good reason for that.
I think it’s a dangerous policy.
I think it is risky pool playing in the foreign exchange markets, asking them to do so much of our work when the world’s recovery is resting on this.
I think this is a particularly risky strategy when you have the world’s reserve currency.
If we were monetary policymakers in the U.K.
or other places, and it turned out that we got a little ahead of ourselves, so that gilts weren’t valued as much as we had thought they would be, well, the gilt market would be a little bit confused for a while, but it wouldn’t change fundamentally the value underpinning every asset everywhere in the world.
So I worry about playing in these markets.
I don’t think that that’s one that’s likely to yield benefits.
While there could be some improvement in net exports
—and I don’t want to dismiss that
<START>—I think these other risks are much more significant, and I think about investment that goes in the opposite direction of these net exports.<END>
<START>If the world comes to not believing in the underlying value of our currency, then at some point the world will say, “That is not where I want to be investing my excess reserves and excess cash.” Those are brief responses to, I think, well-intended arguments in terms of channels by which this could work.<END>
Let me make a few other points about tools and risks.
As I mentioned, I think we’re underestimating the risks of interfering in size and in force in the longer-term Treasury market, and I think that Brian and his colleagues have a very difficult job to try to be price-takers and not price-makers in these markets.
As I mentioned, this is not a one-off game.
We’ve already seen examples of ad hoc interventions by policymakers around the world that can November 2–3, 2010179 of 238 interrupt capital flows and cause some retrenchment from globally integrated monetary and trade architectures, and I think this is very risky.
I think the adoption of nonstandard tools introduces new uncertainties about the conduct of policy, which I haven’t heard reasonably and finely understood by this group.
In addition, by using such expansionary policies now, we are risking leaving ourselves ill-prepared for an exogenous global shock which I cannot anticipate.
It might have nothing to do with the policies that we’re putting in place, but, boy, oh, boy, I don’t know how we’d respond if a shock happened anywhere else around the world.
Let me raise two more concerns before going to the statement.
One is the stagecraft.
I would say that all of us want the policy that comes out of the Fed to be successful.
<START>Part of that policy success depends on what a former member of this group called “theater” and what I’d call “stagecraft.” I don’t think the stagecraft over the last six weeks has been optimal, and I look to Governor Yellen’s subcommittee to see if we can’t improve that, because I wouldn’t dismiss the importance of the formation of these views and communication of these views to the ultimate success of our policies.<END>
Second, I’d like to build on a point that Narayana and a couple of others made about exit.
The exit plan is not fully understood by me.
It’s not obvious to me when we will stop expanding the balance sheet.
<START>It’s not obvious to me what will satisfy our conditions of saying, “Yes, this worked,” or, “No, that didn’t work.” Instead I fear that, if the unemployment rate remains, in the language of the moment, “unacceptably high,” it’s not obvious to me that this Committee has explained to markets why they would no longer be willing to go down this path of QE2 and beyond.<END>
<START>Let me turn to the statement and see whether I can’t make a modest proposal to try to bridge some of these risks in what is, in my view, a very suboptimal set of outcomes.<END>
I won’t November 2–3, 2010180 of 238 focus on a lot of the suggestions that have been put forward, though I’m sympathetic to them.
Very simply, in paragraph 3, I would suggest that you would have a better chance of succeeding and that we have a better chance of communicating if we were simply to reverse the order of the operative sentence on asset purchases.
I don’t think this makes a ton of difference, but it certainly would make me more comfortable.
So I would rewrite the final sentence of paragraph 3 as follows:
<START>“In addition, the Committee intends to purchase additional long-term Treasury securities at an average pace of about $75 billion, which is intended to constitute a total increase of $600 billion by the end of the second quarter of 2011.” Now, I don’t like anything about alternative B. I am not in love with this sentence in any formation, but I think that change at least captures what I take away as maybe my own reading of alternative B, which is that we’re going to move at $75 billion a month, and adheres to your suggestion yesterday, Mr. Chairman, which I took very seriously, that we are going to try to monitor these risks and we are going to be very attentive to developments.<END>
By putting that first, it strikes me that you’re giving yourself at least the option that you will be prepared to take action if these risks materialize.
The $600 billion then is the summation of that expectation, but I do think it would go some way toward suggesting that this thing is not on total autopilot, given the risks that I see.
I won’t comment in any great detail on what others have put forward on the statement.
I do consider the use of the word “unacceptably” in paragraph 2 to be really odd and not something that we could well explain.
So I don’t think that that’s useful.
<START>I’m also sympathetic to Richard’s suggestions on inflation, mostly because I don’t think we want to suggest we have a ton of work to do on the inflation front.<END>
<START>November 2–3, 2010181 of 238 So having given you my views, having told you I think probably more than you or anyone wants to know about my sense of the risks, and having made a modest suggestion to alternative B, let me try to talk a little bit about my vote.<END>
How in light of all this do I justify not dissenting?
<START>If I were in your chair, I would not be leading the Committee in this direction, and frankly, if I were in the chair of most people around this room, I would dissent.<END>
My respect for you during this last four and a half years is incredibly high.
I am awed by the burdens that you are confronting, and I wouldn’t want to undermine at this important moment the chance that this program could be successful.
I know a lot of people around this table feel total conviction on the opposite side of where I do.
I think this is called the Bernanke Fed for a reason.
<START>I’ve got a lot of confidence that if the risks that I talk about materialize, you will not hesitate and you will change your view, you will change this experiment.<END>
That’s not just a hypothetical
—when we did the LSAPs the first time, we did a $300 billion Treasury purchase, which I did not think was a good idea, and you stopped it because it was not working, and we pivoted to these mortgage-backed securities.
There, again, I had my own misgivings, but I think that was more fertile ground.
As I had mentioned then and frequently since, that market was broken long before we ever found it.
<START>So, I think you did some good there in the crisis, and I’ve seen your willingness to change your view, and I will count on that if these risks that I talk about, however unlikely, do end up materializing.<END>
Let me talk about what could change my support for alternative B, which, as I’ve indicated, I offer with the greatest reluctance.
<START>If inflation were to move up and were to be broadly consistent with the implicit inflation target in different people’s minds around this room, even if unemployment were unacceptably high, I think that would be time to stop this program.<END>
<START>If inflation expectations were to move out of the range that they have been in for a long time, that November 2–3, 2010182 of 238 would be a reason to end this program, even if unemployment were exceptionally high and GDP were well below what we think the economy is ultimately capable of.<END>
<START>And if these other risks that I talked about did materialize in the foreign exchange markets, I’m confident that you would be unafraid to change your views on that.<END>
What about the wording in alternative B?
The version of alternative B that I can, with the greatest reluctance, not dissent from suggests that the LSAP program is, in fact, limited, that the judgments that are being made on this incremental $75 billion are circumscribed, and that the program is subject to serious regular review.
I must admit that I don’t like the phrase “continuous review” because I don’t like the idea that it is every day that markets might worry whether our views change.
So “regular review” or “periodic review,” which might coincide with FOMC meetings, but obviously could coincide with market events, strikes me as a little better.
<START>Ultimately, I think that’s subject to rigorous review, and if this program were to end at $300 billion instead of $600 billion, as the first attempt did, then I suspect we probably haven’t done too much harm.<END>
So if my reading of this and my reading of your willingness, Mr. Chairman, to change course is right, and if these judgments were to materialize and the reaction function of this Committee were to change, then I can support it.
<START>I will have no choice but to dissent, I think, at future meetings if these risks materialize and if these benefits don’t end up coming.<END>
This is maybe a little bit more than you wanted to know on my personal struggle on this and also on the risks that I see.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you, and it is “regularly review” in the current statement.
Governor Duke.
November 2–3, 2010183 of 238 MS. DUKE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for taking the time yesterday to lay out your reasoning so completely.
In my time here, I’ve learned to respect and be guided by your reasoning and your instincts, and I’ve also learned to trust your integrity.
So I was pleased to hear your commitment to the notion that, if at any time the costs of these actions are unacceptably higher than expected, we will stop.
<START>On that basis alone, I would probably be willing to support alternative B, but I came in here with a few other reasons to support this action and a few concerns.<END>
I don’t disagree with the need for action.
I’m just troubled by the limited projected results from this action.
Given the discussion of pace versus level, when I looked at the graphs in the inset box, it seemed to me that the difference between alternatives was less than one quarter in terms of time.
I may be a little wrong on that because the graphs were small and I didn’t actually have a ruler, but that’s what it looked like.
[Laughter] Therefore, perhaps the strongest reason that I can find to proceed with LSAPs is the healing effect of low rates.
Understanding that banks and their customers need to heal before they reengage, it may be enough of a reason.
And while I think the benefits are small, I’ve come to view the cost as equally small.
<START>Although still untested on a large scale, our exit tools are at the ready, and inflation threats seem far away.<END>
<START>I’m anxious about the potential for asset bubbles, but I do believe we have a tight enough clamp on the financial system to limit those risks at the moment.<END>
However, given that I expect the benefits to be small, I still question what’s next.
It doesn’t feel really right to choose a strategy because I think it’s unlikely to do much harm if I also expect it to be unlikely to accomplish the mission.
While we’re framing this action as state-dependent, I don’t see much actual room to maneuver in reaction to different economic conditions.
<START>With total monthly purchases as a constraint, our actual ability to react to incoming November 2–3, 2010184 of 238 data going forward seems limited to extending or not extending the time frame and the total amount.<END>
I wholeheartedly endorse President Kocherlakota’s suggestion that we need to understand how we would define good and bad outcomes and what we might do in response to them.
I’m not sure how much scope we actually have, but it sounds like many around the table have different expectations about what comes next.
Let me end with two reservations, just in case anyone missed them when I wove them into my comments yesterday.
We’ve talked about the difference between LSAPs and quantitative easing, but the fact is we will be injecting more reserves into the system.
The last time we had large purchases, reserves didn’t grow very much.
They had already grown as banks snapped up much needed liquidity, so, for the most part, our purchases represented a substitution of assets purchased for liquidity facilities’ repayment.
For their size, the LSAPs didn’t really expand our balance sheet or the reserves very much.
But the banking system doesn’t have the same thirst for additional liquidity at this time, so we need to monitor the response to additional reserves.
My second reservation comes from my concern about the mortgage market.
<START>I can’t tell from the staff projections how much of the benefit of this action is expected to come from improvements in house prices or the mortgage market, but I still believe that channel is too broken to work.<END>
In summary, I support alternative B with the understanding that we will closely monitor the costs and benefits as we go along and hope that we will also continue to look for even stronger actions or uses of our tools to improve the outlook for unemployment.
<START>Turning to the statement, I do prefer “disappointingly slow” to “unacceptably slow.” And I don’t like the “up to” language<END>
—I think that conditions it too much.
<START>As to paragraph A4, I think markets already expect that timing, so I don’t see that it adds anything in terms of November 2–3, 2010185 of 238 expectations, and I thought President Fisher’s suggestion, “while maintaining a firm commitment to keep inflation within levels consistent” and so on might signal the same thing and in a more efficient way.<END>
Finally, I do sort of prefer the discussion of rate of progress rather than levels.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Tarullo.
MR.
TARULLO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is a difficult decision for me, and I think it was a difficult decision for most of you.
<START>The only people I worry about are the people who think that the decision was easy, whether to do nothing or to do precisely this, because I do think that, as many people have pointed out, there are nontrivial costs and nontrivial benefits associated with, for example, each course of action that the Tealbook tried to play out for us.<END>
This shouldn’t be a surprise.
When one is faced with difficult problems, policy responses are invariably not going to be perfect.
<START>You’re going to have shortcomings with each, and you’re going to have advantages with each.<END>
<START>From my point of view, as you could tell from yesterday, I’m most concerned with the present and, perhaps, future absence of sufficient aggregate demand to move us out of this rather sluggish growth pattern which, I fear, be self-reinforcing.<END>
will And I certainly don’t believe that $600 billion of additional asset purchases over time will turn that situation around.
I’m nonetheless in favor of the action proposed in alternative B for a couple of reasons.
First is the potential for deflation.
I think this really is worth emphasizing
—Jim Bullard did it again today, John Moore did, as well, and others have alluded to it.
<START>Even if the potential is not large in probability terms, it’s one that would have such costs that the extra bit of insurance against it seems to me important.<END>
Second, the real economy effects hypothesized by the staff with the implementation of this plan would have some influence on changing the balance of November 2–3, 2010186 of 238 people’s portfolios and thus where money is being extended in credit markets, and it would have some effects at the margin, which, after all, is where economic policy is generally made.
There are certainly risks.
The Chairman detailed a number of them yesterday, and several of you have mentioned them today.
<START>To me, the risk of excessive leverage developing in some markets is among the most important of those, and I think it is incumbent on us in our supervisory and new financial stability roles to monitor the growth not so much of asset prices as of the leverage associated with that.<END>
Having said that there are risks, I’d also say that some of the things that I’ve heard described as risks don’t worry me as much.
First, there’s concern that if we do something today, then markets will expect that we’re going to do more later with QE3 and QE4, as Nouriel Roubini is now discussing publicly.
I think we can’t have it both ways
<START>—we either worry about market expectations or we try to lead market expectations.<END>
In taking this action today and through the words of the Chairman and I hope the consonant words of others over time, I think we can shape market reactions as to what may happen in the future.
<START>Second, there’s concern about our independence.<END>
I think that, if we fail to take a monetary policy action that we think is the right action for fear that it will lead to encroachments upon the monetary policy independence of this Committee, then the Committee has already lost its monetary policy independence, because it is now being moved by expectations of how others will assess it.
I distinguish this from
—just to pick something out of the air
—the Fed doing consumer protection rules.
As many of the people around the table know, I thought that was better done in another agency precisely because of the partisan nature of much of those responsibilities and because they are not directly relevant to monetary policymaking.
I feared it might have effects upon our monetary policymaking function.
Indeed, I think it already has.
November 2–3, 2010187 of 238 But, if we believe in the independence of this Committee to set monetary policy as we think best, removed from the politics of the moment, then I think we have to proceed on that basis.
Third, there’s concern about dollar depreciation.
I really don’t understand the concern here, to be perfectly honest.
<START>I’ve been doing international economics for a long time, and every time the Fed moved, those of us who paid attention to trade and investment flows would always think about the effect on the dollar and, thus, on both trade and investment flows, whether we’re easing by reducing the federal funds rate by 50 basis points or by reinitiating an asset-purchase program as we’re considering doing today.<END>
So, in terms of the perception that we’re going to have such an effect, this really is not news
—it’s the way things have always been.
The attention to it may be heightened at this juncture because there has been some question about the dollar’s position over time.
<START>I am one who shares some concerns about the dollar’s position and the potential for instability in foreign exchange markets, but I must say that that situation has developed over the last decade as large current account deficits and large budget deficits were run even in a period of economic growth.<END>
<START>I don’t think that the actions of this Committee in initiating an additional $600 billion in purchases are going to tip us towards foreign exchange instability in the context of those broader problems which are going to have to be confronted by the country over time, including having a more sustainable external balance.<END>
<START>Fourth is the argument that it would be better if other parts of the U.S.<END>
government took their own policy actions.
I agree it would be far better if aggregate demand were being supported by the political branches of government.
But it’s not, and I don’t think Section 2(a) of the Federal Reserve Act reads this way:
“The Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee shall take such actions once they have told the rest of the government what’s best for them to do.” [Laughter] We’ve got the mandate to take such actions as we can, seeing the world November 2–3, 2010188 of 238 as we see it and taking it as we find it, just as sometimes people wish that the private sector would be doing things differently, but it isn’t, and, therefore, monetary policy action is called for.
So I think that there is an obligation on our part to do what we can, taking the world as we find it.
<START>Now, I do not disagree with Kevin that some prodding of the other branches of government to do their part would be valuable, but that doesn’t seem to me to undercut our obligation to take the actions that we can in an effort to achieve the dual mandate.<END>
<START>I am in support of alternative B. I think that, as President Evans suggests, there would be an argument for doing more precisely to get the benefits up.<END>
<START>I can see the arguments of those who think that the risks may be disproportionate to the benefits, so they don’t want to do anything.<END>
<START>I come down on the side of saying that the risks are exceeded by the potential benefits, particularly in these circumstances where we do need to be mindful of the potential for deflationary traps<END>
—we’re already in a liquidity trap.
We have to think in a prophylactic fashion as well as an incremental fashion.
I’m sorry, this is a bit of a digression
—I do vividly recall in the 1990s pleading with Japanese authorities not to raise their value added tax and to take more aggressive action to stop their economy from sliding into a liquidity trap and being met with a whole line of arguments that “things are getting better, we just have to be a little bit patient.” There was an inability to pull out of conventional policymaking thinking and to see that the situation was actually quite different.
Is this policy move we’re contemplating destined to be a great boon and prod to the economy?
<START>No. However, I think the risks, which are real, are well worth assuming both as a means of stopping a slide towards deflation if one were to start to develop and as a means to provide an incremental prod towards activity in the real economy.<END>
<START>November 2–3, 2010189 of 238 With respect to all the suggestions on the language in the statement, I’ll just note the ones that particularly appeal to me or that somewhat troubled me.<END>
I like both of Narayana’s suggestions, and I think a lot of people do.
<START>I don’t like the “up to,” even though I understand why Richard proposed it, and I like Kevin’s formulation better.<END>
The reason I don’t like “up to” is that it makes it seem that there’s not a presumption that that’s what we’re going to do, and I think we should have a pretty strong presumption that it’s going to be $600 billion during this period, not more and not less.
But, as Kevin suggested, if serious problems were occasioned by the policy, or as Narayana suggested, if unexpectedly we got this huge burst of activity or, I would add, if unexpectedly the slide towards deflation seemed to be taking place, then, of course, we should change policy.
But I would hope there would be a reasonably strong presumption for action, because I don’t think we want to get into fine-tuning even though we do want to react to the world as we see it.
Regarding paragraph 4, I don’t feel strongly about the actual language in A versus B, but I think, as Janet said, we might be well advised at this particular FOMC meeting to minimize the number of changes except those we think are really necessary in order to reflect our assessment of the economy and the action we’re taking today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Raskin.
MS.
RASKIN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>Given that the economic recovery is too weak to deliver acceptable progress toward our dual objectives, additional monetary accommodation is appropriate.<END>
<START>Although it is appropriate, I believe its effect should not be overstated, and its risks need to be monitored.<END>
The effects need to be viewed as not particularly overwhelming at this point.
FRB/US simulations suggest that the implications for real GDP and unemployment would be small.
Moreover, there currently is not a particularly robust short-term accommodative fiscal policy.
In addition, I wonder about the strength of the linkage between longer-term interest rates November 2–3, 2010190 of 238 on Treasuries and the terms and availability of credit to small and medium-sized businesses.
<START>These businesses, as we know, are an important source of job creation, and I’m uncertain about the extent to which lowering longer-term interest rates will open the spigot further to new lending.<END>
This uncertainty is exacerbated by a supervisory policy that is uncoordinated, either rightly or wrongly, with monetary policy.
Similarly, I view the so-called wealth effect as having minimal further effect.
Equity prices have risen and may rise a bit more, but perhaps not enough to induce households to embark on much of a sustained spending spree.
Despite these mitigants, the staff estimates that $600 billion of purchases leads to a reduction in the unemployment rate of approximately 0.3 percentage point.
This is small, but not inconsequential.
<START>Alternatively understood, it’s small but, at this time, is not overtaken by risks that make doing nothing the better course of action.<END>
<START>Incidentally, I cast substantial doubt on the proposition heard around the table this morning that doing nothing here will somehow push and direct fiscal policy in the right direction in a timely and predictable way.<END>
<START>I view fiscal policy as highly uncertain, and, frankly, I believe it disingenuous at best to think that we can pass the buck, so to speak, back to the Congress.<END>
Accordingly, I would support the policy action and statement described in alternative B. As between A and B, it strikes me that it is desirable to maintain flexibility in the timing and extent of any purchases above and beyond the $600 billion.
An even larger purchase program could be necessary, and alternative B signals that possibility.
A more incremental approach gives the Committee the chance to understand with precision the effect of increases in the balance sheet and the chance to incorporate incoming data
—in a “regular” if not a “continuous” way
—that could permit a more precise determination of the amount of stimulus or withdrawal of stimulus that the economy will need.
In addition, this more incremental approach may help allay November 2–3, 2010191 of 238 any lingering concerns among some members about the Committee’s ability to execute a smooth exit from policy accommodation.
Moreover, whether this is desirable or not, public statements by members of this Committee, this so-called stagecraft, have provided financial markets with the strong expectation that the Committee will announce an expansion in the balance sheet at this meeting.
<START>Should we choose to determine that the threshold for undertaking further accommodation has not been met, as in alternative C or D, we would significantly surprise market participants and, as a result, longer-term interest rates would rise more than forecast, which, in my view, stall the recovery at this point.<END>
would Since the time of the Chairman’s Jackson Hole speech, we’ve seen that the prospect of purchases can succeed in lowering interest rates.
<START>Given the magnitude of excess capacity, there’s little risk of inflation today, and the risk of future inflation is minimal, so long-term interest rates should not rise dangerously in response to the interventions because this Committee has a credible record of reasonably anchoring inflationary expectations.<END>
That record is what makes the course of accommodation described in alternative B, to my mind, credible.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
<START>Vice Chairman.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support alternative B. The issue of whether to do another round of LSAPs is really
—as both proponents and opponents have made clear
—about costs versus benefits.
<START>I think we mostly agree that the benefits of the LSAPs decline with size, so each additional dollar of LSAP has less benefit in terms of reducing longer-term rates and easing financial conditions, while the costs increase with size, so, as we do more, the costs of this program increase in terms of exit difficulties or balance sheet risk.<END>
<START>This means that at some point these diminishing benefit and rising cost lines must intersect, and what November 2–3, 2010192 of 238 we’re really arguing about is where that point is.<END>
In addition to the intersection of those lines, I think we also need to focus on what we can do to shift that cost line
—it’s not as if it’s immutable.
The better we communicate to markets about what we’re doing and why, the more we can reduce the cost of the LSAP program and push out the point where those two lines intersect.
On the issue of communications, I think we can reduce the cost of LSAPs by being clear on three issues.
First, I think we can explain very clearly why this does not represent monetization of the debt.
The two are very, very different.
Unlike monetization of the debt, the increase in the size of our balance sheet will be temporary, not permanent
—as soon as we see the economy coming back to the point that we think the dual mandate is going to be satisfied, the program is going to end.
Monetization of the debt, in contrast, involves increasing the balance sheet and creating inflation that you live with forever.
Second, I think we have to continue to work on explaining to market participants why we can exit smoothly from this period of monetary policy accommodation when the time comes.
<START>There are still people, very smart people, who think this is ultimately going to lead to an inflation problem.<END>
My own view is that the ability to pay interest on excess reserves gives us the ability to limit credit creation, so we will not have a longer-term inflation problem.
<START>Third, I think it would be useful if we leaned a bit against the idea of a currency war.<END>
<START>I find, as Governor Tarullo does, a lot of this disheartening, because I view the LSAP program as having effects on the currency markets that are very similar to what happens when we reduce short-term interest rates<END>
—the program changes interest rate differentials, and that has effects on currencies.
I don’t think that’s meaningfully different in kind from traditional monetary policy easing measures.
November 2–3, 2010193 of 238 In terms of the benefits associated with further LSAPs, I think we can increase them by explaining very clearly why we’re doing this
—we’re doing this to ease financial conditions in order to support economic activity consistent with our dual mandate obligations.
The better that market participants and the general public understand the rationale for our actions, the more our actions will be confidence-inspiring, which will increase the magnitude of any benefits.
<START>Now, in terms of considering the benefits and costs of an additional LSAP program today as compared with a few months ago, I’d say the evidence in favor of the benefits has become a lot more compelling, because we’ve essentially run a test over the last six weeks as the market has gone from pricing in a very low probability of LSAPs to pricing in a much higher probability of LSAPs.<END>
What has happened over that period of time?
<START>Financial conditions have become much more accommodative, bond yields are down, equity prices are up, and the dollar has been slightly weakened.<END>
<START>Also, inflation expectations have risen, which was actually quite helpful, because it reversed the earlier decline we saw during the summer when deflation risks were becoming a more prevalent fear in the market.<END>
The Tealbook underscores this by pointing out that the unconstrained federal funds rate now, given the expectation of the LSAP program, is actually a little bit higher than it was in the prior LSAP.
So the Tealbook is basically saying this is a substitute for further cuts in short-term interest rates, which we can’t do because of the zero lower bound.
<START>In terms of the issue of continuous adjustment versus “shock and awe,” I favor providing the most clarity we can to market participants while, at the same time, retaining some discretion to increase or reduce the program size as the economic outlook changes going forward.<END>
I view the $600 billion figure in alternative B to be the amount that we are highly likely to want to do, so that the threshold for rolling it back is significantly higher than the one for doing more.
I November 2–3, 2010194 of 238 think it’s preferable to communicate this bigger figure to the market;
if we were not to do so, we would create, I think, unnecessary uncertainty about our future actions.
Since the LSAP program is mostly about stock effects rather than flow effects, introducing more conditionality than necessary would just undercut the power of this action to ease financial market conditions, which is what we’re seeking to encourage.
<START>Doing it this way also gives us the benefit of allowing us to take a little break for several meetings to see how things are evolving, so we actually have some time to judge how the program is working and whether the costs and benefits are still in the direction that we currently anticipate.<END>
I have two final points.
First, I’d like to keep the door open to changing the type of securities purchases, should market conditions change significantly.
If, for example, agency MBS spreads were to widen significantly, then I think we should keep an open mind about the wisdom of shifting a portion of future purchases from Treasuries into agency MBS.
No one has mentioned that, and I’m not saying that I think it’s likely that we’re going to want to do it
—I just wouldn’t want to rule it out categorically.
Second, I think we need to be very clear about our expectations of what this LSAP program is going to do.
This is not a panacea, and I think we need to communicate that clearly to market participants.
I’d really expect today’s announcement to have very small effects on markets.
Brian and I have a little bet on whether the market is going to react slightly positively or slightly negatively to this announcement.
But the emphasis is on the word “slightly.” It’s already priced in to a very large degree, so this is not going to be a big surprise, and we shouldn’t judge the success of the program by what the markets do today
—we should judge the success of the program by what the markets have done over the last six weeks or so.
November 2–3, 2010195 of 238 In terms of language, I think there’s a pretty strong consensus for substituting “disappointingly” or “too” for “unacceptably” in alternative B. I’m not a fan of moving A4 into B4, just because I think it wouldn’t do very much.
I think the markets already have an expectation of mid-2012, and I think it just creates one more moving part that makes it a little bit more difficult to explain and interpret.
So, at this meeting, I’d favor doing one major change rather than two.
<START>I don’t like “up to.” I think we’re highly likely to do $600 billion, and putting in “up to” qualifies that more than I feel is appropriate.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
I’d like to extend my sincere thanks to the members of the Open Market Committee.
Obviously, we don’t agree on all the aspects we’ve been discussing
—although I think that, to some extent, the disagreement is less fundamental and more a sense of weights that are placed on different benefits and costs or risks.
In any case, the views expressed around the table are evidently very sincerely held, very well expressed, and very useful.
We began this meeting by talking about the benefits of collegial interaction, which, as I said, are enormous.
I also can say, quite frankly, that my own views have been influenced by the very careful and thoughtful statements that we have heard yesterday and today.
So I very much appreciate your thoughtful contributions, and I hope everybody understands that I do find this debate very constructive.
Let me try to frame this at three different levels to help us think about the nature of the action we’re taking.
In some sense, the most basic level is the one I focused on yesterday, which essentially takes off from the staff forecast and then tries to assess the quantitative impact of these actions, which operate through various channels.
I said that my guess would be that the actions would be somewhat stronger than the staff predicted.
Monetary policy can be surprisingly powerful
—I think there’s a tendency to underestimate that.
In any case, at that level November 2–3, 2010196 of 238 the case seems pretty clear, because we are missing the two objectives under our mandate in the same direction, and not just now but for what we expect is a long period of time.
So, at that first level, the analysis says that we should be doing what we can to move in the direction of our mandate.
<START>A second level, maybe one step up, says basically, “Well, there are likely to be relatively small benefits coming from these actions and a whole bunch of undefined risks.” A number of people around the table took that approach, particularly those who are most concerned about it.<END>
That has clearly been the line that a lot of the external critics have taken:
<START>“The benefits are small, and we don’t know what’s going to happen, and my personal view is that risk X is really the most serious one.” I think it’s important that we look at those risks, as we have, including discussing them at some length.<END>
Of course, that way of framing the problem makes it a much more uncertain decision.
I’d like to ask you to think about this at yet one higher level
—and we all alluded to this
—which is that there’s an implication that taking no action is a relatively safe thing to do.
There is no safe thing to do
—any action we take or don’t take is going to expose us to the judgment of history if we make the wrong decision.
In particular, taking no action has risks.
It may be true that deflation isn’t one of those risks, although that could happen down the road
—currently, I think, the odds of that are relatively small.
<START>But another risk with greater odds of materializing is that the recovery could falter, and we could begin to see unemployment rising, and we could get into a more serious downward spiral.<END>
<START>Therefore, not taking action is a risky step, just as taking action is a risky step.<END>
We’re caught between action and inaction
—each has implications, and we need to make an appropriate decision.
<START>November 2–3, 2010197 of 238 I’d like to frame our decision today as a very conservative, middle-road approach, namely, we recognize that doing nothing carries serious risks of further disinflation and of a failure of the recovery to meet escape velocity, and, therefore, we’re going to take some actions to try to move us closer to our mandate and to take out some insurance against those bad downside risks.<END>
Furthermore, in doing so, we’re not going to do “shock and awe”
—we’re not going to do something extraordinarily large and dramatic.
Instead, we’re going to undertake an asset-purchase program that will play out over a period of eight months, with the purchases equaling $75 billion a month.
This is a substantial period of time
—indeed, in some sense, the program has already been in place for two months, since we’ve already seen a lot of the effect on financial markets.
Having such a substantial period of time means that we can be very vigilant about monitoring whether the program is having the effects that we hope it will have and whether other considerations are arising.
<START>I do appreciate Governor Warsh’s comments, and I want to reassure him, and others, that I take very seriously the need to review regularly not only the evolution of the economy, but also the emergence of risks.<END>
So, in undertaking this program, we will review, we will be conditional, we will continue to monitor the risks that do exist.
<START>We will do all of this over a substantial period of time, and, in particular, we will be very careful about inflation.<END>
I want to reiterate that, again, there is no hidden agenda here to drive inflation to a high level.
That will be a very important consideration as we look forward.
To summarize, I think that this is the right step.
In the broad context, I think it is a reasonably cautious step.
<START>It hedges us against risks in both directions, and it gives us a substantial amount of time when we can be relatively more passive and observe developments.<END>
Although I don’t anticipate, for example, fine-tuning or small jiggering of the amounts from meeting to meeting, I do think we should be prepared to make significant changes if either the November 2–3, 2010198 of 238 benefits or the costs prove different from what we anticipate.
Again, recognizing all of the concerns that people have, as well as the issues about impact and the like, I do think this is a conservative action, which, perhaps, seems a bit ironic, given the conversation.
It is one that attempts to take an appropriate step in the right direction, but in a careful and measured way, and it is one that will be reviewed as we go through the next eight months.
My recommendation, therefore, is to go ahead with this program.
<START>There were a lot of very good statement suggestions, and, although it always makes me nervous to edit these things on the fly in the meeting, I will propose adopting some of them, and I’d like to just go through and see how they work.<END>
The first thing I would suggest, and I will check with all of you on each of these, is in paragraph 2.
<START>I don’t think this really brought President Lacker along, but are you negative, President Lacker on “over the longer run?” I thought the benefit of adding “over the longer run,” consistent with what President Bullard said, was that it emphasizes the fact that just because we are not at our targets today doesn’t mean that we are not doing optimal policy.<END>
MR.
LACKER.
What does it mean arithmetically?
If you had to write it down arithmetically, what would “over the longer run” mean about the unemployment rate?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>Well, we will be calculating that over time, but I think most of us would put high odds that our longer-run natural rate of unemployment is below 9.6.<END>
MR.
LACKER.
You mean the natural rate.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
The natural rate.
MR.
LACKER.
Well, that’s not uncontroversial.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
9.6?
MR.
LACKER.
No. I’m not saying we’re at the natural rate, but, I mean
— November 2–3, 2010199 of 238 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
So this doesn’t help you at all.
Does it help you, President Bullard?
MR.
BULLARD.
What are we proposing?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I’m proposing to reinstate the phrase “over the longer run” in the fourth line of paragraph 2, in order to say that these two things are inconsistent over the longer run with the dual mandate.
Is that good?
MR.
BULLARD.
I support that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Others?
Do others have comments?
<START>[No response] All right, I see a few nods, and President Lacker’s objection is noted.<END>
So we’ll add “over the longer run.” The second one that got some support was from President Kocherlakota and it referred to the phrase “unacceptably slow.” I would propose getting rid of the phrase “it judges that,” because we wouldn’t judge disappointment, so that the last phrase would be “progress towards its objectives has been disappointingly slow.” All right?
[No response] Okay.
There are a couple of other suggestions.
One was motivated by President Fisher’s comment
<START>—I’m talking now about his comment about inflation and price stability.<END>
There’s a bit of anxiety, I think, about phrases that involve intentional increases in inflation, admittedly.
So here’s a proposal:
<START>In the two places where we have the phrase “to return inflation, over time, to levels consistent with its mandate,” how about changing it to “to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate?” The revision doesn’t have the sense of having to push it up, and it also finesses the differences among us about what the inflation target is.<END>
MR.
FISHER.
I think that’s better than what we have.
And “to help ensure” is the operative phrase.
November 2–3, 2010200 of 238 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
So that’s in two places:
at the end of the first sentence in paragraph 5 and in the middle of the first sentence in paragraph 3.
MR.
FISHER.
That would be an improvement.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Is that an improvement for you?
Okay.
If I’m going too fast, you let me know.
MR.
WARSH.
Or “unacceptably slow.” [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Lunch has been ready for an hour, I would like to point out, and we started at the second round today.
There was also a small suggestion for the very last sentence
—again, from President Kocherlakota.
In the clause that starts “in light of incoming information,” we could insert, “concerning progress towards its objectives.” Is that what you suggested?
MR.
KOCHERLAKOTA.
No, I suggested “about the rate of progress towards its objectives.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
How about “concerning the rate of progress towards?” MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.
That’s fine.
MR.
WARSH.
You had “including,” not “concerning” in your version, Mr. Chairman, because that’s not the only piece
— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>Well, now it’s getting confusing.<END>
MR.
FISHER.
Could you read it, Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
The Committee will review the pace of its purchases and the overall size of its program “in light of incoming information concerning the rate of progress towards its objectives.” November 2–3, 2010201 of 238 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.
Okay.
Sounds good.
MR.
WARSH.
Are there things we’re missing that are not included in that new phrase?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Would you like to comment?
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
You could say “such as.” MR. WARSH.
I’m fine with Narayana’s suggestion
—I think it’s great.
I just wouldn’t want to limit the range of things the public understands to be part of our reaction function.
<START>We should have our eyes wide open, and, if Narayana thinks it’s prudent, as do you, to reference one of those, that’s fine, but it shouldn’t be to the exclusion of a broader set of issues.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
You could qualify it with the words “such as.” MR. TARULLO.
Doesn’t that undermine what you’re doing?
MR.
KOCHERLAKOTA.
What else do we care about?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>Well, we care about the level of risk.<END>
MR.
LACKER.
Well, “objectives” is pretty broad, isn’t it?
MR.
WARSH.
<START>We’ve already said twice in the statement that the objectives are inflation and economic growth.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
I’m now concerned that we’re leaving out an important set of criteria, namely, emerging risks, side effects, and so on.
So I guess I would propose to leave it as it is, unless you have an alternative.
MR.
KOCHERLAKOTA.
Let me suggest another alternative, which would be to change the word “concerning” to “including.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
“Including” what?
November 2–3, 2010202 of 238 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.
“The rate of progress towards the objective.” You had suggested the phrase “concerning the rate of progress towards objectives,” and I’m suggesting changing the word “concerning” to “including.” MR. LACKER.
<START>We care about risks, because it’s a risk to achieving our objective.<END>
It should be tautological here.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>But we could care about things that don’t directly bear on inflation and economic growth.<END>
MR.
LACKER.
Financial stability?
Well, that’s one of our objectives now, right?
MR.
TARULLO.
<START>I think the issue may be, Jeff, that while we think about financial stability pretty regularly as one of our responsibilities, I’m not sure that everybody externally includes financial stability as an objective.<END>
Everybody else tends to think in terms of the dual mandate.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I don’t know what to do.
MR.
LOCKHART.
Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
MR.
LOCKHART.
I think we can be too cute here in trying to frame the conditionality.
I think the original language, just “incoming information,” is enough.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I take the general concern that, through various communication media, we need to have better explanations of what our criteria are.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
Well, I’ve changed my mind on this.
This would add yet another reference to our mandate, and I think we mention it, what, five or six times?
We’re perseverating.
November 2–3, 2010203 of 238 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
I think we’re going to stick with the status quo, if that’s okay.
On the insertion of “up to,” I agree with the majority of people who spoke about it, in that it seems inconsistent with the notion that we’re going to be reviewing this program
—we could conceivably increase it, and we could conceivably decrease it.
So I don’t think that captures the spirit of the program.
Kevin, I’m hoping that you would be satisfied if we took the very last sentence, “The Committee will regularly review,” and put it up to the end of paragraph 3
—this is something that President Bullard also suggested.
Between that and the language about price stability, we have, I think, qualified that and made it more conditional.
MR.
WARSH.
Just one question.
What’s wrong with my proposal, if we’re using the identical words?
Teach me
—what’s your hesitation?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
The problem has to do with the fact that the flow rate is not equivalent to the level of the funds rate.
The way we connect these things is by thinking about the total stock of holdings and what the relationship is to the level of the interest rate.
I don’t think, therefore, that an emphasis on the flow primarily
—and I know President Bullard disagrees with me
—is enough information.
There needs to be some kind of marker about what our expectation is in terms of the total purchases.
And I’d like to add that, just as it was easy to stop the $300 billion Treasury program you mentioned because we had given a number, so it will be easier to stop this if we have given a number.
If we just have it open-ended, at every meeting it will be harder and harder to make that decision.
MR.
WARSH.
I don’t really understand.
I’m not suggesting that we exclude putting a number in.
I’m only suggesting that we begin by stating what we are now committing to do, November 2–3, 2010204 of 238 with the same verbiage on intents and expectations;
that is, this is what we have decided to do today, and the news is the $75 billion per month.
<START>I don’t really understand why it defeats the purpose of your and the majority’s objective by simply saying “beginning with what we have decided to do today,” with your very expectation of what is going to happen by the end of the second quarter.<END>
MR.
TARULLO.
Kevin, what does it add from your point of view?
MR.
WARSH.
I think it makes it clear that, should the risks materialize, however remote they may be, the path could change.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
But that’s why I am suggesting putting this last sentence up into paragraph 3, to make it directly follow.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
I think, in particular, the sentence does that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
“The Committee will regularly review”
— MR. WARSH.
<START>Well, I think for all the fights that we’ve had about the right policy, the delta between your ask and my ask is de minimis, so neither of us should be prepared to go crazy about it.<END>
<START>[Laughter] But I would say it does indicate to me, if I understand the fierce views held by many, a certain lack of comfort with revisiting this, because I’m talking about the exact same words.<END>
<START>I won’t fall on my sword over it, but I must say I’m puzzled by why this would be something that causes concern, with the exact same words and the exact same numbers.<END>
I think it tries to put the emphasis on what I took from your statements yesterday and today, which is that you’re going to review this regularly, and, if the risks arise, you’re going to stop.
Instead, by leading with $600 billion, it says:
“It will be $600 billion, and now I’m going to tell you how we’re going to get there.” I think those are different messages.
I won’t change my vote because of it, but I must say I’m concerned by the fervor on the other side of the question.
November 2–3, 2010205 of 238 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Again, I propose to leave it.
I think we need to have the marker as the broad expectation, which is the equivalent of the policy move that we’re doing today.
I think that’s an important marker.
I do think, though, that it would be useful
—and I hope it helps you some, at least
—to put the last sentence up into paragraph 3.
MR.
TARULLO.
I’m sorry.
Kevin, would you mind just reading again what you had proposed?
MR.
WARSH.
Sure.
“In addition, the Committee intends to purchase additional long-term Treasury securities at an average pace of about $75 billion per month, which is intended to constitute a total of $600 billion by the end of the second quarter of 2011.” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
I’m where the Chairman is.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I think it conveys too little conviction.
Although I think we all agree we need to monitor the program, I don’t think there is a very strong bias, among those who want to go ahead at least, that the expected amount is going to be significantly less.
That’s an expectation of where we are going to be.
MR.
WARSH.
I mean, I didn’t change any words, so it’s hard for me to understand that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>Well, if there’s no difference in meaning, then why the concern?<END>
MR.
WARSH.
Because I think what we’re trying to announce is what we’re doing, right?
And what we’re doing, by virtue of this action, is this amount.
<START>Again, I’d say there is not a huge difference between us, and I appreciate your moving the other sentence up, but the fervency of the Bernanke-Dudley views on this does strike me as suggesting a difference.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Lockhart.
November 2–3, 2010206 of 238 MR. LOCKHART.
This may be too simplistic a way of thinking about it, but I think there are differences of opinion around the table about how much we want to stress the absolute stock amount.
<START>To cut through that, I’d be consistent with what I remember we did when we announced the first LSAP, which was to lead with the amount.<END>
I think people are going to parse this statement for every nuance more than they have ever parsed a statement, so to add another invitation to misinterpret what we’re saying doesn’t make sense to me.
If the first time around we said we were going to do a program of X, I would stick with that, just to keep it simple.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
It’s a conceptual issue.
The flow rate is not the choice variable, it’s the expected amount that is, in some sense, the choice variable.
MR.
BULLARD.
Mr. Chairman, we would be letting the markets do the math under Kevin’s approach.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I understand that, you know, multiplication is commutative and everything.
[Laughter] I understand that.
MR.
FISHER.
Mr. Chairman, could you read paragraph 3 as it now stands?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
<START>“To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery, and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to expand its holdings of securities.<END>
The Committee will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its security holdings.” The next sentence is unchanged.
Then, get rid of “in particular,” “The Committee will regularly review the pace of its security purchases and the overall size”
—and then that sentence goes on just as it is.
MS.
DUKE.
I don’t see how “in particular” is
— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I got rid of “in particular.” That’s my proposal.
Are there any further comments?
[No response] Okay.
Debbie?
November 2–3, 2010207 of 238 MS. DANKER.
The vote will be on the statement for alternative B and the directive that goes with that, as passed out by Bill, except with the four changes, one of them in two places.
In paragraph 2 on the fourth line we are adding “over the longer run” between “consistent” and “with its dual mandate.” The final line of paragraph 2 replaces “unacceptably” with “disappointingly.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
And get rid of the “judges that.” MS. DANKER.
And removes “it judges that,” correct.
The Chairman just read paragraph 3.
Paragraph 4 is unchanged.
Paragraph 5 consists now of the one sentence which has been changed along the same lines as the first sentence in 3, so that it refers to “support the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
And the last sentence has been moved up to paragraph 3.
MS.
DANKER.
Correct.
As you read it.
Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes President Bullard Yes Governor Duke Yes President Hoenig Respectfully, no President Pianalto Yes Governor Raskin Yes President Rosengren Yes Governor Tarullo Yes Governor Warsh Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
As I discussed yesterday, I’m not going to do any kind of attribution briefing or anything like that today.
I am going to do a very generic 800-word op-ed tomorrow morning, which will basically say that the Fed thinks that progress is too slow, and we’ve taken this action.
I take the Committee’s discussion at the videoconference November 2–3, 2010208 of 238 as allowing me to break the blackout period in that way.
I’ll also have opportunities on Jekyll Island, if comments come up, and, of course, I know many of you have speeches, and so on, coming up.
We also agree tentatively
—and I just want to make sure it’s okay
—that we’re going to vote on the minutes and the SEP separately, so that the projections can be released a day early and I can give a press conference related to the projections.
Any problem?
[No response] And the Desk is going to release its statement.
Brian, do you have any comment on your statement
—are you still working on it?
MR.
SACK.
<START>Well, we intend to break the $110 billion per month figure into its two components and list each in the statement.<END>
And we are making changes to the language on the 35 percent limit.
We can’t quite figure out how to handle some of the suggestions
—the “if necessary” language or the “on occasion” language
—because it suggests different judgment criteria from what we actually plan to use.
We’re afraid that would be confusing, so we’re trying to soften the language that we’re using in the paragraph.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
I’d like to make one point about the 35 percent limit.
That’s being driven not by the Desk actions, but by what people are actually offering.
And so I think it is really important that we understand it’s not the Desk actively seeking to drive the level of securities up, but it’s the offerings of securities that happen to be cheap relative to other securities in the market.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
I trust you to be very careful here in the way you word it, because, again, it can be a spark that incites the people who are quite critical of us.
You mentioned that some November 2–3, 2010209 of 238 very smart people are concerned about inflation and about whether we’re opening that door.
So just be careful, that’s all.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Kocherlakota.
MR.
KOCHERLAKOTA.
Without trying to get into the business of editing this
—I will get into the business of editing it.
[Laughter] I would just suggest that you lead with your second sentence, which is about the justification for why it might go above the 35 percent;
that is, start by talking about the reasons for that, and then say explicitly, “in order to help maintain liquidity and avoid dislocations in individual securities, SOMA holdings may exceed, on occasion, the 35…” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
You have the spirit of the comments.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
There are also the FAQs that will provide more nuance.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
You have until 5:00 tomorrow, if you want to make any changes in your forecast.
There is lunch available
—there’s no presentation.
Our next meeting is December 14.
Thank you again for a very productive meeting.
MR.
KOCHERLAKOTA.
Where is your op-ed?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
The Washington Post.
The meeting is adjourned.
Thank you.
END OF MEETING November 2–3, 2010210 of 238
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 171
