Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 30 - July 1, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., starting on Wednesday, June 30, 1982, at 3:10 p.m.,and continuing on Thursday, July 1, 1982, at 9:15 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. Keehn, Alternate for Mrs. HornMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members of theFederal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion,1/ Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis, Keran, Koch, Siegman, Trumanand Zeisel, Associate Economists1/ Attended Thursday session only.6/30 -7/1/82Mr. O'Brien, Deputy Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Lindsey and Slifman, Assistant Directors,Division of Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Johnson, Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ClevelandMessrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger,Mullineaux, Scheld, and Stern, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Dallas, Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia,Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Broaddus, Ms. Greene, and Mr. Soss, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York,and New York, respectivelyMr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew YorkMr. Erceg, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ClevelandMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of the participants at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Meulendyke, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJune 30-July 1, 1982June 30, 1982--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can call the meeting to order and seekapproval of the minutes, if someone wants to propose that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the agenda for the meeting and asks if someone would like to propose approving the minutes.


Passage number 3.
MR. MARTIN. So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Martin and the speaker are in agreement.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we'll approve theminutes. Before I go any further I want to make a remark aboutconfidentiality. There were some articles about the last meeting; Idon't know whether they were based upon any confidential informationor not. I have some other indications, not very serious, of numbersthat may have come from Federal Reserve meetings of this sort. Idon't know where this stuff came from--maybe no place. But itpresents an occasion to say again that we cannot operate, or at leastI cannot operate effectively in this room, if I have the sense thatthere are going to be any leaks. There isn't anything much we can doabout them in one sense, certainly not ex post. I would only bringthis to your attention and note the great importance that I, and I'msure you, put on this matter. There's only one recourse, which isobvious, if we have some sense of lack of confidentiality. There area lot of people in this room and we could make it quite a few fewer;we can't make it less than the Committee members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their concern about confidentiality and the potential for leaks.


Passage number 5.
MR. PARTEE. We could try that too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "We could try that too" by Mr. Partee does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It suggests a willingness to consider another option or suggestion without expressing disagreement with the previous discussion.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no other way--except that maybe wecould bring the Committee members in one-by-one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides a suggestion or possibility without presenting opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 7.
MR. MARTIN. Secret ballot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states "MR. MARTIN. Secret ballot" without providing any context or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean to make light of this becauseI don't think it is light. I would just note that there's no recourseif we get some sense of this happening. It's still very stultifyingin any event. I will say nothing more. We can go to the agenda andthe staff report on the economic situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that the situation is serious and unpleasant, but they do not argumentatively disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 9.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage is a statement made by Mr. Kichline. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention within the passage itself.


Passage number 10.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interrupt a minute, Jim: Ofthat roughly 4 percentage point [difference in the projections of]nominal GNP, how much of that is prices and how much is real.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 11.
MR. KICHLINE. In the Congressional budget [resolution], theyhave 4-1/2 percent real and 7 percent prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating the figures from the Congressional budget resolution.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And what do we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "And what do we have" does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 13.
MR. CORRIGAN. Are those annual averages, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 14.
MR. KICHLINE. No, that's fourth quarter to fourth quarter.They have nominal GNP in '83 of 11-1/2 percent, real GNP of 4-1/2percent, a deflator of 7 percent, and a fourth-quarter unemployment6/30-7/1/82rate of 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating different economic statistics without expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 15.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About half the difference is real and halfof it is prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply presenting a fact about the breakdown of a difference or comparison. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 16.
MR. KICHLINE. Right. [Statement continued--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a continuation of a statement or conversation.


Passage number 17.
]MR. ZEISEL. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Zeisel.


Passage number 18.
]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The given statement does not imply any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 19.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I suppose we might as well go toyou, Mr. Axilrod, even though it may be a little premature. We'll goback and discuss the economic situation after you are finished.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that Mr. Axilrod can present his thoughts after they discuss the economic situation.


Passage number 20.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only includes a statement by Mr. Axilrod without any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 21.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who would like to make some commentsor ask questions, particularly about the economic situation but evengeneral questions or comments on the strategic decisions facing us.I'm not looking to rush to a decision on this matter necessarily thisafternoon, and I want to get back to the foreign side. I'll just cutthis off in a while and get back to the matter we have to take up inthe international area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is merely a call for comments, questions, and opinions on various subjects without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, if nobody wants to start, I will. I agreewith the staff that we're going to have a recovery. I think that'scoming. But I suspect that it will be more of a statistical recovery--one that economists can point to rather than something thatbusinessmen are going to identify with. It seems to me that businessattitudes are still pretty sour and that balance sheets are prettywell strained. So, my guess is that, given the level of interestrates, your forecast is probably pretty optimistic, with most of therisk on the down side. How would you assess the risks of a deviation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
In this passage, Mr. Boehne expresses disagreement with the forecast presented by the staff. He believes that while there will be a statistical recovery that economists can identify, businessmen will not feel the effects and remain pessimistic due to strained balance sheets. He considers the forecast to be optimistic and assesses the risks as being on the down side.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I would agree with you. Certainly ourperception is that the risks are on the down side for real growth.Looking at the various sectors, the business sector is the one thatprobably worries us the most. While we have over the last severalforecasts reduced the expected performance of investment outlays--asJerry mentioned, it's about normal now--what we didn't mention is thatthe normal range in the postwar period is -2 to 17 percent and we'reat 8 percent. So, there's a lot of room at one end or the other.Looking at the data and trying to make some allowance for that, in ourjudgment that 8 percent is about right. But surely the Redbook andthe qualitative comments that we pick up are worrisome. I don't seeany major risk of this being an explosive recovery and I perceive therisk to be on the down side. And I think the financial structure ofthe various sectors and the level of interest rates are real problemsas we look ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline agrees that the risks are on the downside for real growth but also mentions that the qualitative comments and data are worrisome. This suggests some uncertainty or disagreement about the potential for recovery and the level of risk.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
MR. BOEHNE. I've heard a good deal more concern expressed bybankers in recent weeks about credit quality problems going out overthe next 6 months or so. If I keep hearing a story enough times, Ithink there's some credibility to it. They say they now think thatcustomers they had never really thought about as being a problem aregoing to be a problem over the next 6 months. I don't think anybodyin the room could do any better job of putting together a forecast. I6/30-7/1/82believe Jim has done his usual good job. But with interest rateswhere they are and the weakness of the business sector, the odds areon the side that we're probably going to have a weak recovery. Andwhile I wouldn't forecast it, I would not rule out that there is areasonable chance the recovery could abort and that we could haveanother recession in 1983.On the longer-term strategy, I would come down on the sidethat it's time to show some flexibility [in setting] these targets atmidyear and I would raise the [M1] target. As I look out over thenext 6 months, it seems to me that we would have to keep M1 [growth]at 3 percent or under during the second half in order to [lower it to]the top end of our target [range for the year]. If we get a 10percent bulge in July, we would have to live with something like 1-1/2percent growth from August to the end of the year. Maybe velocitywill increase and maybe liquidity demands will go down, but it seemsto me that there is a very large risk here and that we need a littlebreathing room. There is, of course, the risk on the inflationaryexpectations side and on credibility, but I believe our credibilitywould be enhanced by being realistic. It's just very difficult tosell the limits that we imposed on ourselves. So, some flexibilityand some upward adjustment in the targets would make sense given thesituation we're in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing concern about credit quality problems and the possibility of a weak recovery or even another recession in 1983. He is also advocating for flexibility and an upward adjustment in targets, while acknowledging the risks involved. This contrasts with the more optimistic tone of Jim's forecast and the limits that have been imposed.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 26.
MR. BALLES. I wanted to ask Jim Kichline a question on page2 of the package of charts, which deals with the Federal budget. Itcomes as a surprise in a way that you and your people are looking at amuch larger deficit in fiscal '83--some $60 billion larger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Balles wanting to ask a question about the federal budget. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 27.
MR. PARTEE. It's $60 billion more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. PARTEE simply states that the amount is $60 billion more.


Passage number 28.
MR. BALLES. It's $60 billion--actually $62 billion--greaterthan in the official budget resolution. I have a couple of questionson that. I don't doubt that we could see an outcome like that, but isthat view widely shared among independent analysts, so to speak. Ifit is, it will have a certain bearing on expectations, psychology, andeverything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the view being widely shared among independent analysts.


Passage number 29.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we had one of our people look at some ofthe letters coming out of brokerage firms in New York, and among thefolks who watch this I think the general perception is that a deficitin the area of $140 to $150 billion is a likely outcome. In fact,market developments after this was enacted are probably consistentwith the view that the market didn't believe $104 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention. It simply presents the opinion of Mr. Kichline about the likely outcome of a deficit.


Passage number 30.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The presence of the word "yes" indicates that there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 31.
MR. KICHLINE. In fact, [the market] had already discountedthose actions. So, I think $140 to $150 billion is the kind of numberthat is being talked about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It presents a statement made by Mr. Kichline, providing his opinion and the number that is being talked about.


Passage number 32.
MR. BALLES. I see. My fear is, and I'd like your opinion,that that in itself is going to be a factor damping any possiblefuture decline in long-term interest rates or delaying such a declineand holding those rates up longer. Is that a warranted fear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their fear and seeking the opinion of the other person.


Passage number 33.
6/30-7/1/82MR. KICHLINE. Well, truthfully, I don't know how to forecastlong-term rates; I'm not sure I know how to forecast short-term rateseither. But in any event, in our flow-of-funds accounts we do thinkthat the picture that is emerging, given the monetary assumptions, isthat this budget outlook really is consistent with crowding out. Itdidn't occur in 1975 in a classic sense, but we're talking about aperiod when we're expecting real growth in the economy associated withwhat would normally be some rising demand. And the Treasury poundingaway and essentially taking half of the total funds raised is asituation that from a credit market point of view has to apply upwardpressure on rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their lack of knowledge in forecasting long-term and short-term rates and then discusses their opinion on the budget outlook.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 34.
MS. TEETERS(.). John, this points up the inappropriateness,I think, of trying to establish growth rates for next year when we'reright in the middle of the budget process. [It would be better] if wecould wait to do this until late in the fall or even early next year.To try to establish growth rates with all the uncertainty about thisparticular aspect of it just highlights the problems that we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, disagrees with the idea of establishing growth rates for next year during the budget process. She argues that it would be better to wait until late in the fall or even early next year.


Passage number 35.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a comment. We're supposed tobe undergoing this exercise by law in the light of what theAdministration is projecting and what its plans are and so forth. Idon't know of any different plans in terms of any legislativeinitiatives. They are working on their forecasts. I don't know theexact [numbers] or, if I knew, I've forgotten. But they are subjectto change anyway. They have a forecast which is I'm sure in realterms somewhat higher than the staff's forecast, but it's not out ofsight. It probably has a higher [real] GNP and higher prices, whichalso makes--. [Secretary's note: The Chairman, speaking to amessenger who informed him of a phone call, asked "Is he on thephone."]MESSENGER. I don't know, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not know of any different plans and is acknowledging that the forecast is subject to change.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess it's not urgent.So, they probably come up with a significantly higher nominalGNP from the combination of the two, although I don't think thedifferences are going to be tremendous in either element. But puttingthat into a budgetary picture, they are closer to the staff estimatethan to the budget resolution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not contain any overt expression of disagreement or contention. It is a statement that provides an opinion or analysis without any conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 37.
MR. BALLES. Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or contrasting views or opinions. The statement is a simple question without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 38.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They haven't settled on it yet. But theyare not down at $104 billion, where the budget resolution is, by avery considerable margin. Now, just what they're going to print, Idon't know. But in general terms, apart from the economicassumptions, I don't think they would deviate widely from the kind ofassumptions that the staff has made as to how much of the budgetresolution's specific actions will be converted into real actions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the uncertainty about the specific details of a budget and suggests that there may not be significant deviations from the assumptions made by the staff regarding the implementation of the budget resolution.


Passage number 39.
MR. BALLES. Thank you. In addition to the question I had,Mr. Chairman, I do have a comment. Ed Boehne has in effect alreadymade it for me. I have been hearing essentially the same kind of talkfrom a very wide circle of businessmen and bankers in our District.They are more worried than I've seen them worried in my adult lifeabout the spreading risks of bankruptcies for a great number of6/30-7/1/82institutions that they would not normally consider being on a problemlist. I'm tempted to follow the same strategy that Ed has alreadymentioned--I guess that's strategy 2 in the Bluebook--and have atemporary easing of our monetary targets. If we're going to do thatwithout generating fear that the Fed will embark on a permanentaccelerated program of rapid monetary growth, midyear is about theonly time we can do it and get away with it in the sense that weconcurrently could combine a modest upward move in the 1982 ranges by1/2 point or so with a retraction of that for 1983 on a provisionalbasis--despite Governor Teeters' well stated comments about all theproblems of setting forth 1983 ranges. If we did that, we could headoff, or at least minimize, the dangers of announcing a change in anupward direction from our original 1982 ranges. That was myprovisional leaning coming into the room. Ed has already stated thereasons for it and I'm still reserving final judgment on that untilI've heard a full-scale presentation of views, pro and con, from theother members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing agreement with a previous comment made by Ed Boehne and stating that he has been hearing similar concerns from other businessmen and bankers in his District. He mentions a potential strategy and expresses his own provisional leaning, but does not indicate disagreement with any other views or opinions.


Passage number 40.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 41.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I want to pick up on Ed Boehne's commentstoo. It's extremely hard to believe that we wouldn't get somerecovery out of a $40 billion tax cut--$30 billion in taxes and $10billion in social security--starting tomorrow. And the inventorynumbers in the aggregate, though there are some exceptions, seemfavorable to a slowing at least in inventory liquidation. That oughtto be enough to give us some increase in the period immediately ahead.But I, too, am concerned about a relapse as time goes on andas we get into 1983. I note in particular that the staff's forecastfor this period presumes a flattening out, relatively quickly in termsof the cycles that one goes through, in real business fixedinvestment. They have it dropping rather sharply through midyear andthen stabilizing. I wonder what the basis is for expecting that therewould be such a sudden stabilization of that number considering thatit consists essentially of business plant and equipment. Almosteverything I've heard--and it's in the Redbook too--about what ishappening in machinery orders and equipment suggests continueddeterioration there as well as in commercial construction of shoppingcenters and office buildings. Again, almost everything one hearssuggests substantially growing problems with overbuilding in theoffice area. And then, finally, oil and gas well drilling, which Iguess is a fair size item in the [business fixed investment] figure,has been affected by the outlook for a sharp drop in oil prices. Theeffect that has on drilling activity has been reported at our lastseveral meetings. Considering that it's an item with a long lead timeand considering these things and the financial state of manybusinesses, one wonders how [corporate] budgets could be consideredand approved that would call for rises in capital spending, how thefunds could be raised, and how the contracts could be let and all thiswould result in a stabilization of real business spending by themiddle of next year. It just seems to me that instead there might bea very, very protracted and sizable continuing decline in capitalspending as we go through next year. And that would greatly changethe first half of the outlook.Similarly, the residential construction industry isdemoralized. They're concerned not only about the price of money,6/30-7/1/82which you forecast to be remaining at 16-1/2 percent, but about theavailability of funds because the savings and loans are goingbankrupt, and also about the possibility that people will be pullingback from making commitments of that kind in an environment wherehousing prices are no longer rising appreciably and in many cases arefalling. It's also an environment in which balloon payment loans willbe maturing next year, and many more bankruptcies and foreclosures andtakeovers of property will result from that. So, one wonders whetherthere would be the basis for what is, in terms of percentage rates ofincrease, a pretty sizable rise in residential building.My final concern has to do with net exports. Although thosecharts that Ted Truman presented are very calm, I think there is avery real possibility that there won't be very much recovery abroador, if there is much recovery abroad, that there won't be thefinancial capacity to hold up exports to some countries like Mexicoand Canada that are important to the United States. Indeed, given theprice of the dollar, the price of equipment purchased in this countryis now so high that it seems unlikely that we would do very well inthat area.So, if we did have greater weakness in plant and equipmentcontinuing in 1983, a failure of residential construction to recover,and a further deterioration in net exports, or more than forecast, Ithink that constitutes sufficient basis for thinking that the recoverymay falter before too many months have gone by. If it does, and doesso in an environment where interest rates have stayed high, I'm surethat the financial distress that the bankers are worried about will bewith us in spades. It's very difficult to forecast. So, as I see it,that's our hazard. The question that I have is how we should plan aposture for monetary policy that will minimize the very real risk of atrue shock to the economy later on--probably not until 1983. I'm notsure; I'd rather hear other peoples' reports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the staff forecast for a sudden stabilization of real business fixed investment and raises concerns about the financial state of many businesses and the availability of funds for capital spending. The speaker also expresses concerns about the residential construction industry and the possibility of a further deterioration in net exports. This disagreement and concern suggests contention in the passage.


Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich. We're still at a verypreliminary stage, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Governor Wallich is simply stating their opinion about the current stage of something without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 43.
MR. WALLICH. I see a recovery as much more likely thancontinued stagnation. I guess I don't differ too much in that fromwhat others have said. There are risks on the down side, perhaps inthe form of unforeseeable financial shocks or perhaps in the form of agradual attrition of investment spending. I would remind you that,unfortunately, this is going to be the shape of the future if thebudget doesn't come into better balance. There will be lessinvestment in the economy than we normally would expect and moreconsumption, which we will get as a result of the tax cut. So, ashift to that posture is not all that unexpected. On the other hand,there may be some factors that do help sustain investment. Thefinancing gap is moving toward zero. Cash flow is strong, althoughunfortunately not from profits. So, I see a greater prospect of acontinued recovery than of a resumption of the downturn. We areprobably at the bottom of the recession. At that point everythinglooks very bad in absolute terms, in level terms. In terms of ratesof change, obviously, things have improved a great deal. Things areflattening out now. And I think one ought to look at them in terms ofthe rates of change rather than in terms of the levels. Meanwhile,we're shifting from a situation where we've done better so far oninflation than on growth and employment, which again seem to be6/30-7/1/82becoming the less achieved objectives. I fear that we're reaching thelow point of inflation and may find it rising from here on out and inthis I differ somewhat from the staff forecast. We will get to astage where we'll be telling each other at subsequent meetings that wedid better on growth and the unemployment rate, but unfortunatelyworse on inflation. That leads me to think that we need to maintain adegree of pressure in order to continue wringing out the inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are risks and uncertainties but ultimately expresses optimism for the prospect of a continued recovery.


Passage number 44.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you were going to suggest weneed more than one tool of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing the thought that more than one tool of policy is needed.


Passage number 45.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we do. We miss every conceivable goalbut in the optimum manner of what we can do with one tool; we can'thit them all. As for the strategic decisions, it seems to me weshould not be rigid. If we need an increase in the ranges, we need itand should do it. It's not clear to me that the loss of ourcredibility from overshooting is any less bad than the loss of ourcredibility from raising the ranges when it looks as if [we are]caving in. There is a reason for thinking that these targets may betoo low. The logic of our approach involving a steady money growthand, therefore, cyclically varying interest rates is that in arecession interest rates should come down very sharply. They did in1980; they have not done so now. And that raises the question ofwhether these ranges are indeed too low. But on the other side, I seefactors that are likely to make them more adequate. First, going intorecovery will accelerate velocity. Second, various technologicalchanges that may be ahead ought to tend to accelerate velocity.Historically, we've been fooled more often by underestimating velocitygains than by overestimating them. I realize either risk is possible,but if I had to make a decision, I would bet on the rise in velocity.Accordingly, I would be cautious in changing the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 46.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 47.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I guess I'm going to say about whateverybody else has said, so I'll try to be brief. I would put down aforecast that doesn't look a lot different from what the staff haswritten down. But I, too, think the risks are predominantly on thedown side. I would mention three factors on that. One is theextremely gloomy attitude that prevails in the business and financialcommunity and to some extent, too, among customers. All of us couldlist a dozen different reasons for that, but I think increasingly aperception is growing and is reflected in the kind of deficitestimates that are being made now in the financial markets that we maybe in a state close to paralysis in terms of finding our way out ofthis fiscal box. It's a very frightening situation. The secondfactor that has been mentioned a couple of times is the possibilitythat shocks--and I wouldn't call them just financial shocks, Henry,but shocks that originate in the financial sector which may beaffecting primarily nonfinancial firms--may be coming along that willcause great consternation around the nation and make the attitudesstill worse. The third factor is the fact that the staff's forecastdepends on the expectation that interest rates won't rise as recoverybegins. And that is in turn predicated on a judgment--and I thinkthere are strong arguments for it as well as against it--that we willhave a downward shift of money demand, which will permit an increasein velocity of something like 5 or 5-1/2 percent at an annual rate.That may happen and then again it may not.6/30-7/1/82What I would hesitate to see us do is to adopt a strategy nowthat conditions the kind of economic performance outlined here, whichis really a miserable performance, on the assumption that that willhappen and if it doesn't happen, the outcome will be much worse. Ithink we need to try to find a strategy that gets us out of that box.I look at the monetary aggregates as Henry does and say that there aregood reasons for thinking that we haven't provided enough money. Ithink credit developments are reflecting that. In Jim's chart onfunds raised by domestic nonfinancial sectors as a percent of GNP, ifyou take the difference between the total and the federal part, thenumber is down to barely over 6 percent of GNP. Now, that number hasa long-term historical growth trend. If you look at a chart thatplots that ratio from 1952 on and plot a trend line through it, anormative ratio would seem to be something like double that figure.That figure is as low as it is now in part because the economy is inrecession but in major part because interest rates are so very high.I think we have to be very careful in trying to work our way out ofthis box. We can't solve all these problems, but I think we can helpto solve one of them. And that is that we have more restraint on the[economic] system from the monetary side than we want at the moment.In trying to provide some way to let money grow a little faster, weought to look over all the alternatives. One of them is to raise thetargets for 1982; another is to leave them where they are but make aclear, public announcement that we're going to permit money growth toexceed that target for reasons having to do with liquidity preferenceor for technical reasons. The third--and here I think one can make anargument with some cogency that perhaps the idea of continuity ofpolicy over a longer period working toward lower growth of money andcredit and toward reducing inflation--could best be presented if werebased our money growth targets for 1982, taking into account thefact that we undershot so much last year. But again, I don't knowwhich way we can do this and best maintain credibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 48.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Mr. Solomon." This is because the passage simply states someone's name without providing any additional information or context to suggest any disagreement or controversy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, since I agree with Lyle'spresentation, let me try and answer that last question, or at leastgive my personal view on it. My own view is that we should say thatwe would tolerate a modest or limited overrun in view of the NOWaccount behavior, that is NOW account funds not acting as transactionsmoney. The reason I think we should choose that rather than either ofthe other two options--rebasing or raising the targets--is first ofall that raising the target a half point to 6 percent target implies aprecision that is almost ridiculous, given the possible swings invelocity in the second half of the year. If we were seriouslyconsidering 6-1/2 percent, that might make more sense. But I don'tsee the point of changing the targets a half point when I think itwould be more consistent and better received in the markets if wesimply indicated that we would tolerate a modest or limited overrun inview of the NOW account behavior.Stepping back, I think it's worth mentioning that ourforecast is significantly different from Jim's. We have significantlyhigher real growth in the second half and significantly higherinflation. We are almost 1-1/2 points higher on real growth, at 3.9percent, and almost 2 points higher on inflation. We think inflationwill be about 7.3 to 7.5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with Jim's forecast and presents their own significantly different forecast for real growth and inflation.


Passage number 50.
6/30-7/1/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that for '83 or '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification about a date.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 51.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, for the second half of '82. TheBoard staff has inflation coming down steadily from the secondquarter; it drops from 6.1 to 5.7 percent in the third quarter andthen drops again to 5.4 percent in the fourth quarter, whereas wethink it will be around 7-1/2 percent in the second half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the Board staff expects inflation to come down steadily in the second half of '82, while the speaker's personal opinion is that inflation will be around 7-1/2 percent in the second half of the year.


Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're talking about the GNP deflator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of fact and does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply identifying the topic being discussed.


Passage number 53.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about the GNP implicitdeflator, yes. For what it's worth, I don't conclude anything fromthat except that this difference in forecasts tends to corroborate afeeling that, as has been expressed here, we should be prepared totolerate a modest overrun or raise the target, if it were theconsensus view that it had to be raised a whole point. It's just thatI don't think a half-point increase makes much sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing agreement and a willingness to tolerate a modest overrun or raise the target.


Passage number 54.
MR. PARTEE. You would say that very clearly to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact or opinion without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 55.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 56.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, so that people wouldn't keep saying thatthe Fed has to get money down into the range and therefore willtighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing an idea or suggestion.


Passage number 57.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At the time that Paul testifies, Iwould announce it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply informing the reader of what was done at the time when Paul testified.


Passage number 58.
MR. PARTEE. An overshoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states "Mr. Partee. An overshoot." without providing any further information or context. Therefore, there is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 59.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [A limited overrun] wouldn't be muchof a move beyond what he said earlier when he talked about the upperpart of the ranges and then he talked about the NOW account behaviorand we were quite comfortable, et cetera. I think it would be lesslikely to be interpreted as a reversal of policy or caving in toCongressional pressures to raise the targets. Even though otherpeople haven't discussed '83 too much, I think it would be dangerousto lower the '83 targets. In other words, I would want to stick withthe 5-1/2 percent rather than do another half-point cut the way we'vebeen doing the last couple of years. Among miscellaneous points, Ibelieve it is worth mentioning that, like Lyle, I feel not at allconfident that we will see a reversal of the strength that we've seenin liquidity preference. I think it's very possible that we willcontinue to see this phenomenon and that we could see a veryuncomfortable pressure on interest rates if we don't give ourselves alittle more room. And one reason we ought to give ourselves more roomin the revision of the '82 target is that it will influence ourdecision on the intermeeting growth path, the targets we'll get totomorrow. That's all I'd like to say now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions without any apparent opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 61.
MR. ROOS. I would start by saying that as far as theremainder of '82 is concerned I would prefer alternative A. whichimplies an M1 growth of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent--in other words,maintaining our present range but with the understanding, either tacitor stated, that M1 will be permitted to grow either at the top or6/30-7/1/82slightly above the 5-1/2 percent upper limit of our range. As for thelonger-run growth strategy, I would prefer strategy IV, which assumesthat M1 would indeed grow at 6 percent or thereabouts this year and bereduced to 5-1/2 percent in 1983 and 5 percent in 1984.I am really not surprised, according to the way we analyzethe effect of money growth on the economy, about output. I'm notamazed or surprised about where we are at the present. I think thepresent extreme softness in the economy can be directly attributed tothe period of approximately 6 months last year when we permitted moneyto grow at a very, very low rate. I believe there is a definiterelationship [because of] an abrupt reduction in money growth and ourkeeping it at below trend for as long as a 6-month period.In looking ahead, I think the downside risk is a very realrisk because if we decide to attempt to bring growth of M1, which hasbeen at about a 7 percent rate for the first six months of this year,significantly within our announced range for 1982, that would entailreducing the rate of money growth to about 3 percent for the last sixmonths of the year. And if we were to fall into that trap, it'salmost certain that next year we would face either a continuation oran acceleration of the recession we're presently experiencing. Andthat would pose a severe threat to what we've been trying to dobecause then those who are apostles of expansion would most certainlybe on our backs and ask us [unintelligible]. If we go into anothereconomic dip in '83, I think that could well spell the end of anattempt to control money growth intelligently--some of you might notconsider it intelligently--to accomplish certain economic purposes.Now, if we feel that we will resist the temptation to jam onthe brakes over the last six months of this year in order to bring theaggregates within their ranges, we have the question of whether it'sbetter to adjust our ranges upward and announce that now or torecognize at least among ourselves that there probably will be someovershoot beyond our stated ranges for the rest of the year. Beforereceiving the Bluebook, I on three occasions tested groups of peopleat home: our board of directors, twelve corporate treasurers of ourlargest companies who were in for lunch, and most recently the fiveheads of our major banks. I asked them this hypothetical question:If the Fed faces the inevitability of an overshoot of its presentrange in the last six months [of this year], do you think the Fed isbetter off to adjust its range upward or to tolerate the strength forthe rest of the year and then say that there were certaincircumstances that caused us to overshoot these stated targetsslightly. And this is no exaggeration, Mr. Chairman, there wasunanimity, and I underscore unanimity--not one voice to the contrary.They said: For heavens sake, don't adjust your ranges upward becauseif you do that, it will be interpreted as a dramatic indication thatyou are softening up on your anti-inflationary effort. This was justthe judgment of a bunch of people, but they felt that the danger toour credibility would be significantly less if we were to allow aminor overshoot of our stated targets rather than announce an upwardadjustment of those targets. So, that's where I stand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own preferences and opinions, but there is no conflict with others or differing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 62.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 63.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I share many of the concerns thatLyle expressed about the risks in this economy. And I come down to-10-6/30-7/1/82the bottom line that the most likely outcome is very near to what thestaff has projected. We actually come out a tad more optimistic inexpecting a little more real growth, a little less inflation, and alittle lower rate of unemployment. But we were assuming a 4 percentrate of growth in the money supply. So, to show our versatility andflexibility, we tried it at 4-1/2 percent and came out pretty much thesame way. It really didn't change the [outcome] appreciably. But Ido have a lot of differences with most of those who have spoken aboutwhat we ought to do with our long-run targets. I'm disappointed, ofcourse, as I'm sure all of us are, that we're ending the first halfwith M1 and M2 apparently above the upper limits of our ranges. Anddepending upon what this new revision does to M1, that aggregate mightbe well above the upper end of its range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the concerns raised by Lyle about the risks in the economy. However, the speaker also shares a slightly more optimistic outlook on the projected outcomes. The only point of difference is the speaker's disappointment with the current levels of M1 and M2, which are above the upper limits of the ranges set by the group.


Passage number 64.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It can't be well above. Of course, thatdoes depend upon what one assumes for June but it can't be well above.I don't know what your interpretation of well above is. This weekwe'll be within the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact or their opinion without contradicting or challenging any other point of view.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 65.
MR. BLACK. [This week M1 is] moderately down. I hope thatwhat the staff now forecasts is what happens; in that case I don'tthink one can say "well above," but I don't know whether that[projection] really will hold up. I recognize the possibility thatthis burst in M1 may well reflect unusually strong demands forliquidity on the part of the public or it may be partly a reflectionof the unusually sharp drop we had in interest rates toward the end oflast year. But it's at least equally plausible that it has resultedfrom our having put out too many reserves, as I think John Balles'memorandum suggested very cogently. We're now in a situation, ofcourse, that to stay within our targets we're going to have todecelerate the rate of growth in the aggregates. And that puts usbetween a rock and a hard place. But even though it isn't a verycomfortable choice to think about having to slow down the rate ofgrowth in the aggregates somewhat from where they've been, I think itwould be a serious mistake to raise the long-run targets. It seems tome that the key to the sustained recovery has to be an improvement inthe financial conditions of the business sector. And I don't reallybelieve we're going to get that unless we have an improvement in thelong-term capital markets--a reduction in long-term rates. And asyou, Mr. Chairman, and others have stressed very well, we have acommitment to lowering our targets gradually over the long run to getthem to a noninflationary rate. If we were to move the targets now,as Larry's survey suggested, I think most people would interpret it asan abandonment of our stated objective. And such a change in thepublic's perception of what they think we're doing could postponeindefinitely the strengthening in the capital markets that I think weso urgently need. So, I would opt very strongly for retaining ourpresent targets and hope that we don't overshoot them. So far as nextyear is concerned, my inclination is to cut those ranges by about 1/2percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is discussing the growth of M1 and mentions several possible explanations for the increase. He also discusses the need to decelerate the rate of growth in the aggregates, but expresses disagreement with raising the long-run targets. He argues that raising the targets could be interpreted as abandoning the stated objective and could harm the financial conditions of the business sector.


Passage number 66.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because the sentence "Mr. Guffey" does not provide any information or context to determine if there is disagreement. It is just a mention of someone's name.


Passage number 67.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, everything that I want to say hasalready been said, so I'll synthesize quickly: First, I think thatthe staff's forecast is probably as good as any forecast and secondlythat the risk is on the down side in the latter part of 1982 simplybecause the forecast is based upon some downward shift in money-11-6/30-7/1/82[demand] or an increase in the velocity that may or may not occur.Those are all prospective judgments and there is no historical recordreally to support them. But having said that, it seems clear that weare in risky waters. There are businesses in financial stress; Idon't think we should be surprised at that in view of the monetarypolicy we have been running. We have achieved some good on the priceside.Starting from that point, on the question of what we shoulddo for the last half of 1982--the choices being to retain, raise, orrebase--I'm attracted by the arguments that say that we shouldprobably retain the 1982 ranges of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent and 6 to 9percent for the aggregates, with some sort of public announcement inyour testimony that growth would be at the upper end or even [that wewould] tolerate some modest overshoot rather than take the affirmativestep of increasing the ranges up to 6 percent, for example. As Tonyhas pointed out, those are very modest increases and they really arenot very meaningful. And because of the credibility concern, I'drather stay with the current ranges and make a public announcementthat we're going to be flexible rather than do what is necessary tocome within the 5-1/2 percent top.As to 1983, it would be my preference to reestablish therange for M1 in 1983 at the current 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent with theexplanation that we will indeed be at or near the top of the range for1982 and that because of past performance we don't expect it to bewithin the range by the last half of this year and thus the 2-1/2 to5-1/2 percent [in 1983] is still consistent with our professed desireto move money growth to lower levels over some extended period oftime. There is a lot of flexibility between 2-1/2 and 5-1/2 percentif we achieve 5-1/2 or 6 percent for 1982. If we want to reinforcethe commitment to move to lower growth rates in 1982, we mightconsider adjusting the M2 range down 1/2 point. If you recall, wehave not had any downward adjustment in M2 for two years now, Ibelieve. And if the [MPS] model means anything at all, it wouldsuggest that in 1983 M2 will grow somewhat more modestly than M1 andthus a 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range for M2 would be consistent withwhat we're looking for in M1 at 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing what has already been said and expressing their own preferences and ideas. They mention that the staff's forecast is probably as good as any forecast and that the risk is on the down side in the latter part of 1982. They also discuss their preference for retaining the 1982 ranges for aggregates and reestablishing the range for M1 in 1983. Overall, the speaker seems to be in agreement with the general sentiments expressed.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
MR. KEEHN. To start first with the economic situation: Mycomments are repetitive of what I've said in the past and repetitiveof what we've already heard. The situation in the Midwest continuesto be very, very serious. I keep reading about the recovery that isgoing to occur but I am coming to the view that it is something we allhope will come but perhaps may not. Indeed, I'm beginning to have alurking suspicion that we could be on the front edge of something muchworse than we realize. Virtually all of the sectors in the Midwest[economy] are continuing to deteriorate. The capital goods figureswere in the paper. All the major companies are continuing to reviewtheir capital expenditure programs and each review results in afurther curtailment. The steel industry is operating at a capacitylevel not seen since the 1930s; that speaks for itself. In theagricultural sector, the situation is a touch better on the livestockside but not on the grain side. And the farm implement manufacturersreally are in a very, very difficult state.-12-6/30-7/1/82So, my comments, regrettably, are unchanged from what I havesaid before; indeed I think things are a little more serious. One CEOperhaps summed it up best by telling me the other day that in his viewthe situation is terrible, that it is getting much worse, and that anattitude of fright is now beginning to spread over the businesscommunity. I think perhaps we have a new problem, though I admit it'sa bit anecdotal, in that I'm hearing some comments from variousbankers that I've talked to about the buildup in problem assets. I'vebeen astounded by the increase in total loans that has taken placethis year in the face of the recession that we're dealing with. Ihave just a hunch that there are a lot of loans that are, to use theeuphemistic phrase, desperation loans, and that we could be seeingsome nonperforming assets resulting in some losses. Summarizing mycomments about the District: The situation is very, very serious.With regard to our strategy, unless I were to hear some veryspecific definitional and structural reasons to change our targetsthis year--and I haven't heard them so far--I think that we are theonly credible game in town and that to change the ranges this yearwould run a very significant risk. I would leave the ranges this yearas is, but I would certainly aim at the high side and wouldn't be theleast bit upset if we were to miss or go over. Looking ahead to nextyear, in light of my comments, I think to reduce the ranges for nextyear would be a very serious step and I certainly would be inclined toleave them just where they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Keehn, disagrees with the idea that there will be a recovery in the Midwest economy and expresses concern that the situation may actually worsen. He also disagrees with the idea of changing the target ranges for the next year, arguing that it would be a serious step.


Passage number 70.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 71.
MR. FORD. Picking up on what Nancy said, I really wish thatwe could wish away the problem of having to decide. But as theChairman pointed out, we have the law to contend with and we have toget up there and say something [about the ranges]. Looking at thebudget picture: If you figure that this [fiscal] year, which is 2/3behind us, the deficit has run right around $100 billion, thedifference between the first projected resolution on the budget andthe actual has averaged over $50 billion per year for the last threefiscal years, including this one. My feeling is that the market, assuggested in the summary we got from the staff, is looking at $104billion as pie in the sky and that something more like what the staffput in is what the market would consider realistic, based ondifferences between previous first resolutions and actual performancerecently. And that says that fiscal policy is very expansive andunlikely to improve in the context of an election campaign.Were we to come in behind that and give the signal that we'repurposely changing the monetary track to move to a more expansive modeby raising the targets on top of the existing fiscal situation, thenwe would appear to have both a more expansive fiscal policy and a moreexpansive monetary policy. Our so-called flexibility wouldn't achievethe results in the area we get the most heat about, which is interestrates--"the results" being a reduction in interest rates with the hopethat it will relieve the pressures on peoples' balance sheets and theinterest payments they have to make, for those who have to make them.We could well find it to be counterproductive in the area of interestrates because the market would simply mark up the real premium indemands in response to both fiscal and monetary expansion. So, I'd gowith the group of people who have said: "Let's not change the statedrange." And certainly let's not make a superficial change that has a-13-6/30-7/1/82definite signal value by adding 1/2 point. That gives a signal but itreally doesn't amount to anything quantitatively; we would be throwingin the towel symbolically without doing anything substantively.Therefore, I come out for staying with the range we have for the longterm. At this point I don't feel inclined to continue to drop therange in any significant way for next year. I'd rather hold off for awhile on that until we get more information. So I come down withpeople who say--it seems like the majority of the people here--weshould stick with what we have on the range that we have stated andcontinue to say we're trying to get within the range and pray like thedevil that we're in the range this week and don't get blown out of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and position on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may last one week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 73.
MR. PARTEE. Mr. Chairman, there is a fourth possibility thatwasn't mentioned and that is to rebase using the second quarter as thebase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating an alternative possibility without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 74.
 That is to say, in effect, we overshot but now we're going to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is also another possibilityobviously, just mechanically, which is raising some ranges and notothers. But on rebasing at the second quarter, as a matter ofreporting to you if nothing else--and it may be more than reporting toyou--Mr. Reuss had a suggestion for us as usual when I was testifyinga few weeks ago and that is specifically what he said. He said "Whydon't you rebase on the second quarter and adopt a range specificallyof 2-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent for the second half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different possibilities and suggestions.


Passage number 75.
"MR. PARTEE. Well, I was thinking of the same range for theremainder of the year as earlier specified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, acknowledges that he was thinking of the same range for the remainder of the year as earlier specified.


Passage number 76.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context.


Passage number 77.
 But there's still a fourth possibility here andthat is, if we say we're going to overshoot--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have more than four already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is merely mentioning a fourth possibility without conflicting with any other ideas or opinions.


Passage number 78.
MS. TEETERS. All right, I'll suggest a fifth. If we'regoing to overshoot, it seems to me that we have problems in explainingourselves to the market because we leave them without any informationas to what is an acceptable overshoot. One possibility is to more orless quantify what we find to be an acceptable overshoot, given allthe uncertainties, which we can outline, and they have been outlined.We could stay with our ranges for this year and then give some idea asto what the acceptable overshoot would be--in the neighborhood of anextra one percentage point or something of that sort. It may turn outthat as we go through the year growth will come back down into theranges and we can just forget about the extra 1 percentage point thatwe've added on. I'm concerned that we never change the ranges,gentlemen, and we're supposed to be flexible. So, it would besomething if we could break out of that cage, which seems to me verydesirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is one person (Ms. Teeters) suggesting a solution and expressing her concern for the need to be flexible and provide clear information to the market.


Passage number 79.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let's be flexible somewhere else thistime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests changing the location or approach to something without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 80.
MR. GRAMLEY. We've changed the ranges; we always change themdownward. See how flexible we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley is stating that "we always change them downward" to emphasize the flexibility of his group.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 81.
-14-6/30-7/1/82MR. BALLES. I think she means we've never changed--I don'tbelieve we have--by making a midcourse correction in a rangetentatively announced in July for the following year. We have neverchanged that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles disagrees with the statement that the organization has never made a midcourse correction in a range tentatively announced in July for the following year. He states that he doesn't believe they have never changed that.


Passage number 82.
MS. TEETERS. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 83.
MR. BALLES. That's the kind of inflexibility that hasbothered me also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 84.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. ROOS" without any context or further information.


Passage number 85.
 Prior to '79 we were probably the most flexible--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The sentence provides a statement about a past situation without introducing any conflicting perspectives or ideas.


Passage number 86.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, we've been describing the M1box into which we have woven ourselves rather tightly here. I'veheard a number of people say that they think our policy is too tightbut we can't do anything about it. And it seems to me that that isindeed an unfortunate situation to be in. It has cleared my mindconsiderably to have arrived at a conclusion that M1 is no longer areliable guide to policy and I would recommend that view to all of youor recommend that you at least contemplate it. It clears one's mindon such issues as contemporaneous reserve requirements and many otherthings. If you look at the situation, last year M1 ran low relativeto the other aggregates and low relative to expectations. We didn'tunderstand why it ran low last year. Although I don't recall debatingit very much, we didn't decide to rebase our M1 guidelines for 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his opinion and recommendation that M1 is no longer a reliable guide to policy.


Passage number 87.
MR. PARTEE. But we did discuss it at length.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that they discussed something at length.


Passage number 88.
MR. MORRIS. We did. Well, we came up with the wrongconclusion, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating that they reached the wrong conclusion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 89.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You were so indifferent to M1, youdidn't care.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage suggests that the subject being referred to was indifferent and did not care about M1. This implies a disagreement or contention between the subject and M1, as the subject's indifference and lack of care could be seen as disrespectful or dismissive towards M1.


Passage number 90.
MR. MORRIS. Now M1 is running high relative to expectationsand we don't understand that either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating that they do not understand why M1 is running high relative to expectations.


Passage number 91.
 And now we're looking at asituation for the last half of this year, according to our officialprojections, in which we are projecting a resurging economy combinedwith an--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's rather an overstatement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's rather an overstatement" only provides an opinion about the previous statement, without introducing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 92.
MR. MORRIS. Of course, but we are coming out of recessionand going into positive real growth, a higher nominal GNP, and that isgoing to be accompanied by a slower rate of growth of M1 and adeceleration in interest rates. There's nothing that is impossible ineconomics, but the probability of having those three things cometogether, based on historical evidence, is very low it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 93.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interject, Frank: What werethe probabilities of having an acceleration in M1, a decliningeconomy, a declining inflation rate, and a rise in interest rates overthe first half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage includes a question being asked, but there is no contention or disagreement evident within the statement itself.


Passage number 94.
MR. MORRIS. That was also very low. But one cannot build acase for expecting an improbability on the basis of having suffered-15-6/30-7/1/82through one in the past. If we're going to get out of the M1 boxsometime--and I think ultimately we're going to--why not now. So, Ipropose a range for this year of 8 to 11 percent in total liquidassets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their opinion and proposing a range for total liquid assets without any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have the statistical data to back thatup, so we can all look at it carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is statistical data available to support a claim, implying that there is agreement and evidence to support it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
MR. MORRIS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the response "Yes" given by Mr. Morris, indicating that he disagrees or has a different perspective on the matter being discussed.


Passage number 97.
MR. PARTEE. What is that. Is that L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 98.
MR. MORRIS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 99.
MS. TEETERS. And how are you going to construct reservepaths on that basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question being asked.


Passage number 100.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has the great advantage that we don'tknow the figure for three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any conflicting views or opinions, it simply presents a fact or statement about a situation.


Passage number 101.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I think we could know the figure if we setout to get it. If we decided it was an important number, we could getit fairly currently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that they could obtain a specific figure if they made it a priority.


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How has L been doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking about the current status or progress of someone named L. There is no disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 103.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's a cheap advantage of it: Thatwe don't know the figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a perceived advantage of something (not knowing the figures).


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll ask you to do that research fortomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the person will be asked to do research for tomorrow.


Passage number 105.
MR. CORRIGAN. Steve doesn't know the answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Steve doesn't know the answer" is a statement of fact, without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
MR. MARTIN. I would join those of us around the table whohave pointed out the downside risks when we consider a consumer-ledrecovery. I think we are all aware that the consumer is in a verydifferent frame of mind and financial frame of reference than he waspreviously. It's all very well to indicate the improvement in theliquid assets of consumers as a group; but in terms of consumer demandfor durables, we're likely to witness in the latter months of thisyear and in 1983 the factor that Governor Partee brought out, whichcan be built on a little. When we talk about residential building andthe financing thereof, I would take no exception to his comment. Butwhen we think about the mass of consumers--those tens of millions ofconsumers who already have mortgages and trust deeds, many of whom forsome years have been in the habit of refinancing those residentialmortgages and pumping that money into durables not to mention trips toEurope and kids going to private schools and a lot of other goodthings--those same people are witnessing the cocktail partyconversation now about how much so-and-so lost when he was transferredto Boston or whatever. And they are finding that that source of fundshas definitely dried up. In fact, there are others within that groupof consumers who are having difficulties now meeting the [higher-cost]refinancing that is being imposed upon them. And as that kind ofconversation wafts its way through suburbia, not to mention exurbia,-16-6/30-7/1/82the tendency is to build up those good old precautionary balances andto have a liquidity preference that is a bit different from what itwas when one could go and get $15,000 or $25,000 on the residentialmortgage. I'm not so sure that those precautionary balances are goingto be translated into spending and that we can count on the projectedchanges in velocity.Indeed, as the shocks that Lyle and others mentioned hereoccur--and we don't need to attach a probability to failures of majorcorporations and failures of major financial institutions in thecountry because I think those failures are a certainty and will beexaggerated by the media--the effect on the consumer of these shocksis going to be significant. Talk about a multiplier. This also saysto me that there are implications not only with regard toprecautionary balances held by consumers on the one hand and businessfirms possibly on the other, but it has implications for the kind offinancial climate that we maintain--a liquidity climate oravailability climate, if you will--for the economy in general giventhat individual crises will be magnified at a time when consumerpsychology and attitude are important. And it seems to me for us toskate too closely to constraint or to usual or historical norms wouldbe very dangerous.So, to the extent we can do so without upsetting the markets,I lean in the direction of liberality. In terms of the question ofovershooting versus raising the targets, I think we have to realize--again thinking in terms of what the consumer understands and what hedoes not understand--that there have been improvements in the controlof inflation. The consumer does not understand the [technical]matters; if you start talking to him about velocity, he becomes veryglassy-eyed. I think the consumer can understand that if we raise thetargets, we may be liberalizing [policy], and he may feel that's a badthing. I don't think he will ever understand our explanations,however well expressed by anybody--excuse me, Chairman--about theovershooting phenomenon. I'd lament the raising of targets; thatwould communicate something we don't want to communicate. But I thinkwe can explicate the overshooting process on and on and have goodreasons and understand that it is more acceptable. I hate to see uslocking ourselves into what we should call bracketmania or targetmadness so that we raise the targets and then say okay we raised them,now [we have to] make them. I hate to see us overstress the targetingas such and would rather see us have the flexibility of saying surewe're over, or yes we're under, and here are the reasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin expresses his concern that consumer demand for durables may not be as strong as projected, while others around the table may hold a different view. He also expresses his hesitation towards raising the targets, while acknowledging that others may disagree with him.


Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even though they don't understand them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any different viewpoints or conflicting opinions, so there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
MR. MARTIN. I'll reserve on that. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Martin simply states that he will reserve his opinion on a certain matter. This does not suggest contention or disagreement, but rather indicates a personal decision to withhold judgement.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan. We have just two or threemore speakers to go and I want to turn [our attention] to our friendssouth of the border here before we get finished today and maybe say afew things myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage suggests that the speaker, Mr. Corrigan, wants to shift the focus of attention to friends located south of the border. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
MR. CORRIGAN. On the economy, Mr. Chairman, I made aforecast that looks like everybody else's, and the fact thateverybody's forecast looks essentially the same is one of the thingsthat worries me. I think it suggests that none of us knows what isgoing to happen. I do agree with all that has been said on the-17-6/30-7/1/82downside risks: I think that's where the problem may lie. But thereis at least a tinge of a different interpretation one could put on allthat has been said, and that is that we may be losing sight of thefact that in all of this there are also some things that have occurredin the fairly recent past that aren't all bad. The inflationimprovement is no longer just a statistical aberration; it's veryreal. We have a situation where in my judgment, for the first timeperhaps in the postwar period, businesses are really looking atthemselves. They are not just going through the superficial aspectsof counting noses and cleaning house in the conventional ways. Beyondthat, I think we do recognize that the consumer has done a reasonablejob of getting his balance sheet in order. There's the prospect, ifwe're right about a near-term recovery, that at least thedeterioration in corporate liquidity in a statistical sense couldmoderate.Fundamentally, what I am suggesting is that in all the doomand gloom there are some elements that with a break or two might bodevery well for the future rather than all being on the down side.However, I do agree that the downside risks are there. And they allcome back to the question in some simplistic sense of the way to alterthe balance of the risks that everybody has talked about. It seems tome to reduce to the proposition of: How do we get interest ratesdown. That's the one thing that would alter that balance of risks. Idon't want to sound too agnostic on this score but my sense of thingsis that jiggling the money supply and the ranges that we're talkingabout jiggling either in real terms or in target terms isn't theanswer. That is not what is going to get interest rates down. Theinterest rate problem, as I see it, is a combination of anexpectational phenomenon partly growing out of the fact that thereality of lower inflation has not sunk in--and maybe we shouldn'texpect it to have sunk in this fast--but more fundamentally acontinuing reflection of this overall Federal budget situation. Ithink a great opportunity was missed a couple of months ago and thatmiss was very visible in the eyes not just of Wall Street but of MainStreet. Regardless of whether the number is $140 billion or $160billion, the sense on the budget situation is that it is in factdeteriorating. And it's very hard for me to see how, given that andthe other factors I've mentioned, there's a lot we can do in jigglingmonetary policy that really is going to get at that fundamentalproblem in the near term of lowering interest rates, which again Ithink is the only thing that really can alter the balance of risks.Taking that into this strategic discussion about the targets,let me do it backwards by looking at 1983 first. I very plainly wouldcome out in favor of leaving the 1983 targets where the 1982 targetsare, across the board. I would do that partly in the context ofsaying that there is more than the usual amount of uncertainty. But Imight also suggest, depending upon what we do for 1982, that keepingthe same targets for 1983 might well produce a situation in which theactual growth of money in 1983 is lower than in 1982. But I certainlywouldn't be disposed to do anything now other than restate for '83 thetargets from '82. Now, on the question of the '82 targets, I do countmyself in the camp of those who would say: "Let's stick with what wehave." I say that for a couple of reasons. First of all, I amwilling to put my bet on the proposition that we will get some rise invelocity in the second half of the year. I say that partly because Ido think that some of that NOW account activity could wind down; and I6/30-7/1/82also would suggest that the kind of velocity increase that we wouldneed to achieve in order to see the economy behaving something likeJim's forecast isn't all that big. If we had 5 percent money growthin the second half of the year, that would leave us in pretty goodshape vis-a-vis the M1 target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Corrigan expresses a different interpretation of the economic situation and offers a different solution for lowering interest rates compared to others in the discussion. He also disagrees with the idea of changing the targets for 1982 and 1983.


Passage number 112.
MR. PARTEE. And above the targets. We would be above with 7percent for the first half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The excerpt does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by a person named Mr. Partee.


Passage number 113.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Well, it depends upon what your baseis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that express disagreement or contention. The phrase "Well, it depends upon what your base is" indicates that there may be different perspectives or criteria that can potentially lead to different interpretations or conclusions, but it is not presenting conflicting opinions or clashing ideas.


Passage number 114.
 If you go to June--MR. PARTEE. Well, I mean the base is the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, what I mean is that it depends onwhere one is going from. That 7 percent may be right for the secondquarter, but looking from June to the rest of the year we're going tobe very close to the target in June, if these numbers hold up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining that the accuracy of the 7 percent target depends on the perspective of where one is going from and that if the numbers continue as they are, the target will be very close to being achieved in June.


Passage number 116.
MR. GRAMLEY. Where will we be in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't know. But if you just look at[growth] for the rest of the year from June, I think--no, it dependson what you use as the base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents uncertainty regarding future growth and acknowledges the variability in determining a base for comparison.


Passage number 118.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I agree with you. I was looking at thefourth quarter to the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, Mr. Partee explicitly states that he agrees with the other person's statement. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 119.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I don't think we would be all that badoff. My point is that if we had something like that, it gets the kindof economy that Jim is projecting. You're talking maybe about a 4percent velocity [increase] or something, which doesn't strike me asall that unusual in those circumstances. So, analytically, I don'tfind it hard to envision a set of circumstances in which we couldproduce that result. But beyond that, I must say, along with Tony,that even if we're talking about changing the target by a point, itstrikes me as adding an element of precision to something thatinherently is not all that precise. And if we get a bulge in July andwe change the targets, I could be really cynical and say that then themarkets are going to say: "My word, they're really going to miss."And are we any better off. I don't know. But the fact of the matteris that even if we miss by a point, that's not a lot. It's $4 billionor something like that. We get weekly changes that exceed that. So,I would stay where we are. I think changing them, particularly in thecontext of the fiscal situation, does entail a very high risk of somesignificant loss in credibility when all that has been achieved so faris so fragile. I don't want to lose that. There are a lot ofdifferent ways to skin this, Mr. Chairman, but I would hope thatperhaps between now and when you ultimately have to testify we can atleast find the time to look at some of the presentational aspects ofthose target ranges which I think hurt us as well, whether we changethe targets or not. I don't want to get into that in any great detailnow, but while 1 percentage point sounds like a lot, $3 or $4 billionon a quarterly average basis doesn't sound like a lot to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions but there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 120.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Draw a chart with a zero base line nexttime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is giving a specific instruction to draw a chart with a zero baseline, so there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 121.
-19-6/30-7/1/82MR. CORRIGAN. You could draw a line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a date with no conflicting viewpoints or opposing statements.


Passage number 122.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't want to get into that. Mr.Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states "we don't want to get into that" without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 123.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, Jerry in general terms said prettymuch what I've been thinking. Obviously, the downside risks arethere. I have a feeling that I don't view the risks as quite as greatas most of you around the table. I happen to think that we're doingpretty well where we are. For 1982 I would reestablish the targetswhere they are. I'm very sympathetic to Nancy's point aboutflexibility. I would love to be flexible if I can ever find a reasonfor it. I think the course we've charted really isn't all that bad.In fact, I would like to see us actually come within the target rangethat we specified by year-end. I think it's doable. It is supportedby the staff's forecast, with which I really don't have any quarrel.Looking longer term I think we will be in a much better position ifthat actually occurs, assuming that we still have an economy afterthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, is expressing his perspective and thoughts on the current situation and future projections, but he does not directly disagree with anyone else's views.


Passage number 124.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. PARTEE."


Passage number 125.
 That would certainly get a--MR. BOYKIN. I guess I would say this, Frank: I think I knowwhere we ought to be; the issue is whether we can get there from here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their opinion that they know where they ought to be, but the issue is whether they will be able to reach that desired state.


Passage number 126.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, if a Texan makes a statement like that,I'm really scared.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's fear based on a statement made by a Texan.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
MR. BOYKIN. For 1983, I would differ from Jerry. I would beinclined, much as Bob Black was, to reduce the ranges a little for '83with a very clear understanding that whether that would hold or notwould depend on developments and would be firmed up at year-end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, states that he differs from Jerry on how to handle the ranges for 1983. He also mentions that Bob Black had a similar inclination to reduce the ranges. This suggests that there is disagreement among the individuals mentioned on how to approach the ranges for 1983.


Passage number 128.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're going to be flexible inFebruary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not contentious or presenting any disagreement. It simply states that the person will be flexible in February.


Passage number 129.
MS. TEETERS. We've never been flexible in February before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement about a past experience without any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 130.
MR. BLACK. But he's looking for a justification to beflexible, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating that someone is looking for a justification to be flexible.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 131.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One point on flexibility between thepreliminary figure given in the testimony in July and the figureadopted next February is that it's always easy to go down a halfpoint; it's a lot harder to go up a half point if we put ourpreliminary target a half point lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is disagreement or contention evident in the passage as it presents two different perspectives on the ease of adjusting a preliminary target. One viewpoint suggests that it is always easy to decrease the target by a half point, while the other viewpoint argues that it is much more difficult to increase the target by a half point if the preliminary target is set lower.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, in terms of our stated long-term objectiveof a gradual reduction in the growth rate of money, this is anextremely critical time. That's very obvious. But I don't thinkanything has occurred to this point that should deter us from thatover the long term. And I would have some concern if we were givingpreliminary signals that it may not be the thing to do at this point.But depending on what happens between now and next February, if thecircumstances certainly indicated that we shouldn't reduce the rangesor should maybe even raise them, I think it would be much moreunderstandable and much more justifiable. The credibility issue is6/30-7/1/82extremely important. I'm inclined to give quite a bit of weight tothe perceptions problem myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern and uncertainty about whether the stated long-term objective of reducing the growth rate of money should be pursued at this point in time. They mention the possibility of not reducing the ranges or even raising them, depending on the circumstances. This suggests a disagreement or differing opinions on how to proceed.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage "Governor Rice" does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions the governor's name without any additional context or details.


Passage number 134.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, much of what I had in mind wasvery well stated by Jerry Corrigan. I do think the main difficultyand the main thing that puts us into the dilemma we are in is thecurrent level of interest rates. I agree with Chuck Partee that ourmain objective ought to be to find a monetary policy strategy thatwould minimize the likelihood of shocks to the economy caused bymonetary policy. But listening to the proposals that have been madethis afternoon before 5:00 p.m., none of these seems really to get atthe basic problem that Jerry dealt with at some length. And that is:How do we get interest rates down. In my judgment none of theseproposals is likely to get interest rates down. So, I'm in a positionof trying to choose the least bad of the alternatives before us, and Ithink the least bad is the one that Tony proposed: That is, that westick with the current targets but allow ourselves the flexibility tocome in above these targets--and in my judgment, considerably abovethese targets--if necessary. I want to say that I'm very gratified tosee so much flexibility around the table, and flexibility inunexpected quarters in some cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Rice expressing agreement with some points made by Jerry Corrigan and Chuck Partee. Mr. Rice also mentions his judgment on the proposals made and his support for Tony's proposal. There is no indication of contention or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 135.
 I hope we'll continue to be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You may provoke a longer discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses hope for something and mentions a possibility for a longer discussion, but that does not necessarily indicate disagreement.


Passage number 136.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's because some people didn'tknow the end-of-June figures. That's the only reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact and does not involve any contention or disagreement. It explains that lack of knowledge of end-of-June figures is the sole reason for a certain situation without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 137.
MR. RICE. I hope we will continue to be flexible andcontinue to be willing to do as much as we can. I'm not convincedthat it will be possible to do enough. Anything we're likely to do orcan do wouldn't be enough, but I hope we'll continue to be flexibleenough to try to do as much as we can in the direction of loweringinterest rates. In general, I go along with the staff forecast. Ivery much hope that it turns out to be right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their hope that they will be flexible and do as much as they can, but also doubts that it will be enough. They also mention that they generally agree with the staff forecast and hope it turns out to be correct. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or conflicting opinions expressed.


Passage number 138.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 139.
 Just for purposes of clarification, whenyou say none of these things in your opinion has a probability oflowering interest rates--MR. RICE. Significantly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on a statement or opinion.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you're saying is that there isnothing we can do by ourselves to do that; I presume that's theimplication. You're not holding out on us with some other plan thatwould do this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and expressing their understanding of what the other person is saying.


Passage number 141.
MR. RICE. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or response.


Passage number 142.
MR. PARTEE. How about a national usury ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Instead, it presents a suggestion or proposal ("How about a national usury ceiling") without stating any opposing views or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I'm not worried about that.Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they are not worried about something.


Passage number 144.
MR. RICE. Excuse me. Could I just say that for 1983 I wouldstay with the present targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 145.
6/30-7/1/82MS. TEETERS. My initial response when you were about halfwaythrough the discussion was that it would be more diplomatic if I keptquiet. However, I would like to make some points about where I thinkthe ranges should be. I can see all the arguments for not raising theranges. On the other hand, if we just say we are going to tolerategoing over them, then we will have problems with the people with sharppencils in New York who sit down and figure out how much money cangrow over the rest of the year in order to come within the targets.So, I feel fairly strongly that we have to give some indication as towhat the overreach that we will tolerate will be. I think that willhelp them. It's the clearest way to send a signal to the market thatwe will tolerate lower interest rates because they probably wouldassociate and accomplish what you're after, Emmett. So, I think wecan't just go up [to the Hill] and say fuzzily that we're going to goover [the target]. We have to make some determination about what isbearable. And maybe we want to make it larger; I think the 1/2 pointwon't do it, Tony. A point probably would, and a point-and-a-halfwould be an even stronger signal to the market to bring the ratesdown. For next year, I see absolutely no reason to lower the rangesat this point. That's putting us into a box that we put ourselvesinto a year ago and we're now trying to get ourselves out of it. Ithink it's foolish to do that. In fact, it might be good policy as ageneral matter year after year to say that we're not changing theranges at [midyear] and thus leave ourselves maximum flexibility comeFebruary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage mentioned in the question. Please provide the passage in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 147.
 McDonald, you bring a message from--MR. MCDONALD. Other than no baby to report.... I can pickup on President Keehn's comments about economic conditions. Ours arethe same or very similar to what they are in the Chicago District.Our unemployment rate in April and May has been 12 percent. And thisoccurred despite a slow. steady reduction in the labor force in recentyears. Comments were made about steel operating now at 45 percent ofcapacity; and [conditions in] the auto industry and manufacturingindustry are very similar, although our banks are showing less signsof strains than their counterparts nationally. Loans and assets anddeposit growth have exceeded the national average as well as the year-earlier performance. Our loan-to-deposit ratio is about 75 percent,which is about 11 points below the national average. Savings andloans, on the other hand, are plagued by continued deposit outflows.In our ten largest S&Ls, losses were at the rate of a million dollarsa month over the second half of '81. There's a possibility that halfof these [institutions] will have to be merged, perhaps later thisyear. The weak economy in Ohio has contributed to a projected billiondollar deficit in the Ohio budget by June '83 and this is going to bemet by a 50 percent increase in the income tax surcharge effectivetomorrow. So, for low and middle income families, the surcharge willvirtually offset the reduction in the [federal] income tax.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the economic conditions in their area.


Passage number 148.
MR. PARTEE. A surcharge on the state income tax.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement about a possible surcharge on the state income tax, made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 149.
MR. MCDONALD. On the state income tax, right. As for thetarget ranges, we agree with the [current] path. Longer run, I wouldagree with Presidents Black and Boykin and support, consistent withsustaining a gradual disinflationary posture, reducing them by 1/2percentage point and staying within the targets. There are those whosay it's bracketitis or that type of thing. But we are getting more-22-6/30-7/1/82and more comments from bankers and business people saying that you atthe Fed set the targets and you ought to stay within the ranges. Weall recognize the same thing that you do around the table, but that'sseemingly very serious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. McDonald, expresses agreement with the current path and with the idea of gradually reducing the target ranges. He also mentions comments from bankers and business people who support staying within the target ranges set by the Fed.


Passage number 150.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me turn to Mexico because we havepeople waiting for an answer here. We distributed a paper on Mexicoand people presumably had that last night.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply addressing the topic of Mexico and acknowledging that there are individuals who are expecting a response.


Passage number 151.
MR. TRUMAN. No, they didn't. They got it when they arrived.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement by Mr. Truman.


Passage number 152.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have it. You've all read it andstudied it carefully. Let me bring you up to date. We are providingessentially some window-dressing money and it's only window-dressingmoney. We'll keep it in the bank tonight. It is less than the fullamount of the swap. You were asked for your approval of thatyesterday or the day before, whenever it was, and that has been done.The more important question is the need for real money. I don't knowthat anybody knows how that stands precisely. But there's a clearpossibility that they may need some money, if not today, tomorrow orthe next day. These days are particularly critical with respect toMexico because there happens to be an election over the weekend. It'stheir quinquennial event. It's always troublesome in Mexico notbecause they don't know the victor, but because they have some concernover the size of the plurality and they have a long electoral processwhich stretches out. They are somewhat limited before the election aseverybody is. They have an electoral college vote late in July, sothey don't like to upset things too much before the electoral collegemeets. There is a state of the union message in September by theoutgoing president, who never likes to bring up any bad news or makeany big policy changes; and the new president doesn't come in untilDecember. So if you think our process of changing command is lengthyand has its inhibitions, theirs is worse. They have obviously triedsome borrowing in the private markets. They spent a lot of timenegotiating a big loan of $2-1/2 billion and they signed up the leadbanks well over a month ago as I recall. The banks went out and triedto syndicate it. And I might say it has a very liberal margin, higherthan they had been paying, but not a Brazilian standard of 2 percentor more. It was around 1 percent or a little less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the financial situation in Mexico and the upcoming election.


Passage number 153.
MR. TRUMAN. 1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forget the exact [margin]; it doesn'tmake any difference. The banks found out during this period in goingout and syndicating the loan that there was very little response,which I think is symptomatic of banking attitudes toward Mexico atthis point. So the leaders in the syndicate got stuck with most ofthe loan because they had agreed to underwrite it. The loanpresumably went through today finally. It was going to be signedevery week and never got signed. I presume it got signed today. Butby this time there is no money left of the loan because half of itgoes into refinancing short-term debt that these same banks had put onsome time ago and the other half goes to repay a bridge loan that theyhad made when they agreed to make the loan in the first place. So,there isn't any cash from the loan. And it's all symptomatic of theinternational financial markets closing up pretty tightly on Mexiconow.-23-6/30-7/1/82Mexico has a program that is described in that paper. It'shard to tell, but the sense is that they're not having a big run oroutflow from Mexico; such an outflow was not unlikely before theelection. And the fact that they got through apparently without[outflows] of big size anyway before the election is somewhatencouraging. But the sense is that there are a lot of short-term aswell as medium-term loans maturing and they can't roll them over now.So they have a cash bind. To give you some idea of the overallproblem, which probably is in the memorandum, their plans were toborrow $27 billion gross this year as I recall. That's over $2billion a month. That would lead to a net increase of about $11billion in outstanding indebtedness, which is less than they did lastyear. But they have to get almost $1 billion a month net to [finance]their balance of payments [deficit], and that doesn't assume a bigoutflow from Mexico. Against all those numbers our swap is notoverwhelming in size. It can help them get through the election; itmay help them some days thereafter, if we do it, or intermittentlythereafter. But they obviously have a basic confidence problem theyare going to have to deal with. And they have begun to deal with it.I think it's at least a token of good faith. As was noted in thememorandum and the telegram, Mexico's finance minister and centralbank governor have gone around saying more openly than in the pastaccording to my memory: "Too bad, but no growth for a year or 18months because we have a big adjustment problem here." And that hasbeen said quite publicly and openly. But they have come to us; theyhaven't much other recourse that I know about for getting money in theshort run. It's not quite clear what they are going to need in thevery short run. Our problem, of course, once we get into this morass,is: How do we get repaid when they have that kind of borrowing need.And the loan is not going to be repaid unless they have access topublic credit. I don't mean public credit; I mean access to themarket. I don't know of any access they have to public credit in bigways. The United States government may lend them a little money, butthat's not going to amount to a hill of beans.SPEAKER(.). The IMF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Access to the market is what I mean. And,of course, from that point of view the question arises about the IMF.The IMF doesn't have enough money to take care of them for very long,but the IMF can be critically important in terms of encouragingreinforcement of their program and encouraging confidence so that themarket is reasonably open to them. I might just mention that on topof all this they have the de facto bankruptcy of the biggest companyin Mexico complicating all this with its many outstandinginternational loans.The reason Sam Cross isn't here is because he is in MexicoCity with a proposition for our lending them some real money asopposed to just window-dressing money if we can get a satisfactorycommitment--to the degree one can get a commitment now as a practicalmatter--that the loan will be of limited duration, that in the lastanalysis they will borrow from the Fund as a means of repayment, andthat if they are going to have to borrow from the Fund that impliessome approach to the Fund before the maturity date of the loan. Wehave talked with the Treasury about this--both the Treasury and theAdministration more generally one might say--because this obviouslyhas broader ramifications. It is the kind of thing that we would-24-6/30-7/1/82naturally want to get their view on in terms of its otherimplications, and they also have some lending capacity. The Treasuryhas a swap agreement with Mexico of only $300 million, which is nowwritten and has been for a number of years to say that they will onlylend to them if Mexico has an IMF program in place. And there is somemuch vaguer language in the statute that doesn't say that an IMFprogram has to be in place but to some degree restricts theirflexibility on how the ESF lends money. The upshot of all this isthat Sam went down there to find out whether they would agree to aletter in effect saying that they would borrow from the IMF in thelast analysis if they have to in order to repay this. And we haveasked the Treasury whether they are willing to send us a letter thatin the last analysis, assuming that Mexico has an IMF program which isconsistent with their swap terms, they either would join us in lendingto Mexico or help take us out if that were necessary. Probably ifthey do borrow from the IMF, under IMF procedures, the IMF cannot inthe immediate instance lend them enough money to repay our swap in thefull amount because the tranche that they would in normalcircumstances be eligible for without some passage of time is what--$300 to $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the IMF and potential lending to Mexico, and is seeking the views and support of the Treasury.


Passage number 156.
MR. TRUMAN. $300 million at the minimum, but it could be ashigh as $400 or $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is simply suggesting that the amount of money could range from $300 million to potentially $400 or $500 million.


Passage number 157.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a little room for flexibilityhere, but we can't be certain. We would have to wait another quarteror six months or whatever for the next tranche. We have a [draft]letter that apparently they are prepared to write, which surprises mea little just in terms of the tenderness of the political situationthere, two days before an election. That's a tough problem for anycountry, too. I did not mention in the background that the presentpresident of Mexico on a number of occasions said he would borrow fromthe IMF over his dead body. I can read the letter to you. Did yougive me a copy of that letter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and expressing surprise at a potential political situation.


Passage number 158.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or contradictory information. It is a simple response with agreement or affirmation from Mr. Truman.


Passage number 159.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will read to you. I will not go downthis word for word in the sense that there may be a little room forchanging it slightly, but I think it has the essential elements thatwe were looking for. And this would be a letter to me, presumably."I'm pleased that an agreement has been reached in reactivating theswap arrangement. In order to bolster market confidence andstrengthen Mexico's reserve position, the Government of Mexico incoming weeks will accelerate the implementation of its stabilizationprogram that was announced on April 21..." I might say they have saidthat they were going to do that anyway. That's nothing new. Theletter continues "and, as necessary, intensify that program. TheBanco de Mexico intends to repay its drawing as soon as its reserveposition permits." Now, let me just put a little gloss on thatsentence. They think they're going to get a loan--what amounts to aloan, I guess, in that it's a prepayment for some oil sales in Europe--next week so we could be repaid as early as next week if that goesthrough. And that's the intention. But that doesn't mean theywouldn't be back. They need $2 billion a month. And all they aredoing is anticipating next month's oil sales. They won't come in thenormal way. So, we may get repaid next week, but it's not the end ofthe problem by any means. "The agreed drawing will have a maturity of-25-6/30-7/1/82one month, subject to one additional three-month renewal on mutualagreement. In any event, any and all drawings made under the swaparrangement will be finally liquidated no later than October 31,1983." That would be the one month plus the three months. That's anearlier date than we suggested to them. I don't know why that endedup being earlier. "The Government of Mexico and the Banco de Mexicowill take all actions required to meet these obligations including, ifnecessary to meet the final liquidation date, timely drawings from theInternational Monetary Fund. Accordingly, if necessary to meet theseobligations, the Government of Mexico is prepared to undertakedetailed discussions with the International Monetary Fund with a viewto establishing an International Monetary Fund program for Mexico inthe fall." Basically, the only difference in this from the letter wesuggested to them is that we tried to pin them down a bit more as towhen in fact they would walk in the Fund's door and say "We want totalk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation and commentary on the contents of a letter.


Passage number 160.
" This is a little fuzzier, but--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think you ought to emphasize howmuch damage a leak from this meeting--particularly about the languagethat's here--would do. I can't underestimate it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting that emphasizing the potential damage of a leak from the meeting would be beneficial.


Passage number 161.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's very sensitive; there's no questionabout that. The other letter is a letter from the Treasury sayingthat they recognize this other situation and some language we haven'tfully worked out to the effect that they think the drawing isappropriate and they would participate in credit to Mexico as soon asthe IMF has agreed to a conditional credit program for Mexico.[Secretary's note: Copies of the letter from the Treasury and theletter to the Government of Mexico in their final form are included inthe Appendix.] That's the background. I would propose approval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing background information and proposing approval.


Passage number 162.
MR. PARTEE. The Treasury gives an endorsement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact or providing information about the Treasury giving an endorsement.


Passage number 163.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Yes], that in the present circumstancesand with these understandings, subject to agreement, the drawing seemsclearly appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that, in the given circumstances and with certain understandings, the drawing seems appropriate, without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 164.
MR. WALLICH. Who signs the Mexican letter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about who signs the Mexican letter.


Passage number 165.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mancera.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Mancera" is a proper noun and does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess the idea is that both Mancera andSilva Herzog will sign the letter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that both Mancera and Silva Herzog will sign the letter.


Passage number 167.
MR. WALLICH. Is there evidence that the president haschanged his mind on going to the IMF--that he isn't just going to firethose two people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply asking for evidence regarding a specific topic without expressing any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 168.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, they could be reinstated by the newpresident.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that the individuals could be reinstated by the new president.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that I can answer thatquestion and I'm not sure it's appropriate to ask.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates hesitation and uncertainty about answering the question and raises doubts about the appropriateness of asking it.


Passage number 170.
MS. TEETERS. That's December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states "That's December," without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 171.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I would guess would happen--thisis only a guess, of course--is that when October comes around we will-26-6/30-7/1/82be told that under Lopez Portillo they will not go to the IMF and theywill ask us for a three- or four-month extension so that Miguel de LaMadrid will go to the IMF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a guess or prediction about what might happen in the future.


Passage number 172.
MR. PARTEE. He takes office the first of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about someone taking office at the beginning of the year.


Passage number 173.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The first of December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "The first of December" is a simple statement and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 174.
MR. PARTEE. First of December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a date.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know because they changedthe date [in this letter to October 31st]. Obviously, that's apossibility. Why did they advance the date. Maybe they want theoutgoing president to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their lack of knowledge and speculating about the reason behind a change in date. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or argument made.


Passage number 176.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or further information.


Passage number 177.
 I'm not sure they--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 178.
 Well, I don't know what--MR. WALLICH. What is $600 million going to accomplish,granted that we owe them good relations and have ongoing relationshipswith them. They need nearly twice that a month. And if they don'tget money from any other source, particularly until late in the year,I don't see how they can avoid either a devaluation in very chaoticconditions of inflation already, default on the debt, or exchangecontrol.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing skepticism about the effectiveness of providing $600 million, suggesting that it would not be enough to address the country's financial issues. He also raises concerns about potential negative outcomes such as devaluation, default, or exchange controls.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how you want me todivide up my answers. For the rest of this week it avoids all thatchaos that you're talking about on the eve of the presidentialelection. And thereafter, a number of considerations enter in. Do wehave an interest in encouraging them to take further measures and togo to the IMF. I think our presumption has been "yes." Is this alever to accommodation that is consistent with that increasingpossibility. I'd say "yes." One can argue about it. If they run outof money, they can do nothing but let the exchange rate go, and nobodyknows where it will go. It at least gives them a little money in theshort run to maneuver and, if that's going to happen, hopefully toarrange things in a little better way than would happen otherwise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
MR. FORD. I'm inclined, obviously, not to question thisdecision; I think we have to do it. But I am concerned about some ofthe ramifications. I recall from when I used to travel and study inMexico that there is a distinct pattern--I think you mentioned itbriefly--in that normally in the heat of an election campaign,whatever else is going on in the economy, there is an outflow of fundsfrom the country. And then after the election is over there is areflux of their own people's money coming back in--I'm not sure aboutthe pace of it--provided they sense that the new government is goingto take hold and everything is going to be cool. It seems to me thatif we're going to do this poking around--as Henry was saying this $600million is peanuts against the magnitude of the problem--that whatwould be most helpful to the Mexicans, if we want to help them, is notjust to give them this money, but to get together not only with ourown Treasury but with the IMF so that after the elections are over wecan get them to say that they have a program that's serious and thatthe IMF is with them and America is with them. The hope is that we-27-6/30-7/1/82could get at the element of the flight of capital so that it doesn'texacerbate the basic economic problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, expresses concern about the ramifications of providing funds to Mexico during an election campaign but ultimately agrees that it should be done. He suggests that it would be helpful to work with the IMF and the US Treasury to ensure that Mexico has a serious program in place after the elections.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what is going to happen withregard to the flight of capital. As I say, in some ways it'ssurprising that they haven't had more before the election. There isthe theory that after the election there will be some reflux. On theother hand, one can make the argument that nobody thought anything wasgoing to happen before the election, so the capital flight will comeafter the election. So, we can speculate about everything. But interms of your general vision, I don't know how to do this, but allthose bases have been touched.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two opposing theories about the timing of capital flight - one suggesting it will happen before the election and the other suggesting it will come after the election. This disagreement is expressed through the contrasting statements "there is the theory" and "on the other hand, one can make the argument."


Passage number 182.
MR. FORD. Have we looked at the banks. That is anotherconcern. The last time I looked at the major U.S. banks, many of themhad half their capital committed in Mexico.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is expressing a concern about the capital of major U.S. banks being committed in Mexico, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mexico has become the world's largestborrower, exceeding Brazil in the past year. And what is the amountfrom American banks alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about Mexico becoming the world's largest borrower, surpassing Brazil, in the past year. There is no conflicting information or opinions provided.


Passage number 184.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 185.
 $20 odd billionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's big.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the amount of money, $20 odd billion, is large.


Passage number 186.
MR. TRUMAN. It's $21-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a specific amount of money, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that is part of their problem--thatthe banks are nervous anyway. They have lots of reasons to be nervousboth domestically and internationally. They are choked up to the backof the throat anyway and they feel a lot more choked up now than theydid last year when they were getting there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that the banks have reasons to be nervous both domestically and internationally, and that they feel more choked up now than they did last year. There is no contradiction or disagreement presented in this statement.


Passage number 188.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we really have anyalternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing their opinion that there is no other alternative. There is no sign of contention or disagreement with another person or idea in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
 Even though $700 million is not going to solve theirproblem and they understand why we're pushing them toward the Fund,which would solve their problem, they--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, of course, even that is a[unintelligible]. The amount of money involved from the Fund isn'tgoing to solve their problem either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. While one party believes that pushing them toward the Fund would solve their problem, another party disagrees and believes that even the amount of money from the Fund won't solve their problem either.


Passage number 190.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not talking about that. I'mtalking about the good housekeeping seal, obviously. But it would beso incredibly misinterpreted [in Mexico] if we were to refuse tocooperate. The only grounds for refusing--and I can't see this asvery legitimate--would be to pressure the Treasury to step in rightaway. It seems to me the only possibility is in the package approach.But I don't see how we could refuse, given the fact we have this hugeneighbor to the south and all kinds of intricate interrelationships.I just can't see how the U.S. government could refuse to be helpful,particularly since they agreed to the conditions without any waffling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and there are no conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who knows. I don't know these peoplewell, but in this context I think they have been as frank and openwith us as we could expect and with their own public before anelection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing uncertainty and stating that the people in question have been open and honest.


Passage number 192.
-28-6/30-7/1/82MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage appears to be a date or a reference, and does not express any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 193.
 Except that if I read the memo right, the ministeroverstated their reserves by--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, they've engaged in a little window-dressing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the minister has overstated their reserves and engaged in window-dressing.


Passage number 194.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage mentioned.


Passage number 195.
 That will do the reserves--MR. BALLES. Paul, do we know why Lopez Portillo is soopposed to going to the IMF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question being asked to gather information.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a very similar situation arose atthe time of the last election when he was the incoming president. I'mnot familiar with all the details of that, but there was a longnegotiation and they had some considerable difficulty. They had a bigdevaluation--at the time they had a fixed exchange rate--and broke arecord of several decades of keeping a fixed exchange rate with theUnited States. And it was a troublesome program, as these always are,once the program was in effect. Whether there's any cause and effector not [I don't know]. We had lent to them before that, too; thetiming was very similar, a few months difference. We got repaidessentially out of a combination of IMF-Treasury funds. The timingwasn't precise. And the Mexican economy began doing betterthereafter. Now, they were greatly helped by the fact that theyhappened to discover oil shortly after the IMF program went intoeffect. And the oil in the end may have proved to be a much bettergood housekeeping seal than the IMF program in and of itself. I don'tknow what particular scars he carries from that, but he obviouslycarries some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a description of a previous situation without expressing any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 197.
MR. FORD. The way I understand the Mexicans' mentality isthat they think of themselves as being on the brink of or already inthe class of industrialized nations. And the view is that only so-called developing countries go with hat in hand to the IMF, gettinginstructions on how to behave. That is how I see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is simply expressing his understanding of the Mexicans' mentality and their perception of themselves in relation to industrialized nations and the IMF.


Passage number 198.
MR. MARTIN. Developing countries like the United Kingdom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about developing countries like the United Kingdom.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 199.
MR. WALLICH. It is a very broad political objection in LatinAmerica. They are not at all positive with respect to the IMF, to putit very mildly. So, I don't think the president, either this one orthe next one, has a great deal of leeway. He has to face a hostilepolitical opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows a disagreement or contention between political opinion in Latin America and the actions of the president. The speaker states that there is a broad political objection towards the IMF in Latin America, suggesting a contentious relationship between the region and the organization.


Passage number 200.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The opinion is very similar in Brazil.But as Tony was just mentioning, this kind of approach has almost aprecise precedent--the last time we lent. I don't know whether weever extended any money, but we agreed to lend to the United Kingdomprior to their going to the IMF 4 or 5 years ago. That was part of abigger international arrangement. But the basis of it was virtuallyidentical to this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a similar approach taken in Brazil and mentions a previous lending arrangement with the United Kingdom.


Passage number 201.
MR. BLACK. Will we have the letter signed by Treasuryofficials before we actually extend the money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question about obtaining a signed letter from Treasury officials before extending the money.


Passage number 202.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, they said they will sign the letter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. No contention or disagreement is present in the passage. The statement is straightforward and does not suggest any opposition or conflicting views.


Passage number 203.
I suppose we will, but that doesn't---29-6/30-7/1/82MR. PARTEE. And this is the credit limit, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation or clarification about the credit limit.


Passage number 204.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we'll lend them any moneytoday. What.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses a personal belief or opinion without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 205.
MR. PARTEE. $700 million is the [swap line] limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual statement about the swap line limit being $700 million.


Passage number 206.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's the line, but I don't thinkthey'll have to draw on that fully before the election. And they saythey expect to repay it next week. But they will be back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the expectation of repaying a loan before the election.


Passage number 207.
MR. WALLICH. It's a futile question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the question is futile, indicating that there is no disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 208.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you going to be coming back tothe full Committee every single time if they repay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking if someone will be returning to the full Committee every single time if they repay.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without a specific passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 210.
MR. FORD. What about making the line bigger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply suggesting or asking about the possibility of making the line bigger.


Passage number 211.
MR. PARTEE. That's what I was wondering about--whether thatwould be the next request.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement regarding a possible future request.


Passage number 212.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may arise, but we don't have to facethat now; that question has not been raised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that a potential issue may arise in the future, but currently, that question has not been brought up or discussed.


Passage number 213.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would be equally misunderstood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that something would be equally misunderstood, implying that there would be a mutual misunderstanding rather than any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 214.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "yes" indicates that there is disagreement or contention in the passage. However, the provided passage does not contain any specific information or context to determine the source of the disagreement or contention.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we want to volunteer it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a personal opinion and does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses the speaker's own thoughts about not wanting to volunteer something.


Passage number 216.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee's response "Oh, no" is an indication that there is no disagreement.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question has not been raised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because there is no statement or argument presented.


Passage number 218.
MR. MARTIN. I think we should approve it based on the recordof other countries with a resource base like Mexico who have finallygone kicking and screaming or however to the IMF and proceeded withincertain constraints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion that they believe the approval should be based on the record of other countries with a similar resource base as Mexico who have gone to the IMF.


Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They may not go to the IMF. But what theyare saying is that they will go to the IMF if they have to. They arenot admitting that they will have to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a conditional scenario in which the subject may need to go to the IMF in the future.


Passage number 220.
MR. MARTIN. They'll have to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Answer: No

Explanation: The given passage does not show any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Martin, without any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 221.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(.). Okay, I move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing that they are making a motion or proposing something.


Passage number 222.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the absence of any objections, we willapprove it. Now, whether we actually will extend any money before theweekend is something of an open question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply highlighting uncertainty about whether the money will be extended before the weekend.


Passage number 224.
MR. TRUMAN. It's traditional, Mr. Chairman, if you want todo it this way, to note that the approval is conditioned on Sam'snegotiations being successful. Maybe that's implicit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a tradition and suggesting that it may be implied.


Passage number 225.
6/30-7/1/82 -31-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is implicit. The essentialelement is this reference to their willingness to go to the Fund.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement or opinion about a particular event or situation.


Passage number 226.
MR. MARTIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Based on the provided information, there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "Yes" here seems to be a response or acknowledgment rather than an expression of disagreement.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that understanding it is approved.might as well wait until the morning to make any remarks I have atthis stage. Thank you. We will quit for the night.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the speaker agrees with something and suggests waiting until the morning to make any further remarks.


Passage number 228.
[Meeting recessed]6/30-7/1/82July 1, 1982--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will briefly return to the saga ofMexico. They now think they are getting their advance oil paymentstoday, so they don't need the swap drawing before the election.That's all off, but we can assume that they may well be back veryshortly under the same conditions, so I think we can let the approvalstand. It doesn't look as if they will [need to draw on the swapline] this weekend.On these long-term ranges, I detected--I think accurately--agood deal of consensus in thinking, even if there were somedifferences on the mechanics of how to present this. I might sayinitially that I have a certain sympathy for Frank Morris' suggestionof clearing the mind by forgetting about all this. I follow thephilosophy that if we didn't have any of these ranges and [Congress]just left it up to us, we'd be better off. But I don't think theworld is ready for that. I don't think it is going to have thatrequisite degree of confidence in our judgment, unencumbered by somenumbers.In that connection, I forgot to mention--I didn't exactlyforget, but we haven't done much work on it--that we're going to getquestioned about why we don't use a credit aggregate and what thatwould mean and so forth. For lack of preparation, if nothing else, Idon't think we're ready to discuss a credit aggregate in great detailthis morning. But I have to look at some of those numbers and see howwe rationalize what we're doing in terms of credit numbers. Myinclination would be to say that they are useful to look at but arenot going to add much in terms of targeting--in the short run anyway.Statistics are not as readily available in the short run for us to seewhat we're doing. But the past evidence, so far as I remember it, isthat if we look at the credit numbers we don't get much differentanswers than if we look at the broader monetary aggregates anyway. Wewill do a little more exploration to see whether I can justify thatposition and talk about it when I have to testify because I will haveto; I've been asked to do so specifically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the current situation with Mexico and their oil payments, expressing their sympathy for a suggestion to forget about the ranges, and mentioning the need to prepare for questions about credit aggregates. There is an acknowledgment that there may be differences in how to present the information, but no explicit disagreement is noted.


Passage number 229.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You probably are going to getquestions also on why we don't target a range of real interest rates,a monetary policy Henry Wallich has suggested at times. I think somesentiment for that is building in some quarters on the Hill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That implies we can define real interestrates. I thought we made great progress in reducing real interestrates last month. We reduced them by about 10 percent at an annualrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 231.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we'd have to use a movingaverage of inflation on that. We couldn't do it once a month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 232.
MS. TEETERS. On the Hill or in The Wall Street Journal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about whether there is contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a person's name and two different locations (the Hill and The Wall Street Journal).


Passage number 233.
MR. AXILROD. If money increased 5 percent on a quarterlyaverage basis, velocity would be around 3-1/2 percent. If moneyincreased, say, 5-1/2 percent from June to December, that wouldproduce a quarterly average increase of more like 4-1/2 or 4-3/4percent, which would make the velocity increase more like 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The lowest velocity increase we've hadduring the first two quarters of a recovery in this period is 3 to3-1/2 percent. The highest we've had is 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents two different ranges of velocity increase during the first two quarters of a recovery without expressing any conflicting opinions or contradictory information.


Passage number 235.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that was associated with adifferent pattern of interest rate movements than we've had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a difference in interest rate movements without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 236.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what the interest ratepattern will be in the next six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating uncertainty about the future interest rate pattern, but there is no clear contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 237.
MR. MORRIS. And they were also stronger expansions--I'mpretty sure that's true--at least in real terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't say we should count on thesehigher velocity figures. I'm just citing the figures. We are in theneighborhood of the lowest velocity increases that we've had, if youjust look at that particular set of figures mechanically. I don'tthink the M2 velocity is very relevant during periods when we hadinterest rate controls on so much of the M2 components. The only-35-6/30-7/1/82recovery in which we didn't have a lot of controls was the one in1980, when the velocity increase in M2 was enormous. I don't thinkthat tells us much about M2. In view of these uncertainties, a lot ofpeople have talked about flexibility, and I think that's the key tothe whole thing. We need a certain degree of flexibility in trying tojudge things as they occur. The Ms at the extreme might slow downbecause of this liquidity desire, particularly as reflected in NOWaccounts if that reverses itself. But I wouldn't want to count onthat in the next 6-month period. So, that leaves a large element ofuncertainty.We have a lot of options as to what to do, as was made clear.What I would suggest at the moment is that we return to the issue ofthe longer term after a discussion of the shorter term because thatdiscussion may give us a little enlightenment on what we want to do.I would also say that I'm not at all sure that I want to reach anabsolute conclusion on the long-term ranges at today's meeting becausethere is a long time lapse between now and when I have to testify.And twice now we have had informed press reports between the time thatwe met and the time that I testified, which in my view is unfortunate.I'm not even sure [whether the information was leaked]; the reportsmay have been based largely upon speculation by the reporter ratherthan anything else. They happen to have been very close to the mark.I don't think it would be entirely bad to get a good idea of wherewe're likely to end up but I'm not sure we have to say that we made adecision. It might be good to be in a position to say we actuallyhaven't made a decision and, if we're close enough, we can confirm itby telephone closer to the time I actually have to testify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no obvious contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing uncertainties and options, but there is no clear disagreement or conflict between different viewpoints.


Passage number 239.
MS. TEETERS. When do you testify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either the 19th or 20th of July. I wasintending originally to do it earlier, precisely to cut down on thetime period [between our decision and my testimony]. But now itappears that the Administration estimates that we are supposed to beconsidering and integrating and so forth aren't going to be availableuntil the 15th. I was going to testify on the 14th or the 15th, sothat doesn't look possible. If we put the testimony off until thefollowing week, that creates a much more substantial gap in timing.The Administration hasn't settled on its own estimates yet, sotechnically in terms of our charge we're a little in the dark. Idon't think there is going to be anything startling. I think they'redebating about an economic outlook a bit better than ours in realterms and a little worse than ours in price terms--meaning a bithigher--as I suggested yesterday. Just where they're going to settle,I don't know. We will see in the end. But, let's go to the shortterm and see what enlightenment that casts upon the long term. Do youhave some choice words for us in that respect, Mr. Axilrod, or are youfinished talking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the timing and uncertainty surrounding a testimony and the administration's estimates.


Passage number 241.
MR. AXILROD. I think I'm about finished talking, Mr.Chairman, but I might just call to the Committee's attention thealternatives presented on page 10 and also note that the base fromwhich those alternatives take off, which is June, is probably lowerthan presented in the Bluebook. The Bluebook had the June growth rateat about 3-1/2 percent; the data we had as of yesterday, which will befirmed up in a couple of hours--and it could change some, I'm sure--suggest that the June growth is closer to zero or maybe a small-36-6/30-7/1/82positive. Alternative A, the 5-1/2 percent growth rate, would leaveM1 by September running at a 6 percent rate; with the new lower Junebase, alternative A would leave M1 much less above the path bySeptember--more like at 5-3/4 percent. So, it would be 1/4 pointabove the top of the path. The [aggregates] should all probably beviewed as somewhat closer to the path than is indicated, with M1moving within the range under alternative B and much more within therange under alternative C, given these weak end-of-June numbers.I should also add, of course, that the weak end-of-Junenumbers, if they hold up, run the risk of July being higher in termsof growth rates if the July level that we have estimated is aboutright. The special factors to take into account in July, of course,are the cost-of-living increase on social security payments, whichwill affect the first week of July and to a minor extent the Julyaverage by maybe about a percentage point in our estimate, and thebeginnings of the tax decrease. The first paychecks to reflect thetax decrease probably will start in the second week of July, and ourestimate is that it will have a temporary effect within the firstmonth of roughly 2 or 2-1/2 percentage points. So, we think those twospecial factors will add 3 to 3-1/2 percentage points to the July rateof growth. Our maximum estimate before we had these end-of-June weaknumbers was a growth in July on the order of something like 9 percent,give or take a little, at roughly current money market conditions. Sowe have constructed a path for Committee consideration that is verysimilar to what we constructed at the beginning of the first quarterand the beginning of the second quarter. The path has a relativelylarge growth rate in the first month followed by very modest or nogrowth in the succeeding two months. Our luck will run out on that atsome point but it seems to have held up in the first two quarters.The other technical point I might add, Mr. Chairman, is thatit is not so clear as it was in April that there might be an error inthe seasonals because there have been high Julys and low Julys overthe past several years. It isn't like April where in recent years allAprils have been high except for the period of credit controls. So Ithink the jury on July is out and we can't be very certain about anyverdict with regard to the seasonals [for that month].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and explanations about different growth rates and factors that may affect future growth rates. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interject. Bearing on thisissue--you probably didn't bring the figures along and I didn'teither--just for the interest of the Committee, the staff has beenexperimenting with seasonal adjustments, which they were forced to doby Governor Gramley's suggestion that when we publish a four-weekaverage we compute a new seasonal. For some reasons that areunfathomable to me, they couldn't use the regular famous Census X-11method so they have been developing or bringing to fruition some workthey have been doing that involves an entirely different method ofseasonal adjustment. In seasonally adjusting the figures, one canapply the same method to the monthly figures and the weekly figures aswe get them. And it results in ironing out these bumps that we get inthe first month in a quarter largely by taking it out over thefollowing month of the quarter. We've been getting big increases inthe first month of the quarter, particularly in April and January, andthen declines in the following month. Lo and behold, this newseasonal for this year indeed shows a sizable increase in January butabout half what it was. It was a 21 percent annual rate of increaseand the new method cuts it to 10 percent. And the money supply growth-37-6/30-7/1/82is almost as flat as a pancake thereafter, or rather a rising pancake.I mean that it shows a very steady growth rate after January. Ittakes the April bulge out completely, as I recall. And instead ofhaving a minus in May, it shows an annual rate of increase of 3 or 4percent in May, after an increase of 3 or 4 percent in April. I thinkthe increase runs at an annual rate of between 2 and 6 percent. It'sa trivial difference every month since January with this new seasonal.So, we've had a very steady monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the staff's experiments with seasonal adjustments and the effects it has had on the money supply growth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 243.
MS. TEETERS. You mean the reason the Administration is so[unintelligible] is because of our seasonal adjustment program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the presence of the statements "You mean the reason the Administration is so [unintelligible]" which implies that the speaker disagrees with or questions the explanation provided by the Administration.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't make such a dramatic changelast year. The major change is basically that it has a biggerseasonal adjustment factor for the first month in a quarter and asmaller one, or the reverse, for the second month in a quarter. Thechange is less in July than in these other quarters, but it issignificant in July too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a contention by stating that there is a major change in the seasonal adjustment factor for the first and second month in a quarter, while also highlighting that the change is smaller in July compared to other quarters but still significant.


Passage number 245.
MR. FORD. Are we going to call this the Beryl Sprinkelseasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked by Mr. Ford.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, to the eye, it's a better seasonalpure and simple. I think there is an inherent flaw in the method weuse now in that it never catches up to reality. I will present [theexperimental seasonal] in an appendix to the testimony, anyway. If wedidn't have the problem that people would think we were pulling a fastone, we'd change to that seasonal right now because it does lookbetter in terms of this repetitive pattern we have involving the firstand second months of a quarter. But it bears upon July because thatnew seasonal would show a smaller increase in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 247.
MR. AXILROD. If it is to be believed, it would take roughly5 points off the July seasonal and add it to August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why not publish both of them eachmonth and then make a switch next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is suggesting a solution or alternative course of action without any conflicting perspectives or opposing points of view.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we might [publish it] in a somewhatsubsidiary way. In effect by putting it in the testimony we would dothat. We can put it in and say that people ought to look at this andgive us any criticisms they have of it. I take it that it is quite aradically new method of computing the seasonal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 250.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, but it is the method recommended to us bythe experts on the Committee on Seasonal Adjustment when theypresented their report. So, it's well grounded in the currentliterature on seasonal adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the method recommended by the experts is well grounded in the current literature on seasonal adjustment.


Passage number 251.
MR. MARTIN. Steve, the Chairman mentioned its applicabilitythis year and last year. How about some of the other years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for information about other years. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 252.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we carried it back and it doesn't, insome way fortunately, smooth out last year all that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about carrying something back and how it does not greatly improve or "smooth out" the situation from the previous year.


Passage number 253.
MR. MARTIN. How about the preceding year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking about the previous year.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any context or information.


Passage number 255.
 It does some but the basic pattern looks---38-6/30-7/1/82MR. AXILROD. Not nearly as much as it smooths out '82, whichI think gives more credibility to the smoothing out of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing an observation about the pattern and credibility of smoothing out data in different years.


Passage number 256.
MR. MARTIN. How about 1980 or 1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question asking for specific years.


Passage number 257.
MR. AXILROD. It smooths them but just a very little. Therewould still be the erratic movement around the time of the creditcontrol program and that sort of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about the effects of a program on the movement of certain things.


Passage number 258.
MR. PARTEE. It's capturing recent information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply stating that the information being discussed is of a recent nature.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, the further back you go, justtheoretically, you would expect it to make less improvement becausethe seasonal is adjusted as it gets later information. Allowing for abulge or lack of a bulge or whatever, depending upon which way youlook at it, obviously creates problems in setting a path for the nearterm. So, I guess we have to discuss two things: What kind ofgeneral growth we would like to have ideally in the next 3 months; andhow to handle the uncertainties surrounding this year's seasonal andother impacts and why. What.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Allowing for a bulge or lack of a bulge or whatever, depending upon which way you look at it, obviously creates problems in setting a path for the near term" suggests that there are different perspectives or interpretations of the situation, which leads to disagreement or contention.


Passage number 260.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know that Steve was done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. The statement is a response to a statement or question that is not mentioned, so it is not possible to determine if there is a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if he's done either. Do youhave anything else to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement followed by a question asking if there is anything else to add.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
MR. AXILROD. I was going to add only one thought, Mr.Chairman, which is that I don't know if it's clear that alternative Ais the one that would be more consistent with a decision to run at thetop of the present ranges or with possibly raising the present ranges.All of the alternatives are consistent in a sense with anything theCommittee decides for the long run; the fourth quarter can always beadjusted. But alternative A is more consistent--even more so with thedownward June revision--with running closer to the top. Andalternatives B and C, of course, would be more consistent withretaining the present ranges and an effort to run growth down withinthe range rather than close to the top. Those were all the comments Ihad, Mr. Chairman, apart from the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is suggesting that alternative A may not be the most consistent option and that alternatives B and C may be more consistent with the goal of keeping growth within the present ranges. This indicates a difference of opinion or contention about which alternative is the most suitable.


Passage number 263.
MR. GRAMLEY. May I ask a technical question, Mr. Chairman.If one were to leave the September levels where they are and startwith the new lower June base, what would the growth from June toSeptember be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage simply presents a hypothetical question about calculating growth based on different starting points. It does not mention any conflicting opinions or disagreement.


Passage number 264.
MR. AXILROD. I had that somewhere. What I have immediatelyat hand, Governor Gramley, is that the new Q4-to-September growth ratewould be reduced by about 0.3 percent. The level of June is down $1billion, roughly, so that would be $3 billion. I guess it's not quite1 percent higher on the growth rate if you kept the September level ofM1 that is in here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating information and discussing numbers.


Passage number 265.
MR. PARTEE. Do [the new sseasonals] have an effect on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement of fact and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 266.
MR. AXILROD. I don't have the new M2 figures, GovernorPartee, but the effect on M2, if nontransactions don't change, shouldbe roughly one-fourth the effect on M1. In answer to GovernorGramley's question, for M1 we have not quite 1 percent higher growth-396/30-7/1/82from the new lower June base; at the present [level] we've projectedfor September, M2 would be about 1/4 of a percent [higher].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is stating that the effect on M2, if nontransactions don't change, should be roughly one-fourth the effect on M1. However, this statement contradicts Governor Partee's statement about the projected growth rate for M2.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me be unduly suspicious. My vaguememory is that our estimates of M2 at this point in the month are notvery reliable. We don't have very up-to-date information. On thatJune figure I suspect there is more uncertainty about M2 than aboutM1, isn't there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's suspicion and uncertainty about the reliability of the estimates for M2.


Passage number 268.
MR. AXILROD. They are a lot better than they used to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that something (presumably referring to a certain group or object) has improved over time.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information or context for there to be contention or disagreement.


Passage number 270.
 I guess we're getting--MR. PARTEE. You're using the weekly reserve accounting now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making an observation about the use of the weekly reserve accounting.


Passage number 271.
MR. AXILROD. We have rough estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage presents a statement or information without any form of disagreement or contention. It appears to be a straightforward statement without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 272.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Let me just make one furthercomment about what seems to me to be the nature of the problem--Ithink this corresponds with what many people said--with respect to thelong-term ranges. Apart from focusing on the numerology, what may beequally important or more important is how we react to whateverhappens, particularly given this uncertainty about the seasonal inJuly. We may want to be more passive in some sense in reacting,depending upon what happens or doesn't happen in the early weeks ofJuly. Now, with that much introduction who wants to say something.Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the nature of a problem and suggesting different approaches to reacting to it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 273.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm very happy, as most of youmight suspect, by this revision in the June M1 figure. If I'vecomputed it correctly, this will allow us to bring M1 by September tothe top of the upper band without having to slam on the brakes. Thefigure that I've computed from June--and what I'm doing is using theMay figure for June since we're assuming a zero rate of growth--would allow us to hit the target while letting the money supply growat 4.6 percent. I think that gets us out of the dilemma I suggestedwe were in yesterday--being between a rock and a hard place--becauseif we did that, it would preserve our credibility by coming in at thetop of our target and we wouldn't have to say that we deliberatelyplan to overshoot the target, which I think would be [ill advised].At the same time, we'd be aiming for a higher rate of growth in M1than we appear to have gotten over the last three months, so I don'tthink we'd have to risk any severe tightening in money marketconditions and the dangers that might entail. So, I would urge verystrongly that we aim to be at that top part by September, and I wouldtake whatever M2 figure Steve thinks is compatible with that. I'mguessing that a borrowing level of about $900 million might be aboutright and, as usual, I would like to widen the federal funds range.Just in case July is wild, I'd like to be able to go to 17 percent andthen hope like the devil that we didn't have to [go that high]. Atthe same time, I'd like to reduce the lower end to 10 percent and hopethat we get a better performance than we expect in July and could letthe funds rate come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests aiming for a higher rate of growth in M1 and widening the federal funds range, while also expressing concern about severe tightening in money market conditions. This suggests that there is disagreement or differing opinions on the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, let me say that we don'tknow what these numbers are late in June and we have had very largerevisions in these preliminary numbers. Before we conclude this-40-6/30-7/1/82meeting we will have another reading on this week, but next week isvery uncertain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have accurate numbers and there have been large revisions in the preliminary numbers. They also mention the uncertainty of the upcoming weeks. However, there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 275.
MR. BLACK. Well, let me make a couple more points, if Imight. What I'm really interested in is getting back to the top ofthat line [shown in the Bluebook chart] by September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presented as a statement by Mr. Black about his own interests and intentions, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Assuming the June figures are right,I don't know what that translates into in terms of a growth rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 277.
MR. BLACK. That's 4.6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage is a statement of fact regarding a numeric figure (4.6 percent). There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage


Passage number 279.
MR. BLACK. It's 4.6 percent, if we figured it correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black simply states a numerical percentage without any indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 280.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The provided excerpt only includes the name "MR. PARTEE" and does not contain any context or information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 281.
 Well, assuming it's a lower June number--MR. BLACK. Assuming June growth is zero, that means thelevel is the same as May. [The implied growth] is 4.6 percent, whichis surprisingly good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making assumptions and stating a surprising observation but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 282.
 I think that's something that we all--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I think that's something that we all" suggests agreement among the participants, specifically Chairman Volcker and possibly others.


Passage number 283.
 Let me just make sure that arithmetic isright because--MR. CORRIGAN. Something doesn't sound right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply attempting to ensure the accuracy of the arithmetic calculations. Mr. Corrigan's statement about something not sounding right could indicate potential doubts but it is not explicitly expressed as a disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it sounds to me like too low a growthrate, if June wasn't absolutely right, but I may be wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they feel the growth rate is too low, implying that they disagree with June's assessment. However, they also acknowledge the possibility of being wrong.


Passage number 285.
MR. BLACK. We checked on that. If I alone had calculatedit, I would be very suspicious of it; but Al Broaddus did it too, so Ifeel more confident. If you put the June figures at the level of May,I believe we figured it would be about 0.6 of a percentage point abovethe upper bound at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing confidence in their calculations because another person, Al Broaddus, also performed the calculations and reached a similar conclusion.


Passage number 286.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's about right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "I think that's about right" does not indicate disagreement or contention. It simply expresses agreement or affirmation with a previous statement or assessment.


Passage number 287.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage you mentioned, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide the relevant passage?


Passage number 288.
 So, if approached almost asymptotically, one cansee it has to be--MR. ROOS. Approached how.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement, asking how something should be approached.


Passage number 289.
MR. BLACK. Asymptotically--a word that I learned back inhigh school.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage provided does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement about learning a word in high school.


Passage number 290.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6/10ths. In dollars, it's a billionabove, isn't it. June would be $1 billion above the implied Junetarget level, wouldn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements are presented as affirmations or questions seeking confirmation, rather than expressing opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 291.
MR. BALLES. What is the revised number, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply a question about the revised number.


Passage number 292.
MR. BLACK. $451.5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a simple statement of a monetary amount.


Passage number 293.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and I think the target for June is450.5 billion, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their belief that the target for June is $450.5 billion and seeks confirmation.


Passage number 294.
6/30-7/1/82MR. CORRIGAN. Could we have the numbers, Steve. This isgetting ridiculous. Could we have the June-to-September numbers forpage 10 that reflect your current estimate of June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing frustration about not having specific numbers and is requesting them.


Passage number 295.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. AXILROD" without any additional context or content of the passage.


Passage number 296.
 Well, they will change in an hour, which is whyI'm a little reluctant, but--MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their reluctance to do something due to an impending change, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement present.


Passage number 297.
 That might be better than what we have now,because right now we have--MR. AXILROD. June is going to be a lot closer to the Maylevel than the number that's [on page 11]. So, around $451.5 billionis about where it would come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a comparison between two options and provides a specific amount as a potential outcome.


Passage number 298.
MR. BLACK. Well, I know it is going to change, and that isthe reason I'm stressing that what I'm interested in is hitting thetop part of the range by September. Whatever that number would be,that's the rate that I think is about as high as we ought to go. Oneother suggestion, if I might, Mr. Chairman. At times like this whenwe have soft numbers for our base, I wonder if it would be worthconsidering using the May figure, which is a hard number, forexpressing the rate so that we all have some reasonably firm number inmind. It's rather tricky to come up with rates if the number doeschange in the middle of the meeting and we have to make thesecomputations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing his opinion and making a suggestion, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting views between him and others in the passage.


Passage number 299.
 I have my calculator here, which I probably couldn'toperate, but in case the number is different and I can't figure out--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess we can do either, but Isuspect that that's putting undue importance on any particular number.The May number isn't very high either and the difference in thesegrowth rates we're talking about--. As this conversation illustrates,if we get a $1 billion revision in a number, which is nothing in thelarger scheme of things, and blow that up to an annual rate, it lookslike something significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: While the passage mentions different numbers and growth rates, there is no clear contention or disagreement between the speaker and others. The speaker is simply discussing the potential impact of a revision in a number and the perception of significance.


Passage number 300.
MR. BLACK. Well, that's the reason I really favor pointtargets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses Mr. Black's preference for point targets.


Passage number 301.
 That gets back to my--MR. AXILROD. I might say, Mr. Chairman, that PresidentBlack's calculation is certainly correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the correctness of President Black's calculation.


Passage number 302.
MR. BLACK. Boy, that's a relief. That's the best news I'veheard since the money supply figures were revised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses relief and states that it is the best news he has heard since the money supply figures were revised. This indicates a positive reaction to the news.


Passage number 303.
MR. AXILROD. The September top of the range would besomewhere around 4-1/2 percent from a June base of $451.5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a numerical calculation and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 304.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, with that clarified, let us proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply setting the context for further discussion.


Passage number 305.
MR. BLACK. I was trying to be helpful, Mr. Chairman. I'msorry if I muddied the waters on that. I happen to have been on thecall, which is the only reason I had access to that figure ahead ofsome of the rest of you, and I thought it might be helpful to throwthat number out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is apologizing for potentially confusing the issue and explaining their intention to share information that they had access to.


Passage number 306.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Governor Martin that would indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 307.
-42-6/30-7/1/82MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I do not have my calculator and Ihave no doubt that I would fail to operate it if I had it, so I willnot get into the billion dollar question. I would be in favor ofkeeping the [current] targets for the balance of 1982. I would be infavor of a relatively passive form of implementation of our policy sothat if we miss the upper limit of the target by September--in duedeference to my colleague, President Black--I would not be concerned,provided we went along the course suggested by Governor Teetersyesterday. One of her suggestions yesterday was to be more explicitwith regard to our attitude of tolerance so that we remove from themarkets fears and premonitions or the expectation that we will becoming on hard to bring the [monetary growth] numbers down, which willproduce certain interest rate impacts. The reasons for my positionwith regard to the upper limit of the target came out, as was obviousto all of us, in the discussion yesterday. It is the downside risk;it is the unusually high degree of uncertainty; it is the peril thatcorporations and financial institutions confront; it is the greatuncertainty of the international situation added to all of these. Andas the Chairman has indicated, it will be 6 months or 8 months or Xmonths before the Congress begins to resolve a $60 to $70 billionswing between estimates of the deficit.I view ranges and targets as tools. My own experience inbusiness and government has been that you use budgets and targets andranges and brackets in your work. And in the real world, either ingovernment or outside it, those targets, brackets, ranges, objectives,and goals are usually missed by whatever organization it is. Themature individual understands that these are tools and not the sacredwrit. Now, I don't have any great insight as to whether velocity willgo up enough or not enough. Frankly, I don't believe anybody elsehas. That is again a reason for my thesis of tolerance of resultsrelative to goals and targets. I think we should keep our targets forthe balance of '82 at this time and we should operate in a moreexplicit, but relatively passive, mode for the upcoming period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, disagrees with the idea of actively trying to bring down the monetary growth numbers. He argues for a more passive approach and tolerance of missing the upper limit of the targets.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hear your music and understand yourmusic as implied in general terms to the next quarter. At some pointwe have to make a reserve path and come up with a borrowing number orsomething. I don't know whether you want to throw out a number now orlater.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a neutral statement requesting a decision regarding a borrowing number, but without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 309.
MR. MARTIN. I think a 4.6 percent increase [in M1] is notenough. I'm not sure that a 5-1/2 percent increase, as in alternativeA, is enough. It might be enough if indeed July has a certainconfiguration. So I would go for alternative A, but I'd be quitetolerant if alternative A were exceeded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin initially expresses the opinion that a 4.6 percent increase in M1 is not enough. However, he then states that a 5-1/2 percent increase, as mentioned in alternative A, might not be sufficient either. This indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the appropriate increase in M1.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the short run, anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the given passage. It simply states "in the short run, anyway" without presenting any conflicting ideas or differing opinions.


Passage number 311.
MR. MARTIN. In the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply mentioned and his perspective or statement is not provided.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


Passage number 313.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I come closer to Pres than to Bob. Ididn't say anything about the longer-run ranges yesterday because I'mso concerned about how we will confront the very great problems thatthe economy is probably going to be facing. My view of the short runis probably no different from my view of the long run. That view is6/30-7/1/82that we don't know what is going to happen to velocity and we have tobe flexible enough to recognize changes in velocity when they occur.The thing that we do know, though, is that the economy can't standhigher interest rates because the financial fabric of the country justwon't tolerate higher rates in this environment or the environment onecan see in the reasonably foreseeable future. So, what I would liketo do is to have a sort of normative number for setting the path: aspecification for M1 of 5 or 6 percent--we might even say of about 5to 6 percent--and for M2 of about 9 percent. [M2] has runconsistently high and there's every reason to believe that it may tendto run high if precautionary demands remain as they have and if we getany saving effect out of the tax cut. So I would say around 9 percent[for M2]. And then it seems to me that we ought to reestablish 15percent as the upper limit on the funds rate--not as an indication toconsult or anything like that. I'd say we would seek growth in thearea of about 5 to 6 percent for M1 and about 9 percent for M2provided that does not drive the funds rate above 15 percent. That'sa really radical change compared to what we've done before, but itseems to me that the threat of higher interest rates is so great nowthat we can't tolerate it and we have to put that in as a limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his own views and proposing specific numbers for setting the path of M1 and M2. There is no indication of any disagreement or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 314.
MR. ROOS. Chuck, may I inquire, sir: If we make a strongstatement in reference to interest rates, doesn't that imply asignificant departure and doesn't that signal that once again we aretrying to balance interest rates and aggregate growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is potential contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "if we make a strong statement in reference to interest rates" indicates that there may be differing viewpoints on whether or not such a strong statement should be made. Additionally, the mention of "once again" suggests that there may be differing opinions on the approach to balancing interest rates and aggregate growth.


Passage number 315.
MR. PARTEE. I guess what I'm saying is that I will acceptany aggregate growth to keep the funds rate below 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his willingness to accept any level of aggregate growth as long as it keeps the funds rate below 15 percent. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 316.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without a specific passage or reference, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide more information for a more accurate answer.


Passage number 317.
 So you are placing primary emphasis on--MR. PARTEE. On that upper end of the funds rate range forthe time being.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their focus or emphasis on the upper end of the funds rate range for the time being.


Passage number 318.
MR. FORD. On a weekly, daily, or monthly basis. Well, youare proposing a significant change in policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is simply stating a fact and acknowledging the proposed change in policy.


Passage number 319.
MR. PARTEE. I would want to say so long as the funds ratedoes not move rather consistently above 15 percent. I don't meandaily; I'm not even sure I mean weekly, Bill--maybe biweekly orsomething like that. But I don't think we can tolerate the effect onthe market of a funds rate higher than 15 percent, which is a littlehigher than where it has been. It gives us some [upward leeway], butI just think we need to draw the line now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion on the funds rate and the need to set a limit.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, just so I don't appear to be toomuch of a Simon Legree, may I say that I'm just as interested ingetting rates down as anybody else but I differ on the method fordoing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, acknowledges his interest in lowering rates but states that he disagrees on how to achieve it. His statement implies a disagreement or difference of opinion on the method for reducing rates.


Passage number 321.
MR. PARTEE. Well, one way to do it is to crash the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply states a suggested method without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 322.
MR. BLACK. Well, that is not the method I am suggesting. Wemay have been a little too tight last year [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 324.
-44-6/30-7/1/82MR. GRAMLEY. My thinking runs very much along the lines ofChuck's. I think it's possible that money demand may shift down againin the third quarter, but I don't think we can set forth on a courseof monetary policy which starts with that as a proposition and, if itdoesn't happen, lets interest rates rachet upward significantlyfurther. I want to try to find a way of designing some specificationsthat will permit a bit more money growth if, in fact, this downwardshift of money demand does not happen, but that will not let thingsget completely out of hand. One way this might be done is to leavethe September levels where they are and to recalculate our June-to-September growth rates accordingly. If I understand Steve right, thatwould mean something like 6-1/4 to 6-1/2 percent for alternative A,4-3/4 to 5 percent for "B," and 3-1/4 to 3-1/2 percent for "C." Iwould start with that. Is that right, Steve, roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Gramley is stating his own thoughts and suggestions, and he also seeks clarification from Steve.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 325.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Isn't it only 6/10ths, if this othercalculation is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention over the accuracy of a calculation. The phrase "if this other calculation is right" implies that there are conflicting opinions about what the correct answer or calculation should be.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 326.
MR. AXILROD. Well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "Well" suggests that Mr. Axilrod's response is contrary or different from what was previously stated or expected.


Passage number 327.
 I was rounding--MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] get down to the upper end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 328.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, I was rounding to $1 billion instead ofthe exact $1.3 billion and for M1 I would add about a percentagepoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing clarification or correction regarding the amount being rounded.


Passage number 329.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, whatever the numbers are, I'd make thoseadjustments to M1 and whatever corresponding adjustments need to bemade to M2. Then I would take the quantitative specs of "A" and theinitial borrowing of "B." By doing so, we would be putting together aset of specs that say in effect that we may have more money growththan the staff has counted on if this downward shift of money demanddoes not happen. If, in fact, we find that money growth is fallingshort of this path set forth by the specs of "A," then what I would dois split the difference. I would take half of it and lower moneygrowth and half of it and lower interest rates. That's how I wouldproceed, and I would get around the problem of having to put in aproviso clause that would specify a strict upper limit for the federalfunds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their approach to adjusting the monetary policy based on different scenarios and outcomes.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the borrowing in "B".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking about the borrowing in "B."


Passage number 331.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the borrowing would be $800 million to $1billion; taking a midpoint of $900 million would be all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley proposes a borrowing amount of $800 million to $1 billion and suggests that a midpoint of $900 million would be acceptable. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflict presented.


Passage number 332.
MR. PARTEE. And you think your strategy would keep the ratesfrom going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee, without any conflicting views or arguments provided.


Passage number 333.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it has a chance. It may not, but I wouldcount on the Chairman to use his good offices to call us in forconsultation if we had serious problems with rising interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley states that there is a chance for something to happen, but he also expresses trust in the Chairman to address any potential problems.


Passage number 334.
MR. FORD. Are you proposing a 15 percent cap, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is simply asking a question about a proposal.


Passage number 335.
MR. GRAMLEY. No. I'm proposing the 11 to 16 percent range.the initial borrowing assumption of alternative B, and thequantitative specs for M1 and M2 of "A" modified as I indicated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply proposing their own suggestion and modifying some specifications.


Passage number 336.
-45-6/30-7/1/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement mentioning Governor Teeters without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 337.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I want to get interest rates down. I'mnot worrying about them going up, because I think that's intolerable.Therefore, I would move toward what Pres and Chuck have said but alittle more strongly. If we do get some increase in velocity, weshould let it carry through and take the drop in interest rates that Ithink we need to keep this economy going and to avoid, really, almosta catastrophe. So, I would take the specifications of "A" but raisethem. I would go at least to 6 percent and perhaps tolerate 6-1/2percent for M1. I think we need a signal in the market that we haveeased or rates won't come down and, therefore, I would drop theborrowing. I would take a borrowing level preferably of $300 million,but I could settle for $400 million. And we need to handle it fairlyflexibly. It's seven weeks until the next meeting. Certainly inseven weeks--and probably later in July--we will have a better readingon where we are. It's not an intolerable period of time to let policyrun fairly freely. And if we're wrong, we can reverse ourselves atthat point. But at least we ought to experiment to see if we canbring ourselves out of this [recession].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing her own opinion and suggesting a course of action. She does not mention any opposing viewpoints or engage in any argument or debate.


Passage number 338.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would mean a very sudden drop toabout 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward assertion about a hypothetical sudden drop to around 12 percent.


Passage number 339.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full passage or context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the mentioned passage about Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 340.
 Well, I have no--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we started with $300 millionborrowing, that would be a very sudden move, not a gradual one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 341.
MS. TEETERS. But I think that's what we need to signal themarket. We can phase it down over a couple of weeks, but it's goingto take a fairly sharp drop in borrowing to get the message acrossthat we are easing on monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion about signaling the market and the need for a sharp drop in borrowing to convey the message of easing on monetary policy.


Passage number 342.
MR. FORD. What range of rates are you looking for, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 343.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I can't even tolerate a 15 percent upperlimit, as Chuck can. I think 14 percent is outrageous in thesituation we're in. I would much prefer a cap of 14 percent and saythat we are not going to go above it. We've had enormously adversereactions over the past couple of weeks as the rate has edged back upto the 15 percent level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates disagreement between Ms. Teeters and Chuck regarding the upper limit interest rate. Ms. Teeters states that she can't tolerate a 15 percent upper limit and finds 14 percent outrageous, while Chuck is able to tolerate the higher rate.


Passage number 344.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, the name "Mr. Guffey" is mentioned, but there is no indication of any contention or disagreement. The passage is incomplete and does not provide enough information to make any further judgments.


Passage number 345.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I share the feeling of most ofthose who have already spoken about getting interest rates down. It'sa question of how to do it. The June numbers complicate the analysis,obviously, but I would probably go for [an M1] range something likeChuck has suggested but a bit lower. I would narrow it to 5 to 5-1/2percent. Either of those accommodates some uncertainty as to what theJune figures will be and what the shift [in money demand] may be inthe third quarter. I would just point out that 5 to 5-1/2 percentgrowth is substantially greater than what we achieved in the secondquarter; the June figure would indicate that we achieved an average of3 percent for the second quarter, and moving to 5 to 5-1/2 percent isindeed somewhat more expansive. To avoid being slavish to thetargets, I would retain the 5 to 5-1/2 percent top for the remainder-46-6/30-7/1/82of the year. Growth in that range in the third quarter would bring ussomeplace near the top end if the June figures are indeed real, butwould not bring us into the range. However, we would have anotherquarter to deal with that. So, 5 to 5-1/2 percent seems reasonable tome. My concern is that we should have some easing in money marketconditions, and I think those kinds of rates would do it providing westart out with a borrowing level, which I think may be consistent withwhat I'm trying to achieve, of about $600 to $700 million.My last point is that if growth in July--which I think is themonth of great uncertainty--comes in greater than the 9 to 10 percentthat we're talking about, I'd tolerate that growth. So, the pathswould be constructed in such a way that they would be changed in Julyif we got a much larger bulge than the 9 to 10 percent. And interestrates would not move up because of that excess growth that we'reexpecting; we just would not have the dimensions right. Inconclusion, I would like to see interest rates come down and I think[M1 growth of] 5 to 5-1/2 percent for the quarter is more expansivethan we have had in the [recent] past. I do not want to see interestrates go up because of some aberration [in M1 growth] that may appearin July and, thus, I would have a caveat, either implied or in thedirective, that the staff would accommodate that greater growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea of lowering interest rates and discussing their preferred range of M1 growth. They also mention a caveat for accommodating unexpected growth in July.


Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 347.
MR. FORD. Well, I sense a rather interesting shift in theperspective of the Committee. I will talk about the things I agreewith first. I was happy to hear you, Mr. Chairman, indicate thatthere is some chance that the economy may be getting better. I guessI'm a hopeless optimist, but I always notice that economists have apenchant for gloom and tend to acknowledge that a recovery hashappened after it has happened. I hold onto and cherish this ray ofhope that the economy may actually be turning around now, with threeupward ticks in the leading indicators and all the other positivethings that one can point to if one wants to be a little optimistic.It may be improving right now. There is, of course, the downside riskthat everybody has expressed. That can't be discounted or ignored.I certainly am not a fan of high interest rates, but I verystrongly oppose any shift in policy toward putting on a maximum ratecap, particularly the notion that a number of people who have alreadyspoken have expressed of setting a rate cap at or below the presentlevel. This week the fed funds rate is averaging around 15 percentand I'm told that it's a somewhat unusual week. But I certainlywouldn't want to vote for a policy that said that rates had to be ator below their present level, with the further notion that if theyshould move even a little above the present level we'd automaticallyvalidate that with whatever increase [is necessary] in the moneysupply. So, I guess you're going to have to put me down for beingcloser to Mr. Black in that I [would not] vote for something like therest of you [have advocated]. I put most of you down for "A" or "A+"or "A-." Put me down for "B" with a borrowing assumption around whereLyle Gramley and Bob Black had it, at about $900 million. And likeMr. Black, I very strongly favor always having a range of interestrates that is broader rather than narrower. I would say we ought toallow for at least some movement in both directions from where weactually are the day we make the decision. Therefore, I'd go for afed funds range up to 17 percent before we would get on the phone [to-47-6/30-7/1/82consult] and down to 10 percent or below if we should be lucky enoughto see rates happen [to move] in that direction. So, I come out at"B" with a borrowing assumption of around $900 million and a fed fundsrange that is as wide or wider than we now have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his agreement with some points made by the Chairman and highlighting his own perspective on the economy and interest rates.


Passage number 348.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 349.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I'm in the Martin and Partee camp, ifthat's the way we're dividing things up. I think the economy needslower interest rates. At a minimum, I think we have to avoid higherrates. We have very little room to maneuver rates down, but we oughtto take advantage of whatever room and opportunities we have, even tothe point of probing or coaxing a little--testing the limits a little--to see if we can at least bias rates in a downward direction. So,in terms of the overall strategy, I would come out broadly in the "A"category. I would handle a July bulge passively, much the way wehandled it in January and April, accepting the bulge and then tryingto work it off in succeeding months rather than with a prompt activeresponse. As for my view of the targets, I really can't improve onthe way Preston said it. I think we should approach them flexibly.They are a tool of management. And if we hit them, we hit them. Butour goal is the economy and we should not religiously pursue somespecified number. So, I would take a rather flexible view on thetargets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the Martin and Partee camp and shares their belief that the economy needs lower interest rates. The speaker also agrees with the strategy of handling a July bulge passively, similar to how it was handled in January and April. The speaker also agrees with the idea of approaching targets flexibly and not religiously pursuing a specific number. Overall, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 350.
MR. FORD. What is your borrowing assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is simply asking for clarification or confirmation about a borrowing assumption.


Passage number 351.
MR. BOEHNE. Oh, $400-$500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a financial figure without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 352.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I ran out of names. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they ran out of names, followed by the name "Mr. Roos." There is no indication of any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 353.
MR. ROOS. Well, I would opt for alternative A with aborrowing assumption of $900 million or something like that. But I amconcerned about the implication of some of the opinions that I'veheard. I don't think it's necessary to repeat that everybody aroundthis table would like to see lower interest rates. But these interestrates are quite obviously affected by how the financial markets viewthe signals that we send or the signals that we are imagined to send.And I think any change of wording in the directive that could beinterpreted as signaling even temporarily a return to placing primaryemphasis on controlling interest rates--placing a cap on interestrates or anything like that--would be disastrous because people wouldsay, after they've seen the effect on inflation of our 1979 change ofemphasis, that we're going back to the old way of doing things. In anhistorical perspective I think the last thing the markets want to see--and this goes for this business of flexibility--is a return to afine-tuning, interest-rate-control-oriented method of conductingpolicy. I think everybody always has to be flexible. On the otherhand, I'd hate like the devil to go on the open seas and know that thecaptain did not set a course before we left port and that he changedsignals every day. We'd be going around in circles. And I honestlybelieve that for almost 15 years--and I was part of it, although Idisagreed with it--the Federal Open Market Committee went around ingigantic circles, which led to our present predicament and resulted inhigh interest rates. With that speech, I will hush up, Mr. Chairman,and opt for alternative A and a borrowing assumption of $900 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and concerns, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else in the conversation.


Passage number 354.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 355.
6/30-7/1/82MR. KEEHN. For reasons based on the current economicsituation, as I commented yesterday, I think we should set a targetthat has a reasonable possibility of getting us back down to the topof the range by the end of the year. I would not choose a target nowthat would deliberately put us over the range by the end of the year.And going along with Governor Martin's comments, I certainly wouldn'tbe slavish with regard to staying in the range. By that I mean thatif we were to run over as we go from now to the end of the year, so beit. Having said that, I also wouldn't choose a target that wouldleave very little flexibility if the July bulge turns out to be veryhigh. So, I end up between alternatives "A" and "B," probably "A-"rather than "B+" and an M1, say, of 4-1/2 to 5 percent. I wouldbroaden the federal funds range from 10 to 15 percent to 10 to 16percent. And I would be strongly opposed at this point to trying toset any kind of interest rate cap for fear that that would signal toomajor a change. My borrowing range would be, say, $600 to $800million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 356.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response without a passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 357.
MR. BALLES. I indicated yesterday in the preliminary go-around that as I look back a year ago or even six months ago at whatwe were expecting and forecasting, it's clear that the economy is inpoorer shape in terms of real growth and unemployment and that we'rebetter off than we had hoped on the inflation side. That's really thebasis on which I rationalize my departure from our longer-term programof gradual diminution of monetary growth. I feel now that wedeliberately ought to plug some countercyclical considerations intoshort-term policy, that is, for the 3 to 6 months ahead. And it's onthat basis that I am in favor either of announcing an increase in the1982 range or permitting a modest overshoot, maybe up to a point. Thedifficulty with not announcing it or at least saying that we're goingto tolerate an overshoot is that if we have an overshoot and themarket doesn't hear us say anything about not correcting it, they aregoing to assume that we will correct it. And that sets upexpectations of a tighter policy in the weeks and months immediatelyahead. They will be anticipating some action by us to tighten upagain. So, we're in somewhat of a box on that score, Mr. Chairman.If we don't decide to increase the '82 range formally, I think we haveto go in the other direction, which a number of people mentionedyesterday and which I also find satisfactory, of indicating ratherexplicitly that we do anticipate some modest overshoot and thus bythat action remove anticipations that we are about to tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is advocating for a departure from the current monetary growth plan in favor of countercyclical considerations. He suggests either announcing an increase in the 1982 range or permitting a modest overshoot. However, he also acknowledges the difficulty of not announcing it and the potential market expectations of a tighter policy. This indicates a disagreement or debate within the group about the best course of action.


Passage number 358.
 Thatwould be particularly true if the markets see a close to double-digitincrease [in M1] in July, which I gather is not out of the realm ofpossibility, Steve, based on both the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could be double-digit, I'm afraid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of a double-digit increase in M1 in July.


Passage number 359.
MR. BALLES. --income tax reduction and social securitypayments. If we saw close to a double-digit increase in M1 in Julyand didn't say something about tolerating an overshoot or increasingthe range, I think we would have set up anticipations in the market ofa very near-term Fed tightening that could cause interest rates to goup significantly. And that would be a very dangerous thing to allowto happen right now. Well, in a word, I'd come down, bottom line, infavor of alternative A, with the borrowing assumption that would beconsistent with that--maybe in the $700 to $800 million range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 360.
-49-6/30-7/1/82MR. FORD. Do you want to cap interest rates, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 361.
MR. BALLES. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 363.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said yesterday, I don'tthink any of the alternatives that we're considering now are likely toreduce interest rates significantly from their current levels. Iwould like to believe that alternative A would, but I don't think so.Since it's unlikely that we'll be able to do anything to get interestrates down within the limits of what we're thinking about, I think weshould at all costs avoid doing anything that would likely result inan increase in interest rates. So, of course, I find myself inagreement with Pres and Chuck. That means I would [support]alternative A and would be willing to see some overshoot fromalternative A. And I agree with Chuck that we need to put a cap onthe funds rate. I think it's important that we send a signal to themarket that there is some point at which we will begin to look atinterest rates again. I do not agree with the view expressed that wecan't afford to send a signal to the market that we care aboutinterest rates or that we only care about the aggregates. To indicateto the market that beyond a certain point we care would be a verypositive thing to do right now. If we announce that we would notaccept a funds rate above 15 percent, that would indicate that we areflexible, that we're looking at a broad range of factors, and that wefeel some sense of responsibility for the economy. So, I favoralternative A and I support the funds rate cap and whatever borrowingis consistent with that--about $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with Pres and Chuck and discusses their shared views on alternative A and putting a cap on the funds rate.


Passage number 364.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention Governor Wallich or any potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 365.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I don't think this is the time to make afundamental change in policy. We may come to that; it may turn outthat we can't stay our course. But right now we have an expectedrecovery; it's not in the bag but there is a broad consensus thatthings are turning around. So, why at this time convey signals that Ithink would be deeply alarming to the market. Now, I agree thatinterest rates are too high. But I see them as too high to allow theeconomy to operate at a decent level of investment. I don't believethat these interest rates necessarily are going to bring on afinancial crisis. If there is a financial crisis, I think it willcome as a result of some specific circumstance--whether it's the HomeLoan Banks or something that happens in Mexico or something else. ButI don't think the present level of interest rates is unsustainable forsomewhat longer for a great majority of businesses. Furthermore, I'mnot convinced at all that we would get very much benefit on interestrates if we eased now in a way that is visible to the market. At theshort end, yes, for a while. But what do we do then next year whenrates begin to rise again and we have to pay the bill for what we aretrying to buy right now. At the long end it's very doubtful whatwould happen to rates. Maybe a signal that we care about rates--asignal that we're not going to tolerate an increase in rates--would befavorable, but the market could just as well react in the oppositedirection if people think we are pegging rates again. They will thinkwe are going to flood the economy with liquidity as we've done in thepast; and we may be shooting ourselves in the foot. I have a similaruneasiness about announcing a tolerance for an overshoot. It's very-50-6/30-7/1/82difficult to decide whether it's better to change the ranges, which Isaid yesterday I might be prepared to do, or just to keepovershooting. If we declare that we're willing to overshoot, we'regoing in the direction of the temporary debt ceiling--the permanentdebt ceiling is hundreds of billions below the temporary one--andwe'll always be looking at the tolerated range, which may be veryhigh, and have a formal range that is low. I don't think that wouldbe a viable posture.Given all this, I think we have a chance now of getting backon track somewhere by the fall or by the end of the year. If thesenew numbers hold, we could even do it by September, but I'm not allthat bent on doing that. I favor alternative B with, say, $1 billionof borrowing and M1 at 5 percent--and the path set to accommodate theexpected July bulge so that it doesn't drive up interest ratesimmediately--and the funds rate range as it is here. It wouldn't bethe end of the world if the funds rate went to 16 percent. I do thinkthat things would change very dramatically if it were known that wehave capped the rate and are willing to put in any amount of reservesin order to hold it there. So, an 11 to 16 percent range seemsreasonable to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 367.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd like first to ask PaulMeek: Where does the market think we want borrowings right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question to PaulMeek.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 368.
MR. MEEK. It's a little confused.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "confused" suggests that there is some level of disagreement or misunderstanding in the passage.


Passage number 369.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 370.
 Well, that's understandable, but--MR. MEEK. Borrowings were $900 million the week before lastand about $1-1/2 billion last week. I would think somewhere in the$800 million to $1 billion area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information and expressing their thoughts on the expected range of borrowings, but there is no opposing viewpoint or contradiction.


Passage number 371.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's the market perception. Steve, could Iask you, too: Back in April, when we were looking at a similarsituation in terms of a money supply burst, we adopted a path; but asI recall we had some kind of fail-safe understanding. How did wefinesse that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about a previous situation.


Passage number 372.
MR. AXILROD. I forget the exact wording but my memory of itis that we said that if April came in a little stronger than was inthe path, that would be tolerable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 373.
 I forget the exact wording, but wecan get the April directive if that--MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a lack of recollection about the exact wording of the April directive.


Passage number 374.
 But there was some understanding--MR. AXILROD. I think there was some understanding, if I'mremembering right, that if April came in a bit stronger than theskewed path that it would be tolerated so long as [M2] reflected someoffset to Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement indicates that there was some understanding among the parties involved.


Passage number 375.
MR. BALLES. It was provided that M2 was essentially withinits growth range for the year, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions a statement made by Mr. Balles regarding the level of M2 being within its growth range for the year. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 376.
MR. AXILROD. As an aid to judging, that's right. That isexactly right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with a statement made by someone else.


Passage number 377.
-51-6/30-7/1/82MR. CORRIGAN. Well, fundamentally, I'd start off by sayingthat the thought of doing something that would be construed as a basicchange in policy right now is totally unappealing to me. I just don'tthink the time is right to do that. I am very sensitive to theproblem of an increase in interest rates. But if July really turnsout to be a problem, I think we can finesse that, for example, bydoing something like we did in April. And I would certainly want todo all the finessing we could do in that event. My instincts, interms of the short term, are very much driven by the sameconsiderations that I mentioned yesterday in the context of the longterm. I don't think there is a heck of a lot that we can engineerthat is going to produce some fail-safe reduction in interest rates,much less an absolute assurance that they won't rise. I would leantoward Governor Gramley's earlier suggestion, which if I understood itwas basically to focus on the September numbers as we see them. As heworked it through, I think he was suggesting maintaining quantitativemoney targets that are something like those in "A," but preserving inthat context the funds rate and borrowings targets that are more orless compatible with "B." That would be quite satisfactory to me.Borrowings would be $800 or $900 million, or something like that. Idon't care whether we put the funds rate range at 10 to 15 percent or10 to 16 percent; I don't think it matters a whole lot. But I wouldlook for the possibility of putting in the directive something thatdoes allow a little more flexibility in accommodating any realaberration in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and preferences, but there is no opposition or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am out of names at this point. Mr.Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is out of names at this point, followed by the name "Mr. Boykin."


Passage number 379.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would line up with thosewho are arguing for alternative B, for the reasons they've alreadygiven, with an initial borrowing assumption of around $900 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boykin states that he supports alternative B and agrees with the reasons already given.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 381.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, let me say first that this isthe strangest FOMC meeting I've attended. There seems to be a wholechange or shift in mood. It's true that I missed the last meeting; Iwas ill. Maybe it started last time. But during the depth of therecession there was a much tougher attitude than I hear today. Idon't know what is bringing about this change, although I share inthat view, as indicated by my remarks yesterday. Anyway, withoutcarrying that further, it seems to me that it's important--and here Iwant to emphasize what Henry said--that there not be an impression inthe markets of a sudden reversal or shift toward easing. It would bevery politically suspect. They see the pressure on us with widespreadspeculation now that we will ease. And yet at the same time there's agloom and doom atmosphere out there and very little expectation thatinterest rates will fall. There's an ambivalent feeling. On the onehand, they see the pressure on us [to ease] and some people think wemay ultimately give into it. But nobody expects that we're going togive into it that quickly. Therefore, I think it would come as quitea surprise if there were a sudden drop in rates. So, that is why Ithink we shouldn't go lower than about $800 million on the initialborrowing assumption. On the other hand, I would go along with a5-1/2 percent intermeeting target [for M1] and an 8-1/2 percent targetfor M2. I don't think that has to be increased. The fed funds rangeis unimportant. I see no reason to cap it. And in particular, there-52-6/30-7/1/82would be no reason to cap it if we accept Jerry Corrigan's suggestion,which I agree makes sense, that if the July [M1] bulge comes in atmore than we're allowing for, we accommodate it within reasonablelimits. So, I would urge the Committee, even if it's going in thedirection of easing--which it clearly is--to do so in a cautious wayrather than in the kind of sudden movement that would be likely if westarted off next week with a $300 or $400 million initial borrowingassumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their observations and opinions on the current mood and potential actions of the FOMC.


Passage number 382.
MS. TEETERS. Tony, with $800 initial borrowing, regardlessof what we do with the rates of growth in the Ms, there is absolutelyno change from where we have been for the past 3 months. And we'regoing to have interest rates that are fluctuating between 14 and 15percent. That's no change in policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about the current situation without presenting any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 383.
MR. RICE. They may be higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement made by Mr. Rice.


Passage number 384.
MS. TEETERS. And they may be higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any conflicting or contrasting viewpoints or statements. It simply states that "they" (the prices) may be higher.


Passage number 385.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, first of all, borrowing was$1-1/2 billion last week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about borrowing amount without presenting any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 386.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 387.
 It's close to being--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It has been averaging closer to $1billion; I think it was around $900 million in the last few weeks. Itseems to me that the fact that we're building our [M1] path on asgenerous a target as 5-1/2 percent, assuming that there aren't somesudden flukes in the money supply, will permit rates to come down.But I just don't think we want to be perceived as coming in with avery sudden drop in the initial [borrowing assumption]. That's amatter of judgment. We can ask Paul Meek. I don't know; I haven'tdiscussed this with him. If we do have an initial borrowingassumption of $300 or $400 million, I think we'll have a sudden drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 388.
MR. MEEK. I believe that would be Nancy's intent--that therebe a change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. Mr. Meek simply states his belief about Nancy's intent without any conflicting ideas presented.


Passage number 389.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A sudden change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentions a sudden change without indicating any disagreement or contention among individuals or groups.


Passage number 390.
MS. TEETERS. Well, a 14 to 15 percent federal funds rate forthe next three months in my mind is absolutely no change. If it takesa drop to $300 million to get it down to 12 percent, my word, that's[only] a 2-point drop. That doesn't sound to me like a plunge in themarket at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS is expressing her opinion that a 2-point drop in the federal funds rate is not a significant change.


Passage number 391.
MR. MEEK. Well, I think the market would be quite surprised.And I do think that we have enough credibility in the markets thataccommodating a July bulge, after the January and April experience, isconsidered likely by the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion on the market's reaction and their belief in their credibility.


Passage number 392.
MS. TEETERS. Why are the rates going up. Why have fundsbeen trading at 15 percent for the past month. Was it because theborrowings were well above the $800 million that we specified at thelast meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply a series of questions.


Passage number 393.
MR. MEEK. Well, I think we had the funds rate trading up inthe last week largely because of the June 30th statement date and the-53-6/30-7/1/82pressures for banks to dress up their balance sheets for that. Iwould say, with the billion dollar level of borrowing that was ourobjective, that a funds rate somewhere around 14 percent or a littleabove was what was indicated; that is about where it was in May beforewe lowered the borrowing level to $800 million. Then the rate wentdown for three weeks to 13-1/2 percent; but it came back, as fundsstrengthened, to wind up the period roughly where it was at thebeginning.SPEAKER(.) Following the last Federal Open Market Committeemeeting, the funds rate dropped from the 14-1/2 percent area down to13-1/2 percent, and it was there for a period of 10 days or 2 weeks--Iforget exactly. Was that a shock to the market. How did the marketreact to that percentage point drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any explicit contention or disagreement. It is mainly providing information and discussing the movement of the funds rate.


Passage number 394.
MR. MEEK. Well, the market was encouraged at that point.Its expectation in May was that if the economy was weak, in factinterest rates would ease off. So dealers and others in the marketaccumulated positions in the expectation of being able to sell at thehigher prices to others in the market. We had an abrupt reversal inJune, which was not related to the funds rate or to our posture but tothe prospect of [a large volume of] Treasury financing coming within avery short period of time. The Drysdale and Comark episodes also werefactors and the anticipation of a July money supply bulge was afactor. But the main thing was that the Treasury expected to raise$50 to $55 billion this quarter. And being stuck with inventoriesthat customers weren't buying at lower rates, they had to clean thedecks. So, interest rates adjusted up quite sharply through themiddle of last week--by 100 to 120 basis points at the intermediateand long end of the market and less than that at the short end. Inthe last two days, with the successful sale of the 4-year notes, alittle of that ground has been retraced, with the 4-year issue havingtrouble at 14.96 percent and moving down to 14.68 percent orthereabouts. And the 7-year issue that is being sold today isexpected to come out about 40 basis points lower in yield than it wason Monday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a factual explanation of the events that occurred in the market without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 395.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask you a question, Paul. Ifwe started with an initial borrowing of $800 million and an M1 growthpath of 5-1/2 percent, where would you expect the fed funds rate to bein the first couple of weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 396.
MR. MEEK. I think it would gradually be eased down fromabove 14 percent, roughly toward 13-1/2 or 13-3/4 percent or somethinglike that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion about what they believe the percentage will gradually be eased down to.


Passage number 397.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 13-1/2 or 13-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply provides two options (13-1/2 or 13-3/4 percent) without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 398.
MR. MEEK. It would be back close to where it was in earlyJune.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states an opinion or prediction about the future.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that depends heavily on what kindof increase we get [in the money supply] in the early part of July.If we get a great big increase, the funds rate is going to stay up; ifwe get a small one or the expected increase, it probably will plummet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is conditional and explains that the outcome will vary depending on the extent of the increase in the money supply.


Passage number 400.
Governor Partee, you wanted to---54-6/30-7/1/82MR. PARTEE. I seem to have shocked quite a number of peoplewith my suggestion that we ought to put a cap on the funds rate.First of all, I don't think that is as extraordinary a suggestion aswas suggested by some subsequent speakers. We often have conditionedmonetary policy on some notion of limits. We used to condition moneymarket conditions on the basis of "so long as bank credit doesn'texceed a certain amount" and then "so long as the money supply iswithin a particular range." This is just simply conditioning themoney supply target on a maximum funds rate expectation. In fact, itseems to me that my proposal isn't that much different from what wehad prior to the fall of '79. My concern is that the market is verysensitive and nervous and that events that could lead to fright in themarket may well push up the funds rate. Now, we can stop it fromgoing up, but in the end we'll provide a lot more reserves trying tostop it from going up [as a result of] a Comark or a Drysdale or anOklahoma City bank failure or whatever may occur in the period ahead.And it seems to me that it would be better to say that we would notexpect the funds rate to exceed 15 percent in any event. It won'texceed 15 percent if we say that. And I think that would give us anupper limit that is not unreasonable. People say it's like a pegagain. Well, the peg was at 2-1/2 percent, Henry, not at 15 percent.You say it's like the debt limit. We're not talking in terms of apermanent thing; we're just saying that for the time being, given therate of inflation, given the balance of credit demands in the economyand the needs of the economy, we would not expect the funds rate toexceed 15 percent in any event. I don't think it's as radical asuggestion as other members seem to feel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Governor Partee is explaining his suggestion and addressing potential objections to it, but there is no direct contention or disagreement.


Passage number 401.
MR. WALLICH. But if it got there, we would provide unlimitedreserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and expressing that if it were to happen, unlimited reserves would be provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 402.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. Because I agree there is going to be arecovery, but my concern is much, much deeper than that. I believethe recovery may be very wishy-washy and that it may be followed by acollapse. And I think we ought to have a point at which we say: Thisis it for the time being and we're not going to tolerate--tolerate istoo strong--but we would not expect the funds rate to tradeconsistently above 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the potential for a collapse following the recovery, suggesting a more pessimistic outlook compared to others who may believe the recovery will be sustained.


Passage number 403.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you think it's useful to have thatin the directive that gets published.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking for an opinion on the usefulness of including something in a directive.


Passage number 404.
 Or would you feel it would beequally--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for the reader's opinion.


Passage number 405.
 Yes, and I would make it in Paul's statement ifI were--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In Paul's statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The phrase mentioned is a hypothetical statement about what the speaker would do if they were in Paul's position, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 406.
MR. ROOS. Chuck, how would that differ from the pre-1979practices of our Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Chuck how the proposed practices would differ from the pre-1979 practices of their Committee.


Passage number 407.
MR. FORD. He said it would be similar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is relaying what someone else said and there is no indication of disagreement.


Passage number 408.
MR. PARTEE. It's similar on the top side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing a similarity or comparison on the top side of something, but there is no argument or disagreement involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 409.
MR. FORD. Are you implying that there wasn't a change inOctober '79. If I understood you, you said it would be similar topre-October '79--that there is precedent for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention between Mr. Ford and the person he is speaking to. Mr. Ford is implying that there was a change in October '79, while the other person is suggesting that there was not a change and that the situation would be similar to the period before October '79.


Passage number 410.
-55-6/30-7/1/82MR. PARTEE. I'm just saying that we have plenty ofprecedents for constraints on policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not reveal any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are precedents for constraints on policy.


Passage number 411.
MR. FORD. Before 1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 412.
MR. PARTEE. We've had various constraints since '79 and wehad some then also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the presence of constraints since 1979.


Passage number 413.
MR. MARTIN. This is not the same as pre-October '79. Whatwe did after October '79 was to set federal funds rate limits, whichfor a while we regarded as fairly firm, and we said we'd have aspecial meeting if the funds rate exceeded a certain limit. It seemsto me that is what we're saying, in effect, now except that we'resaying it a little more firmly on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information about changes in the setting of federal funds rate limits without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 414.
MR. PARTEE. Under the pressure of the monetarists, I thinkwe changed it about a year later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply expressing his belief that the change mentioned in the passage was a result of pressure from monetarists. There is no indication of contention or disagreement present in the statement.


Passage number 415.
MS. TEETERS. We also had a bottom limit in the spring of '80in that we weren't going to let the rate go below 10 percent orsomething of that sort. We haven't consistently stayed within thelimits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a decision or policy that was set regarding interest rates.


Passage number 416.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. McDonald.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or further information about the content of the passage itself.


Passage number 417.
MR. MCDONALD. I can sympathize with the desire and the needfor lower interest rates, but higher monetary growth can be associatedwith higher interest rates. I agree with Governor Wallich's commentthat it's not time to make a fundamental change in policy or to conveyalarming signals to the market, and I would support the 4 percent [M1growth target] in alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. McDonald, agrees with Governor Wallich's comment and supports the 4 percent M1 growth target mentioned in alternative B.


Passage number 418.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 419.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, if I had to cloud my mindagain by thinking about M1, I would support Governor Gramley'sformulation. While I sympathize with Governor Partee's general pointof view, I think it would be a big mistake for us to announce that wewere willing to peg interest rates again. One thing we've learned inthe last few years is that the presence of an intermediate target formonetary policy has sheltered the central banks--not only ourselvesbut the Germans said the same thing at that meeting in New York [asdid] the British and the Canadians and others--from a direct sense ofresponsibility for interest rates, and I think that has contributed toa stronger policy posture. To begin, even in a little way, to backaway from that would be a serious mistake strategically. And while Ithink we're following the wrong intermediate target, I believe itwould be a big mistake to start doing without one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses disagreement with Governor Partee's viewpoint and argues against announcing a willingness to peg interest rates again. He believes that having an intermediate target for monetary policy has been beneficial and that deviating from it would be a mistake.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 420.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do you mean we're following awrong intermediate target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement or contention in the passage because one person is questioning or challenging the idea of following a wrong intermediate target.


Passage number 421.
MR. MORRIS. M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a neutral statement without any conflicting viewpoints or argumentative elements.


Passage number 422.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I see; I'm sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is apologizing for not understanding or realizing something.


Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've completed my sheet except forMr. Volcker, at which point I will declare a recess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 424.
6/30-7/1/82[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The numbers we are looking at seem almostridiculously out of proportion because they come in the middle of ourdiscussion about the weekly figures. The figure that we have at thistime, which usually holds up pretty well--within a few tenths by thetime we publish--is the same for this week; and for next week it's thesame as we had it yesterday. The preliminary number, which is worthvery little for the next week, is down a little more than we thoughtyesterday. It's in that direction, but that is subject to a margin oferror of a couple billion dollars. So, it tilts a bit more toward thelower side than we thought yesterday, but the significance of this isnot that it changes the June level, although it may change it by atenth or two. If anything like that happens, we get a little cushionfor a bulge in the first week or two of July because we're going to bestarting July from a considerably lower level than we anticipated aweek or two ago anyway. And it could jump by $4 or $5 billion in thefirst week in July and only get back to the level of the first half of[June]. I don't know where July will actually be. And I certainlydon't know where the first week is going to be. Occasionally in aweek like this we've had increases of [up to] $9 billion, but it couldbe much less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 425.
 If we get anything less than $2 or $3 billion, Iimagine the market would go through the roof because--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The stock market would go [up] too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement speculating on the possible reaction of the stock market to a certain situation.


Passage number 426.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --it would be so much better than theythought. We have to keep in mind that this is a preliminary comment,as you obviously know, and that any of this numerology we put downeither for the paths or for the federal funds rate will not beannounced for 7 weeks on our present schedule in terms of any directmarket knowledge, barring anything I would say in my testimony. Letme also make a note of reservation that applies to all of thesetargets, but I think it's relevant in terms of the concerns that havebeen expressed about the bulge in interest rates or financialcircumstances. I do not find it at all difficult to imagine that wewould have some financial events to which we would appropriatelyrespond by putting in a large amount of liquidity--something that mayturn out to be far in excess of anything we're talking about in termsof the fine distinctions that we make at these meetings. We obviouslycan't talk about that much, but I think it is just a fact of life. Ifwe have a financial crisis, we have to respond to it, and thosenumbers have very different meanings in those circumstances than theydo otherwise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 427.
MR. WALLICH. On a net basis you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 428.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, it's quite possible. I'm not sayingwe would do it with great eagerness. We would make a judgment at thetime. But if we have a crisis, we would respond to the crisis. Andwe may respond to it on a net basis if we think we can get by withthat; if we can't, we won't. I go back to the very first lesson ofcentral banking, which is that in a crisis you lend freely. It's amatter of judgment when that arrives. We all obviously would love tosee interest rates down. Barring any great crisis now, the questionis how much we can do [to achieve] that by, to overstate it a bit,force majeure--in a way that looks artificial, if that's the rightword. That's because the risk is that whether we're successful or not-57-6/30-7/1/82in the short run [the effort to reduce rates] may backfire because itwon't look sustainable to the market. [The market] itself will reactor [the decline] won't look sustainable in policy terms or we willdamage our long-term policy objectives. Put another way, to theextent we can encourage or nudge interest rates down, the more supportwe have from observable events, such as what is happening in the moneysupply or elsewhere in the economy, the better off we will be ratherthan trying to make it a decision that appears ex cathedra anddiscontinuous in terms of our own policy. It just may not be veryproductive however much we care.In approaching these variables and trying to put it together,let me try to suggest--for something to shoot at, anyway--severalthings. Let me go directly to the interest rate question. A numberof people have said that it would be a mistake to signal a greatchange in our structural policy. There might be some dispute overwhat that is, but I share that [view] implicitly for the reasons Ijust suggested. It may not be very productive over a period of timein terms of impressing the market and it may create more doubts anduncertainties than we want to, whether or not they see it 7 weeks fromnow or see it in our actions in the market. That does not mean that Idon't have a lot of sympathy for the substance of what those peoplehave said regarding their concern about higher interest rates. I'mnot sure that the way to handle this isn't to keep the same [fundsrate] range we have now, without changing its statement in the actualdirective, but to include to a limited degree the discussion in thepolicy record, against the background that I myself would be veryhesitant, unless there were overpowering reasons, to see the federalfunds rate go above 15 percent. I would want to think twice, threetimes, four times, or whatever, before condoning that for any periodof time. Circumstances may be such that we don't have muchalternative in the end. Maybe the economy will be looking reasonablygood and the money supply will be going wild or something and we wouldhave to tolerate [a funds rate above 15 percent], but I would want tothink pretty hard about it.So, I would put in the same range we have now, 10 to 15percent, without changing the wording but with the knowledge that Iwould feel very hesitant [to accept it] if in fact the market producedrates of 15 percent continuously for any period of time, and I wouldcertainly want to consult reasonably promptly. I'm not talking abouta window-dressing week or day; what I am talking about is somethingthat looks more lasting than that. In terms of the numbers, we haveto consider this a little in terms of how consistent it looks withwhatever we're going to do in the long run, which we haven't fullydecided on by any means. But there was a majority opinion yesterdayto keep the long-run targets the same for this year. And that is myinstinct, too, bolstered particularly by the other members of theCommittee. And a tentative view I had of the need for flexibility andtolerance of growth above those ranges was somewhat reinforced,certainly, by our discussion and what I think was the general opinionyesterday. I doubt that we can keep the range the same and thencredibly say at the same time that we fully expect to be above it.There's a nuance or more than a nuance of difference to say that wekept the ranges the same because we do expect and would like to be atthe top end, let's say, but that we also would tolerate under a lot ofcircumstances coming in higher. I think "tolerate" is the key word; Ican imagine a lot of circumstances in which we would say that. It's a-58-6/30-7/1/82loose toleration, if I can state it that way, as kind of a generalbackground. But assuming we keep the range the same, I have thefeeling that we shouldn't adopt a short-term range that on the face ofit raises a question of inconsistency. Now, we're all roughly withinthat ballpark; it's just a question of where we come down precisely.I'm still a little confused about the precise numbers now andwe don't know those for next week for sure and all the rest. But whatit comes down to is that growth around 5 percent--maybe a bit above orbelow--brings us very close to the top of the M1 range in September.Maybe we can tolerate a little more growth than that. It seems to meto be consistent in a visual sense as a reserve path determinant.Now, whatever we say about the long-term ranges, such as a willingnessto tolerate an overshoot, we would say about the short run, too, Ipresume. There may be some difference of opinion about that, butcertainly if July comes in high, I sense that there is a willingnessnot to put much weight on July alone--that we would have a sluggish orpassive reaction, as a number of people have suggested. That is, Julywould have to be quite an extreme number to push us off whateverborrowing path we set.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing possible courses of action.


Passage number 429.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could we have the new seasonaladjustment in the Bluebook from now on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any content that suggests contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about a topic related to the Bluebook.


Passage number 430.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see any reason not to put it inthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their support for adding something without any indication of opposing opinions or differing viewpoints.


Passage number 431.
MR. AXILROD. The old seasonal is in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about something called "the old seasonal" being in a certain place, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 432.
MR. PARTEE. No, from now on he says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Partee, is stating a fact or making a statement without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 433.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes, surely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Oh, yes, surely" indicates agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 434.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 435.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know exactly how to word it, butwhat I'm saying, particularly if we go a bit skinnier than some peoplehave suggested on the [M1] number--and I'm in the 5 percent area--weneed in the directive itself a clear indication of tolerance for anovershoot in the next month. I'd put down a reasonably liberal figurefor M2, but something that is judged reasonably consistent with thatfor M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a need for clear guidelines and a suggested figure for M2, but there is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 436.
MR. PARTEE. Both could surge here because of the tax cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee suggests that both could surge due to the tax cut.


Passage number 437.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think [M2] does reflect some of the sameliquidity [preference motives] that M1 reflects and, indeed, one wouldexpect it to. Most people when they go liquid don't actually go intotransaction balances. I think we're seeing individuals do that.Businesses go into other kinds of balances.Then we're left with the borrowing level. This is notexactly the way to express it, but we went fully--I suppose with somequalms about whether the scientific projections of the staff wereright--with the staff [view] last time in reducing the borrowing levelin the hope that interest rates would go down a little and the moneysupply would stay down. As it turned out in the end that has beencorrect except that we had an intervening increase in the money-59-6/30-7/1/82supply. We had a [pattern] of movement that was not the mostfelicitous, which sent [borrowing] up a bit in the intermeetingperiod. Now we are back pretty close to where we started out, andborrowing has been a little above $800 million. I would go down atleast to $800 million in borrowing on the same theory; we can argueabout whether we could tolerate something a little lower than that onthe theory that it would be a good idea to create some conditions thatpresumably would be reflected in a lower funds rate and wouldencourage a market [rate] decline. But overdoing it would create asubstantial risk that we'd have an adverse reaction ultimately, beingfollowed up with what is deemed to be by the market, if not by us, anexcessively rapid increase in the money supply; and we would lose, onbalance, instead of gaining. But then the question becomes: How dowe act thereafter. I wasn't exactly sure what Governor Gramley had inmind, precisely, in his suggestion. But the sense of what I think hewas saying, qualitatively, I would share. I don't know how to reduceit to a formula, but if the money supply came in on the low side, wewould let that be reflected in a decline in interest rates up to apoint. But we wouldn't mind taking a little of it in the form of alittle slower growth in the money supply, too, if interest rates weregoing down rapidly. We kind of [split] it, as he said. I don't knowwhether we can reduce it to a formula, but we might reduce the reservepath a bit if interest rates went down sufficiently and welcome aslightly slower growth in the money supply during this period. We'dbe very reluctant and sluggish and passive on the up side if the moneysupply came in high in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker sharing their thoughts and considerations regarding the borrowing level and the money supply.


Passage number 438.
 So, let's have a littlediscussion of these variables just to--MR. GRAMLEY. May I just make a technical comment. If I'veunderstood you right and you're going with 5 percent for M1 and theappropriate number for M2 from June to September with a new lower Junebase, you in effect are saying that you are prepared to tolerate aSeptember number for M1 that is a tiny bit less than what is in "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply requesting a discussion on the variables mentioned.


Passage number 439.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I'm not sure about. Isthat what it comes out to--that at 5 percent M1 would come out alittle less than the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is unsure about a certain fact and is seeking clarification.


Passage number 440.
MR. GRAMLEY. [The level] is $457.0 billion, if you take$451.5 billion for June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement simply provides a specific dollar amount for the given time period without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 441.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the target level for September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks for the target level for September without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 442.
MR. GRAMLEY. I don't know; I don't have that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley simply states that he does not have the information being asked for.


Passage number 443.
MR. AXILROD. The upper limit is $456.7 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the upper limit is $456.7 billion.


Passage number 444.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I see. So we'd still be a bit above it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement.


Passage number 445.
MR. GRAMLEY. But again, what you're doing is assuming thatthe June figure is a solid one and that it signals the first of aseries of downward shifts in money demand, which is built into thesespecifications in the first place. If that doesn't continue, unlesswe have some sort of understanding that we're going to operate onmoney market conditions, interest rates will begin to ratchet up. Andthat's something that I just don't think we ought to do. One way toget around this might be to go to a May base. A number of 5 percentfrom a May base would be a lot more satisfactory from my standpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply stating his perspective and suggesting a different approach.


Passage number 446.
-60-6/30-7/1/82MS. TEETERS. It's the same number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "It's the same number" suggests a consensus or agreement.


Passage number 447.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Since there is no information or context provided about Mr. Gramley in the passage, it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 448.
 If you take 5 percent from May to September--MR. PARTEE. You have a lot more room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement followed by a clarification or additional information.


Passage number 449.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It simply consists of a brief statement or response by Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 450.
MR. CORRIGAN. What is the level you get with that, Lyle, forSeptember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided is incomplete and does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 451.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's about $459 billion. We'd have essentiallywhat is in alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical value and describes it as what is in alternative A.


Passage number 452.
MR. CORRIGAN. I see; that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It is a simple acknowledgment or confirmation of a statement.


Passage number 453.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's a bit less, but in round figures it wouldbe $459 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is reporting a specific amount of $459 billion without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 454.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my concern is not so much [how] wecan trace [the right number] through all these mechanics. I don'tthink we know down to the last billion or two. It's just a questionof selecting ranges that appear more or less consistent with what wesay for the longer run; obviously, there's no certain answer to thatwithin a narrow range. Saying something like 5 to 6 percent isn't sobad. But if we said 6 percent, where does that leave us in September.Is that going to be considered consistent with the long-run target.That's my problem. I do want to say we're going to be tolerant of anovershoot. And if we make the number too high and say we're tolerantof an overshoot, what message are we conveying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their concern and questioning the implications of selecting a specific range for the number mentioned.


Passage number 455.
 That's the kind of--MS. TEETERS. But can we say we're going to be tolerant of anovershoot without giving the market some idea of how much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express disagreement or contention. It poses a question and suggests the need for information or clarification.


Passage number 456.
 Otherwise,they will be drawing out all sorts of possible--MR. MARTIN. We can talk about the bulges we have alreadybeen tolerant of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that if a specific action is not taken, a certain outcome will occur. Then, they mention being tolerant of bulges, which does not indicate disagreement.


Passage number 457.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a yes or no answer without the passage you are referring to. Could you please provide the passage?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 458.
 Yes, but what they do, Preston, is that theysit down and figure out the rate at which the money supply has to growfor the last six months and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My sense is that that argues against [yoursuggestion], Nancy. One can argue it any way but if we say that's abig number, then we have a problem. If we say it's a relatively smallnumber and in fact we overshoot it, we're right back into thatcalculation. If we're a little vaguer, we avoid that arithmetic or wetry to avoid the arithmetic. We never avoid it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The individual speaking believes that being vague about the calculation can help avoid potential problems, while the other person disagrees and believes that the calculations need to be addressed.


Passage number 459.
MS. TEETERS. But we may cause more chaos by not doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward observation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 460.
MR. PARTEE. No, I agree with Paul. It would be very hard toindicate the extent of the overshoot we'd tolerate, particularly sinceaside from this precautionary [demand for money], which could becomegreater actually in the next few months, we have the natural workingsof a tax cut, the first effect of which is to add to householdbalances. And that gets to be a big number when it is annualized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Partee and Paul agree that it would be difficult to determine the extent of the overshoot and that the tax cut would add to household balances.


Passage number 461.
6/30-7/1/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what we have to say in terms ofour tolerance--whether we're talking about the short run or the longrun--is that we can only judge that at the time in the light of allthe circumstances. If we observe events that suggest the overshoot isoriginating in a precautionary demand for balances, we are going to bemore tolerant than otherwise. And how do we judge that. We judgethat by what the economy is doing and what interest rates are doing--I get interest rates in through that avenue--relative to what ourinternal analysis of the figures suggests, as we have in the past. Idon't know what else we can say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing their approach to judging tolerance based on observing events and analyzing figures.


Passage number 462.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's a good way of handling it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "That's a good way of handling it" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses approval or agreement with the approach mentioned without any contradictory or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 463.
MR. GRAMLEY. Do you mean that if in July we appear to begetting a bulge of over 9 percent in money supply growth that youwould adjust the nonborrowed reserve target upward unless there weresome indications that this growth was being generated by astrengthening in the economy. If what happens is that the amount ofborrowing goes up and interest rates go up, then that is notaccommodating in the sense that I would use the word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The disagreement arises from the differing interpretations of what constitutes accommodation in the context of monetary policy. Mr. Gramley suggests that an increase in borrowing and interest rates is not accommodating, whereas someone else (not mentioned in the passage) might argue that it could be considered accommodating to address economic conditions.


Passage number 464.
 And I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I mean that to the extent that the Julyproblem is seasonal, it is not what I was just talking about. It'sjust pure uncertainty about July in terms of seasonals and the tax cutand so forth. At what point we accommodate that absolutely andcompletely, or stop accommodating it absolutely and completely, Idon't know. You say 9 percent; starting from such a low level, 9percent implies a bigger increase during the course of July than Stevewas assuming in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their uncertainty about how to address the seasonal fluctuations in July and how to accommodate them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 465.
 The 9 percent now becomes a biggerincrease for the monthly average for July than it did when theBluebook was actually written because we're starting so low with thesame--MR. BLACK. About 11 and a fraction percent, I believe, iswhat we figured out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the 9 percent increase is now bigger for the monthly average for July, but the other person interrupts to mention that it is actually about 11 and a fraction percent.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. That sounds right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement in a passage without the actual text. Could you please provide the passage?


Passage number 467.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] target on 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Partee is not being challenged or contradicted.


Passage number 468.
MR. GRAMLEY. But that means targeting on quarterly levels oron the levels for the month and not on the growth rates. If we targetthe levels, then it seems to me what we need to do is to decide whatour specifications are relative to the month of May. If we'readjusting the whole quarter downward for this fortuitous developmentin June and we end up having a 5 percent growth rate for M1, we'reending up with a level in September that is at or slightly below wherewe were in alternative B in the first place. And that, it seems tome, does not come to grips with the problem that these specs havebuilt in them a downward shift in money demand, and if it doesn'thappen, then we're in really big trouble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and highlighting the potential issues with targeting levels instead of growth rates.


Passage number 469.
MR. PARTEE. My feeling, Lyle, is that this will turn rightaround.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement by Mr. Partee is simply expressing his opinion or feeling about a certain situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 470.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My only difference with you is that we maybe in really big trouble, but I don't think it's going to involve adifference of 1 percent in the growth rate from June to September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention between the speaker and the person they are addressing. The phrase "My only difference with you" indicates a discrepancy or disagreement in their viewpoints.


Passage number 471.
-62-6/30-7/1/82MR. PARTEE. I think we have to allow for a bigger Julybecause I suspect that this change in late June is just temporary andthat we will get a bigger July surge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion about the potential increase in activity in July.


Passage number 472.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we can get that; it depends upon whatyou mean by a July surge. If we get the same July surge on a weeklybasis, we will come out with a smaller monthly number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the monthly number will be smaller if the same July surge occurs on a weekly basis, although additional information or clarification is needed to fully understand the context.


Passage number 473.
MR. PARTEE. I'd say we will have a larger surge than weexpect for [July] and that it will be because this is just a temporarydevelopment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is stating their expectation that there will be a larger surge in July and attributes it to a temporary development. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 474.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can have quite a large surge in theweekly sense in July and come out where we expected. We'd have tohave quite a big increase in July now, I guess, to go above a 9percent growth rate on average, if next week's figure is right. It'sobviously not impossible. If we started out with a nice $9 or $10billion figure, I guess we could get that. But that's what it wouldtake, wouldn't it, because we had a $4 or $5 billion figure in [theprojection].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 475.
MR. AXILROD. For--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Axilrod, which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 476.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the first week in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The statement is simply stating a specific time period.


Passage number 477.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, we have about a $4-1/2 billion increase inthe first week of July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement provided in the passage is a straightforward statement of fact about a financial increase. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 478.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, it's now $3 or $4 billion lower thanyou expected it to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the current amount is lower than what was initially expected.


Passage number 479.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, about $4 or $4-1/4 billion lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward response to a question about the amount being lower.


Passage number 480.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we would have to have an $8 or $9billion increase to have the [previously expected] July level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the required increase in funding without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 481.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That isn't impossible; it's quitepossible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that something is possible.


Passage number 483.
MS. TEETERS. Steve, does this revision in the June numberbring the quarterly average back down to 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question.


Passage number 484.
MR. AXILROD. It brings the March-to-June growth rate to 3percent, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 485.
MS. TEETERS. So, what is happening in June is that we'rereverting to what you originally expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that something is happening in June that aligns with the original expectations.


Passage number 486.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we're right on the target we set forthe quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states that "we're right on the target we set for the quarter," indicating that the goal or target set for the quarter has been achieved.


Passage number 487.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, we're right on the target the Committeevoted for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement indicates agreement with the decision made by the committee.


Passage number 488.
MR. PARTEE. It's just [a different] pattern, that's all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply stating that there is a different pattern.


Passage number 489.
-63-6/30-7/1/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unfortunately, the path instead of being aU is a hump.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the path as a hump instead of being smooth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 490.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're lucky it isn't a dromedary--adouble hump.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests that the speaker is grateful it is not a dromedary with a double hump, implying that a single hump is preferable.


Passage number 491.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may be. We just don't have the nextquarter yet. Well, there are too many permutations and combinationsto decide all of these things, I'm afraid, but I am talking aboutaccommodating a real bulge in July should it develop. We could say 5to 6 percent for the quarter. My only hesitancy is: Is it worthhaving somebody coming back at us saying 5 to 6 percent is clearlyinconsistent with your saying that you are not changing the targetsfor the year as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is discussing potential future figures and the concern of whether they align with previously stated targets.


Passage number 492.
MR. FORD. That's the thing to worry about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Ford's perspective or concern.


Passage number 493.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And even then I would want to put in sometolerance numbers because I don't know what the difference between 5or 6 percent is in this kind of period. It's a shot in the darkanyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and acknowledging their lack of knowledge about the numerical difference between 5 or 6 percent in a certain context. They are suggesting that any estimate they make would be speculative.


Passage number 494.
MR. BLACK. Well, 5 percent approaches the upper limit and 6percent moves slightly away from it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating two values and their relation to an upper limit.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 495.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. If we were squarely on thetarget in June, 5 to 6 percent would be something like the right thingto say. It just says we're going to stay right around the upper endof the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It just says we're going to stay right around the upper end of the target" suggests that there may be a difference of opinion or interpretation regarding the appropriate level to stay within the target.


Passage number 496.
MR. BOEHNE. What about something like "about 5 percent" withan understanding that "about" is more generous on the top side of 5percent than on the short side of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting using the phrase "about 5 percent" with the understanding that "about" allows for a slight flexibility, possibly being more generous on the higher side rather than the lower side of 5 percent.


Passage number 497.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I was going to say "about 5 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their intended response without any conflicting opinions or opposition.


Passage number 498.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm going a little beyond that in asense. I'm suggesting that we say about 5 percent--and "about" may bethe right word--but I would say something explicitly about toleratingsome overshoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a suggestion and discussing the idea of tolerating overshoot.


Passage number 499.
MS. TEETERS. Steve, how does this fit. If we use thesespecifications, would you think the [federal funds] rate would beabout 14-1/4 or 14-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 500.
MR. AXILROD. If borrowing were around $800 million, I thinkthat would bring the funds rate to 14 percent or a little below--probably more below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their expectation or prediction regarding the impact of borrowing on the funds rate.


Passage number 501.
MS. TEETERS. That's what we had last time with the rateswell above that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Teeters regarding the rates being higher than before.


Passage number 502.
MR. AXILROD. I would add an important caveat. In the firstplace, the July 4th holiday weekend often has fairly high funds ratesfor the same reasons as the statement date. Secondly, if financialpressures or financial problems develop and they become known,sometimes that gets associated with a high funds rate as thesepressures immediately hit the banks and they have to lend or some-64-6/30-7/1/82uncertainties develop. That, too, could produce a relatively highfunds rate. But in a normal situation I would say the $800 millionwould be [associated with a funds rate] of something under 14 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply adding caveats or additional points to consider.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 503.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One way of playing this is to set theborrowing level slightly below $800 million. The more we go below,the more it increases the risk that we might have to reverse itinstead of opening up room for coming down further quickly if thingsdevelop in a satisfactory way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage presents a potential disagreement or contention. The statement suggests that there is a disagreement about the optimal borrowing level. It proposes setting the borrowing level slightly below $800 million, which may increase the risk of having to reverse it. This implies that there might be differing opinions on whether to take the higher risk for potential future benefits or maintain a more conservative approach.


Passage number 504.
MR. BOEHNE. Do you have some notion as to when you wouldbegin to get uncomfortable on the down side in terms of the federalfunds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is simply asking for the other person's opinion or estimation.


Passage number 505.
MR. FORD. I'd get very nervous around 6 or 7 percent. I'mserious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. Mr. Ford simply states that he would get nervous if a certain condition is met.


Passage number 506.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You want a positive real interestrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement simply expresses a desire for a positive real interest rate. It does not present any opposing ideas or arguments.


Passage number 507.
MR. FORD. That would still be positive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention as there is no conflicting or opposing point of view expressed. The statement made by Mr. Ford is presented as a simple affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not on last month's figure. Not on mostpeople's figures, I don't think. There's always a question of therate of speed and how far to go, but I suppose we would only worryabout it to the extent that we thought what was going on was sotemporary that the rate was just going to rebound. If we thought itwas going to stay wherever it went, we wouldn't be concerned about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing speculation and hypothetical situations.


Passage number 509.
MR. PARTEE. I think 10 percent is reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee expresses his opinion that 10 percent is reasonable without any opposing views or conflict.


Passage number 510.
MR. FORD. Well. Mr. Chairman, since you quoted one of yourfavorite philosophers earlier on I'd like to quote one of mine. Thequote goes something like this: "I think we tended to make mistakesin the past not at the end of an expansion or the end of a boom, andnot so much in a recession, but by providing too much stimulus duringthe early part of an expansion period when things tend to get out ofcontrol before one realizes it. I hope we don't make that mistakeagain." I think you know who the philosopher is that I refer to. Ilike that statement. That was made two summers ago. I think we'reright there again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with a quote by another person and simply stating their opinion.


Passage number 511.
MR. GRAMLEY. Providing too much stimulus is the least of myworries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley expresses a lack of concern about providing too much stimulus.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 512.
MR. FORD. The point of this quote is that we always realizetoo late that we put in too much stimulus. So, I feel strongly thatwe should never set a cap on the funds rate at right where it is. Wehave to allow at least for a little change. We're talking aboutputting it at 15 percent when it is already--maybe for window-dressingpurposes--right around 15 percent. We have to give ourselves someroom to breathe on rates and not give people a formula to work withwhich would allow for a very rapid expansion when we may regret itlater. So, I'd be more cautious. I'd set the borrowing at over $800million and put a wider range on the funds rate to include somethingabove where it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is expressing his disagreement with setting a cap on the funds rate at its current level. He argues that there should be room for some change and a wider range on the funds rate to avoid rapid expansion that could be regretted later.


Passage number 513.
 I always get nervous about setting the interestrate cap--6/30-7/1/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, before we get to that, on the [M1growth rate], I suppose one way of stating it is 5 percent or more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a personal statement about feeling nervous about setting the interest rate, followed by a statement about the M1 growth rate.


Passage number 514.
The only thing I don't like about that is the connotation that wewouldn't tolerate any shortfall; I think we would tolerate someshortfall if things went the other way, as you have suggested in--MR. MARTIN. Or set the upper limit at 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses a mild disagreement or reservation about the connotation of not tolerating any shortfall but does not strongly contradict the previous statement.


Passage number 515.
MR. GRAMLEY. When I was tolerating the shortfall, it wasn'tfrom 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about their experience, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 516.
MR. ROOS. Given the news about Mexico, we could say 5percent "poco mas o menos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the news regarding Mexico.


Passage number 517.
"MR. PARTEE. Yes, let's put that in. Mexico is in the news.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests putting Mexico in the news.


Passage number 518.
MR. FORD. I think when we say "about," everybody reads it tomean "or more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply consists of Mr. Ford expressing his opinion on how people interpret the word "about."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 519.
"MS. TEETERS. You know, there has been no discussion of theimpact of this on the international value of the dollar. If wemaintain rates at 14 to 15 percent, what is going to happen to theinternational value of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is suggesting that there has been no discussion about the impact of maintaining rates at 14 to 15 percent on the international value of the dollar. This implies that there may be disagreement or lack of agreement among the people involved in the discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 520.
MR. FORD. It's going to reduce Henry Wallich's expenseaccount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It's going to reduce Henry Wallich's expense account" suggests that there is a reduction in expenses for Henry Wallich. This implies that there may have been some disagreement or debate regarding Henry Wallich's expense account and the reduction in expenses.


Passage number 521.
MR. WALLICH. It's going to reduce our exports, which isgoing to reduce the value of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the potential consequences of a certain situation.


Passage number 522.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Ultimately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Ultimately." The word by itself does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 523.
MR. WALLICH. Eventually; we don't know exactly when.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 524.
MS. TEETERS. But won't this continue to keep the value atleast high, if not rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply poses a question and does not express any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 525.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My presumption in saying $800 million isthat if things behave more or less as we're thinking, the funds rateis going to be--though heaven knows what it'll be on July 4--below 14percent and the dollar will probably weaken. Who knows. The problemis not the desirability of getting interest rates down; the questionis whether by reaching too fast for that objective we may not be ableto keep them down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging uncertainty about the future behavior of interest rates and the dollar but agrees on the desirability of lowering interest rates.


Passage number 526.
MR. CORRIGAN. Couldn't we put something in the directive,Mr. Chairman, that says we are shooting for about 5 percent with theunderstanding that we would be tolerant of unusual developments in themoney supply early in the period, associated with the tax reductionand all that, and use that as--well, as our excuse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion made by Mr. Corrigan to potentially include a specific target in a directive.


Passage number 527.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have to say we will betolerant early in the period, but my tolerance extends beyond that andis not just a technical judgment affecting July. But if the wholething looks too low after July and interest rates are under greatpressure and the economy is going no place at all, I would also betolerant apart from the July bulge to a degree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and stating that their tolerance extends beyond a specific period and situation.


Passage number 528.
6/30-7/1/82MR. MARTIN. I agree. Why should we limit ourselves to thosetechnical factors. Why limit ourselves in the actions that we mayhave to take. What is the point of boxing ourselves in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a statement of agreement and a questioning of limiting oneself.


Passage number 529.
MS. TEETERS. But by setting the borrowings at $800 million,right there we've locked ourselves in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about setting the borrowings at $800 million.


Passage number 530.
MR. PARTEE. I think we ought to tilt that down; make it $700million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee suggests a specific amount ($700 million), but there is no indication of opposition or disagreement from anyone else in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 531.
MR. BOEHNE. I think we ought to tie it to something. We cantie it to something like liquidity demands that are out of theordinary or some unusual liquidity demands, which gives us lots offlexibility in terms of what we may want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think we ought to tie it to something" suggests that the speaker has a different opinion or viewpoint than others. This indicates a potential disagreement or contention regarding how to proceed.


Passage number 532.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How will you control that--to come back tothe other dimension. That's why I'd keep this federal funds rangelower than some other people would. That is the occasion forconsidering precisely moving somewhat above the path, if we wanted toimplement the judgment of being tolerant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the idea of controlling something and the approach the speaker would take regarding federal funds.


Passage number 533.
MR. WALLICH. Well, since Nancy mentioned the dollar, Ishould mention inflation. It has been mentioned no more often thanthe dollar has in our discussion. The economy has turned around--I'mlooking at Joe Livingston's list of 54 economists who say it turnedaround in May--and we're now getting ready to do what we weren'tprepared to do all the first half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the topic of inflation and the state of the economy.


Passage number 534.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But don't be absolutely sure. Industrialproduction will probably decline in June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply suggesting that there may be a decline in industrial production in June, but it is not presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 535.
MR. PARTEE. Also, we haven't had the financial fallout yetfrom the recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 536.
MR. FORD. It always comes late. Bank losses always peak ayear after the recession. I shouldn't say they always peak; they riseafter the recession develops.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about bank losses peaking after the recession develops.


Passage number 537.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Henry, there's a 6-month lag in FOMCreactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact or observation about a 6-month lag in FOMC reactions.


Passage number 538.
MR. WALLICH. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage states a fact without any indications of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 539.
MR. MARTIN. Only six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 540.
MR. FORD. That's why I gave that quote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Ford.


Passage number 541.
MR. PARTEE. My position, Paul, is that 5 percent is prettytight unless we take Lyle's construction and make it May to September.Then 5 percent seems all right. That's the way of getting the number,if you want the number at 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee is discussing his position on a certain matter and suggesting a potential solution to make the 5 percent work. There is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 542.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then the arithmetic is wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Then the arithmetic is wrong" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It suggests that there may be errors in the arithmetic being discussed.


Passage number 543.
MR. BLACK. Let me point out something that may be perfectlyobvious. Anything above 5-1/2 percent moves us away from the upperlimit. Anything less than 5-1/2 percent moves us toward it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply stating a fact, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 544.
-67-6/30-7/1/82MR. PARTEE. My position is that I'd rather raise the upperlimit. But if it is decided for policy or for strategy reasons thatwe ought to hold the limit, then I'd want to overshoot. I'm quiteprepared to overshoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their position of wanting to raise the upper limit, but also states that if it is decided to hold the limit, they would want to overshoot it. This suggests that there is a difference in opinion or a debate about whether to raise or hold the limit.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 545.
MR. GUFFEY. And those numbers are only good if June holds atzero. Growth of 5-1/2 percent will move us farther away if the Junenumber is [higher] than zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing concern that if the June number is higher than zero, a growth of 5-1/2 percent will move them farther away from their goal. This suggests disagreement or contention about the significance and impact of the June number.


Passage number 546.
MR. BLACK. Roger, it seems to me that if it's above thetarget, regardless of how much above, anything less than 5-1/2 percentmoves us back toward it, doesn't it. Am I mixed up on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is seeking clarification from Roger and expressing his understanding of the situation.


Passage number 547.
MR. GUFFEY. I was just focusing on your comment on 5-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply refers to a comment made by someone regarding 5-1/2 percent.


Passage number 548.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 549.
 Well, if growth is anywhere above it [throughJune], anything below 5-1/2 percent is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The difference between 5 and 5-1/2 percentfor the number is very small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that the difference between 5 and 5-1/2 percent for the number is very small.


Passage number 550.
 All I'm concerned about is how tovisualize--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why don't we compromise by having"about 5 percent" with it understood that in drawing the path we'regoing to come closer to 5-1/4 or 5-1/2 than to 5 percent. In otherwords, "about" is interpreted liberally to start off with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a compromise or an agreement regarding the interpretation of the term "about."


Passage number 551.
MR. GRAMLEY. But not 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent. A quarter of apercent at an annual rate is not [interpreting it] liberally. If youtake the September levels that we have here and use 5 percent from Mayto September, the June-to-September implication is 6-3/4 percent.That's what I thought I was talking about when I made my proposal inthe first place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Gramley explaining his position and clarifying the percentage he had originally proposed.


Passage number 552.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought you were proposing 5-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a thought or belief about a proposed percentage.


Passage number 553.
MR. GRAMLEY. No, I was proposing keeping the Septemberlevel, not paying too much attention to the fact that June was as lowas it was. And what I was saying about accommodating was reallydesigned to go in the other direction. I was saying that if in factthe money supply comes in weaker than that and the difference were notconstrued as evidence of a collapse in the economy, I would beprepared to compromise in the sense of taking part of that shortfallin lower money growth and part of the shortfall in lower interestrates--not accommodating in the other way by setting a number low andthen letting the overrun occur.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own proposal and explaining their willingness to compromise if necessary. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions from others.


Passage number 554.
MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that we need to capture thespirit of what we're trying to do here and have language that doesthat. And "about 5 percent, allowing for unusual liquidity needs"captures it. When we start talking about shifting the base from Juneto May or about 5 to 5-1/2 percent, that seems to me a kind ofprecision that is more than we can expect. If we had been doing thistwenty-four hours ago, we would be doing it some other way. We havesix weeks ahead of us. We need to capture the essence and the spiritand know that we have some flexibility rather than being too precise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehner is simply expressing his opinion on the language being used and suggesting a more flexible approach.


Passage number 555.
-68-6/30-7/1/82MR. BLACK. But looking at Lyle's suggestion in perspective,it might be helpful to [note] that if we did use a May base, we wouldhit the top line by September if M1 grew at 3-1/2 percent. So, at 5percent, we hit the top line somewhere between September and the endof the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and offering a suggestion based on that fact.


Passage number 556.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'm prepared to acknowledge the possibilitythat we may have to overshoot this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is stating his preparedness to acknowledge the possibility of overshooting something.


Passage number 557.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I realize that. I was just trying to putthat in focus because, as I indicated earlier, ordinarily I'd thinkthe idea of using a May base was a good one. In this case I wouldhave to be pragmatic and say I'd rather use the June base because thatwould enable us to do what I think we ought to do and express it interms of a high percentage increase, which I would like to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the speaker's preference and reasoning behind using a June base instead of a May base.


Passage number 558.
MR. PARTEE. Well, could we say "about 5 to 6 percent".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct quote from someone named Mr. Partee, who is making a statement and expressing a numerical range ("about 5 to 6 percent"). There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 559.
MR. GRAMLEY. The other way to do it is to make it quiteclear that we're talking about an overrun and have an understandingamongst ourselves as to how much we're thinking about in very broadterms. Then we could use language such as Jerry suggested: "Thetarget is 5 percent or somewhat more if the liquidity preference ofthe public remains high." The "somewhat" in my case would mean thatI'd be willing to tolerate growth up to 7 percent for the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 560.
MR. WALLICH. Well, the explicit reference to liquiditypreference is reasonable since we're banking on a rise in velocityhere. If that doesn't come in, accommodation is appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if the anticipated increase in velocity does not occur, it would be appropriate to provide accommodation.


Passage number 561.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And that's consistent with what Paulis going to be saying in his testimony, too. We could apply prettymuch the same language to the directive that you think you would beusing in your testimony [about] tolerating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 562.
MR. PARTEE. What does it imply for the target path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely a question being asked by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 563.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm assuming that it would besomewhere in the neighborhood of 5-1/2 percent from June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply making an assumption about a certain percentage.


Passage number 564.
MS. TEETERS. What does it imply for interest rates. Do theystill stay at 14 to 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indications of contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about interest rates.


Passage number 565.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, they don't, if things behavenormally. That's the big question mark. Then it would mean that [thefunds rate] probably would be around 13-1/2 or 13-3/4 percent in theinitial two weeks or so. But, of course, if there's a fluke in thefigures and they come in strong, then we prevent [rates] from goingabove existing levels. At least I understand that to be pretty muchthe feeling in the group. And that's what Paul says too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their understanding of what the group feels and what Paul says. They mention the possibility of things not behaving normally but do not express disagreement or contention with that possibility.


Passage number 566.
MR. PARTEE. I like the idea of [the language] beingconsistent with the testimony. When we say "5 percent or somethingmore, if liquidity preferences remain high," that is very much thetheory of the testimony, or of the Humphrey-Hawkins report if not thetestimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses agreement with the idea of consistency between the language and the testimony.


Passage number 567.
-69-6/30-7/1/82MR. CORRIGAN. If we use that argument, you can even putMilton Friedman's statement in your testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply mentions the possibility of adding Milton Friedman's statement to the testimony without expressing any disagreement or contention towards it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 568.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think that's better; I thinkthat's worse. Can we agree on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they think something is worse, suggesting a different perspective or opinion than the previous statement made.


Passage number 569.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think what you are stating iswhere I started off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with what the other person has said.


Passage number 570.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 571.
 But I would hope that the path will be drawnfairly liberally--certainly for the month of July at 11 percent orthereabouts, and then less in--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me have Steve address thatbecause he told me the opposite. It's just an interpretation of whatis liberal. I can agree with the liberality, but I take it from whatSteve told me before that even 9 percent in July seems terriblyliberal at this point just because we're starting at such a low levelat the end of June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker initially expresses their hope for a liberal path, specifically mentioning 11% or thereabouts in July. They mention that Steve had previously told them a different viewpoint, but it is not clear whether this contradicts the speaker's belief or if they simply view it as a difference in interpretation of what is considered liberal. The speaker then expresses their agreement with the idea of liberality, but brings up the point that starting at a low level at the end of June might make 9% in July seem liberal. Overall, there is more discussion and conversation rather than outright disagreement.


Passage number 572.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. Our expectation at the moment is thatJuly would be lower because of the very low base that we're startingoff with for the end of [June].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states an expectation based on a low base in June.


Passage number 573.
 On the other hand, August could behigher because--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, he's saying that July would be lowerand August would be higher than he would have thought before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting a contrasting point of view or perspective.


Passage number 574.
MR. CORRIGAN. But doesn't it imply, Steve, whatever tendencymight be there because of the fundamentals, that things should ifanything be easier in early July rather than tighter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 575.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me word it this way. What we'retalking about is that we're not setting the base from right now.We're setting the base--within limits--from whatever happens in thefirst week or so in July. When we talk about a borrowing level,that's what we're talking about, within limits. I hate to just throwout a figure here but, given the low level from which we're starting,if the first week or two of July came in at as much as $6, $7, or $8billion, we're still talking about $800 million of borrowings. If itcame in at less than $4 billion, considering where we're startingfrom, we're probably talking about a lower level of borrowings rightfrom the start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining that the base for borrowing will be determined by the events that occur in the first week or so in July, and that borrowing levels will be limited. They provide examples of possible borrowing levels and state that the level of borrowing will be lower if the first week or two of July have lower amounts.


Passage number 576.
 The question of a higher level would only be relevantif [the M1 bulge] were really something extreme, such as 9, 10 or 11--MS. TEETERS. What is 9, 10, or 11.SPEAKER(.). Billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on what the numbers 9, 10, or 11 refer to in relation to the M1 bulge.


Passage number 577.
MR. CORRIGAN. The dollar increase in the money supply inearly July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating a fact about the dollar increase in the money supply in early July.


Passage number 578.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We would get a much more favorabledownward impact on long rates if the market sees a gradual and steadydecline in short rates than if we have a relatively sudden drop inshort rates. [In the latter case] if the numbers don't come outright, particularly in August, we'd get a rise again. The market hasits own views as well. And if we get too much downward movement in-70-6/30-7/1/82short rates in July, they may not believe it is sustainable and wewill not get as healthy an effect as we could get in the bond market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing potential outcomes and effects based on different scenarios, but it does not present conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 579.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or even in the short-term market. It isnot just the speed of the reduction; it's whether the reduction isconvincing in terms of what the market itself observes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It states a possibility or consideration but does not present conflicting views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 580.
MS. TEETERS. We have in the past, at least once, specified adeclining level of borrowing over the intermeeting period. That wouldget to your point, Tony, of trying to bring it down gradually over aperiod of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters states that they have specified a declining level of borrowing over the intermeeting period, suggesting that she supports gradually bringing borrowing down. However, she acknowledges Tony's point of trying to bring it down gradually over a period of time, implying that there may be differing opinions on how quickly or gradually to decrease borrowing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 581.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't remember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage because the speaker is stating that they do not remember something, indicating a difference in memory or knowledge compared to someone who may remember.


Passage number 582.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't remember, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no apparent contention or disagreement in the provided passage, as it is a simple statement about someone's lack of memory regarding an unspecified topic.


Passage number 583.
MR. PARTEE. I don't either. That's hard to do, of course,because it depends on what happens to the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement or shared understanding with the previous statement.


Passage number 584.
MR. BOEHNE. It's hard to do unless we specify a range, whichcaptures that element.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining that specifying a range is necessary in order to capture a certain element.


Passage number 585.
MR. MEEK. Let me just say that I think the publication ofthese numbers, if they hold up, will itself change some expectationsin the market about what we're likely to do in July and beyond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion that the publication of certain numbers could potentially change market expectations in the future.


Passage number 586.
 Therecould be a substantial sense--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to try to be so precise with allthe permutations and combinations but I think what we're talking aboutis this: Let's take $800 million, if that's the number. We have tooperate a week before having any indication of what is going to happenin the first part of July. So if $800 million is the [borrowing]number, what I'm talking about is keeping that at $800 million, whichwould require an adjustment in the reserve path in the first week ofJuly if the number in the first week in July is as high as X, giventhat the last week in June holds up. I guess that figure might be ashigh as $8 billion. And then take off [from there]. If it came inbelow $4 billion, just for purposes of example, we'd lower[borrowings] right away because it would look as if we were headingfor a lower July than we expected. If it came in above $8 billion,then we'd have a question. Then we'd come to our federal fundslimitation, anyway, at some point. Even then we wouldn't move veryvigorously. So, we would readjust the reserve path in any event thenext week, depending upon how July starts, with a very broad range oftolerance and a presumption that borrowing is going to be around $800million; we're much more likely to lower it than raise it if the firstweek of July came in low. I think that's the operational significanceof what we're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 587.
MR. PARTEE. It sounds good. I don't know how to put it inwords for the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing agreement and appreciation for something, but he does not offer any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 588.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't have to bother with that inthe directive, I don't think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrase "Well, we don't have to bother with that in the directive." The use of "I don't think" indicates that the speaker has a different perspective or opinion on the matter.


Passage number 589.
 It's just a--MR. AXILROD. We could interpret that in light of anypotential revisions of June 30th also. It could go either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is suggesting that there are multiple interpretations or possibilities regarding potential revisions of June 30th, but it does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 590.
6/30-7/1/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we're saying is that we're not goingto react to any figure for the first week of July, given how low [abase] we're starting from, unless it's enormously high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing the intention to not react to any figure for the first week of July, unless it is exceptionally high, due to starting from a low baseline.


Passage number 591.
MR. PARTEE. Or pretty low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 592.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 593.
 Well,--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, if it's low, we would permit somedownward movement in the rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that if the rates are low, they would allow for some downward movement.


Passage number 594.
MR. PARTEE. Yes; we'd react by letting them go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, acknowledges the scenario and implies that their reaction would be to let the subject go down.


Passage number 595.
MR. BLACK. Anything below $4 billion, you would lower it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward assertion from Mr. Black that if the amount is below $4 billion, he would lower it.


Passage number 596.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any further information or context, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without additional information.


Passage number 597.
 Look, I threw that figure out, but I-MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a casual statement where the speaker is referring to throwing out a figure and mentioning someone named "I-MR. PARTEE."


Passage number 598.
 Yes, I pretty much agree--MR. CORRIGAN. Well, isn't the point here that if the end-of-June numbers held up and we drew the path with the monthly pattern asit is in alternative B in the Bluebook, with an initial level ofborrowings of $800 million, that anything less than roughly a $10billion increase in the money supply in early July should produce aneasing of money market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the statement made by someone else.


Passage number 599.
MR. AXILROD. That's right; that's leaving the July levelwhere we have it. It would imply something like a 12 percent rate ofgrowth from June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or making an observation.


Passage number 600.
MR. PARTEE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 601.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without the passage.


Passage number 602.
 So we do that and we take account of liquiditypreferences and--MR. AXILROD. We would not draw the path, if I understood theChairman, on this July level. It would be a quite lower level,interpreted as he mentioned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not showing any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a discussion about taking into account liquidity preferences and the need to determine a lower level for something based on Chairman's interpretation.


Passage number 603.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You might draw the path today, but you'dchange it on the basis of whatever things look like. It's not anoperational path beyond this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a matter of fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 604.
MS. TEETERS. How do you decide how to draw it after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 605.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Depending upon what happens in July, withthe presumption that we start the borrowings at $800 million, ifthat's what we decide on--$800 million being attuned to the first weekin July, not this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 606.
MR. GUFFEY. What does that imply for interest rates in thefirst week until we have to decide what to do with the borrowing paththereafter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the implications of a certain situation on interest rates.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're in a window-dressing period,so I don't know. If we were not in a window-dressing period, I wouldsay a little lower. They probably will be a little lower anyhow withthese money supply figures we're publishing. We just don't know. I'd-72-6/30-7/1/82be quite confident of that if it were not for the window-dressing andthe July 4th weekend. What are we talking about--tomorrow. So, Idon't know what the funds rate will be tomorrow. To give you thehonest answer, God knows what the funds rate will be tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is unsure and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 608.
MR. MARTIN. Seasonally adjusted.SPEAKER(.). It's unseasonally adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. MARTIN. Seasonally adjusted." is not in conflict with the statement "It's unseasonally adjusted." It seems like an explanation or clarification is being provided about the data being discussed.


Passage number 609.
MR. PARTEE. I'm not even too certain about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about their own understanding, but there is no opposition or conflicting opinion present.


Passage number 610.
MR. BLACK. If we release our money supply figure a littleearlier than usual, we might be able to move it the way you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 611.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Release the money supply figure earlierthan usual. How do we do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a request or suggestion to release the money supply figure earlier than usual, and the question that follows is seeking advice on how to accomplish it.


Passage number 612.
MR. BLACK. Well, I don't know what time it is firmed up, butthe markets would have time to move a little if it's released earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing uncertainty about the timing of an event and speculating on the possible impact it may have on the markets.


Passage number 613.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We can't start playing that game.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker simply states that they cannot start playing a certain game. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 614.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, you mean actually releasing thenumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement. The sentence is a statement and does not involve any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 615.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We can't do that. The market willthen start reading something into it every time we change the time ofthe release. We'll go out of our minds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses concern about potential consequences if they change the time of the release, but there is no evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 616.
MR. PARTEE. Well, in any event, we have an agreement withthe SEC that we won't release it until 4:10 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating an agreement with the SEC regarding the release time of certain information.


Passage number 617.
MR. FORD. Now that's being specific.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states someone's statement without any opposing views or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 618.
MR. BLACK. I was just being facetious. It wasn'tinterpreted that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is explaining that his previous statement was meant to be humorous rather than serious.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 619.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [As far as] collecting the numbers alittle early, it would solve all our problems if we could collect themoney numbers before the numbers existed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents disagreement regarding the possibility and feasibility of collecting money numbers before they actually exist.


Passage number 620.
MR. BLACK. My wife tells me repeatedly that people don'tknow when I'm joking and I've just demonstrated the validity of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a personal observation made by Mr. Black, who agrees with his wife's claim about people not knowing when he is joking.


Passage number 621.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I see. We apologize. After afew hours here, we lose our sense of humor anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is a casual statement about losing a sense of humor after a few hours.


Passage number 622.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, before I reformulate all this, doesanybody else want to comment on the federal funds rate range. I drewone response out of Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking for comments or inputs on the federal funds rate range.


Passage number 623.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I would oppose Mr. Ford. I think 15percent is plenty high. And the rate is below 15 percent now--I thinkit is 14 percent or a little below--so there is a little upside room.In any event, I would say what I did before. I don't care what theshort-run implications for the aggregates are, we can't stand to havehigher rates at this moment in time. So, I agree thoroughly with whatthe Chairman said. I still think it might be better to say it6/30-7/1/82[publicly], but I'll withhold that until a later date when it becomesmore extreme as a need than now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their opposition to raising rates and agrees with the Chairman's opinion on the matter.


Passage number 624.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd second that. I think 10 to 15percent, using the same language we have used, is the appropriate wayto handle it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the previous statement and gives their own opinion on the appropriate way to handle something.


Passage number 625.
 And the Chairman himself has indicated that he wouldconsult, if we got into an area that--MR. MARTIN. I would support Mr. Ford on the basis that it'spractical to have a little slack in operating and there is no sacredwrit about it. A rate of 15-1/8 or 15-1/32 percent will not cause theworld to spin on its axis in a different direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals mentioned express agreement and consensus in their statements.


Passage number 626.
MR. GRAMLEY. I like 10 to 15 percent. And I would hope thatwe would have some language in the directive indicating that it's 5percent or somewhat more if liquidity preference runs high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal preference of 10 to 15 percent and suggesting the possibility of including language in the directive to accommodate a higher percentage if liquidity preference is high.


Passage number 627.
MR. BLACK. I think 15 percent is [not] high enough. I thinkwe won't have to go above it, but I'd feel much more comfortable if wehad the leeway to do so if we needed to. I would hope we would nothave to use it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This can be inferred from the phrases "I think we won't have to go above it" and "I would hope we would not have to use it" which suggest that there is agreement on the target percentage, but a desire for flexibility in case it is necessary.


Passage number 628.
MR. FORD. So, you want 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is stating a fact or asking a question about the other person's desire for 16 percent.


Passage number 629.
MR. BLACK. Well, I said 17 percent, but since I'm in acompromising mood today, I can stop at 16.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply making a statement about his willingness to compromise.


Passage number 630.
MR. PARTEE. 15-1/8 won't do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "15-1/8 won't do" is a statement of fact or opinion by Mr. Partee, without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 631.
MR. MARTIN. How about 15-1/32.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 632.
MR. CORRIGAN. I like the 32nd.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a personal opinion expressed by Mr. Corrigan, and there is no opposing view or argument presented.


Passage number 633.
MR. WALLICH. I don't think anybody will go broke over thedifference between 15 and 16 percent. The one area where there hasbeen steady and really disastrous pressure of interest rates is thethrifts, and that is where precisely the least has happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is stating his opinion about the difference between 15 and 16 percent interest rates and acknowledging that the most negative impact has been on thrifts.


Passage number 634.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's more significant thanthat, Henry. I agree with you, in general terms, but if the fundsrate gets toward 16 percent, it may trigger a 1 percentage pointincrease in the prime rate, which I think would have very considerablesignificance psychologically for the economy, for financial markets,and for other interest rates. It would not be a very happy situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a conversation where one person is expressing their perspective and the other person agrees with it.


Passage number 635.
MR. WALLICH. If we trigger what seems like a severe bulge inthe money supply, interest rates would go up anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a hypothetical situation and its potential outcome.


Passage number 636.
MS. TEETERS. It's only because we haven't raised the long-run target that we're sitting here figuring out how much we have tomake the growth rate decrease in the last six months [of the year].If we raise our long-range targets, we can take this bulge and nobodywill question it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is stating that by raising the long-run target, they can accommodate the increase in growth rate without facing any questioning.


Passage number 637.
MR. MARTIN. Not if we indicate that we'll tolerate somebulge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 638.
-74-6/30-7/1/82MR. WALLICH. People are sensitive to bulges not only for theweek. [If we] say we will tolerate [bulges], they may be sensitiveeven to our saying that we will tolerate them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich about people's sensitivity to economic bulges.


Passage number 639.
MS. TEETERS. I think they'll be more sensitive if we tellthem we're not going to do it because then they can figure out howmuch [money growth] has to go down in the last six months [of theyear].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion or belief.


Passage number 640.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 641.
 In terms of this bulge issue--and I think it'sworth voting on--given what has happened in the first two quarters, Idon't think the market is going to be anywhere near as sensitive to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they've been quite sensitive toit. That's part of the reason the rates are where they are now. Butthey probably have discounted it pretty well. And this is enormous.Well, let me reformulate this; I'm not sure I'm saying anything muchdifferent from where I started. On the [short-term M1] range we'resaying "about 5 percent." I don't know whether to put it in the samesentence or different sentences but we start with a figure of about 5percent. We certainly add the thought "or somewhat higher" with somelanguage not only about the arbitrariness of the July bulge forseasonal reasons but an assessment of liquidity pressures and demandsor whatever in the economy. I think we'd probably do it in twosentences. We will put down an M2 figure that is reasonably liberal;I wouldn't mind putting down a 9 percent M2 figure. Does that bringus within the M2 targets by--. No, the upper end of the M2 target is9 percent, isn't it. So it wouldn't because we're above it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing the speaker's thoughts and considerations regarding the market's sensitivity and the figures for M1 and M2 targets.


Passage number 642.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. M2 may run stronger for June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that M2 (a measure of money supply) may increase or perform better in the month of June.


Passage number 643.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're above the M2 range. Justmechanically we can't [move into the range if it grew at 9 percent].That might be an argument for leaving it at 8-1/2 percent, but I'd say8-1/2 or 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 644.
MR. AXILROD. I would not expect any downward revision in M2for June; it might even be up a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their expectation regarding the downward revision in M2 for June.


Passage number 645.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, we have to examine the 10 to 15percent or the 11 to 16 percent alternatives on the federal fundsrange. I still prefer the 10 to 15 percent. We have borrowingsstarting at $800 million and they're going to remain at $800 millionwithin a very broad range, particularly on the up side, of whateverhappens in the first week of July. I mean that we will allow for abig bulge in the first week of July. If M1 for the first week of Julycomes in weaker than expected, we would consider reducing borrowings.We will proceed. That's about all I have to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their preference for the 10 to 15 percent range and explaining their plans based on certain financial factors.


Passage number 646.
MR. PARTEE. Why don't you ask for just a show of handsbefore we get into a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a method of obtaining a consensus or decision before proceeding with a vote.


Passage number 647.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A show of hands on what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: A show of hands on what toppings to order for the pizza did reveal some contention among the group, with half of the participants voting for pepperoni and the other half voting for mushrooms. Therefore, the answer is yes.


Passage number 648.
MR. PARTEE. Well, as you said, we have a selection on thefederal funds range and we have a selection on whether to say "5percent or somewhat more" or just "about 5 percent" and then whetherto put in another sentence. Those are two things at least. And we6/30-7/1/82have the M2 question. People might be constrained to vote against itjust for some little reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply listing different options or factors that need to be considered.


Passage number 649.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see whether we can deal withthis federal funds rate range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to evaluate and address the federal funds rate range.


Passage number 650.
MR. FORD. It's now 10 to 15 percent. Do you really mean toraise the lower limit to 11 percent. Did I hear you say 11.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on the proposed increase in the lower limit.


Passage number 651.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, 10 to 15 percent or 11 to 16 percent.Either leave it the same as it is now or raise it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement presents two options for the percentage, either leaving it the same or increasing it. However, there is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints regarding which option should be chosen.


Passage number 652.
MR. FORD. Well, I'm not proposing to raise the lower limit;I want to be clear about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is clarifying his stance and stating that he is not suggesting raising the lower limit.


Passage number 653.
MR. BLACK. Just the upper limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 654.
MR. MARTIN. You're proposing 10 to 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply presenting a proposal without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 655.
MR. FORD. At least 1 percentage point [on the upper limit]to allow ourselves a little breathing room from where we are the daywe start, that's all.SPEAKER(.). Yes, I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Ford and the speaker agree on the idea of allowing at least a 1 percentage point increase in the upper limit.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 656.
MR. FORD. A range of 10 to 16 or 9 to 16 percent at leastgives us some room to breathe.SPEAKER(.). 10 to 15 percent toward 10 to 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is suggesting a different range of percentages than what Mr. Ford initially proposed, indicating a disagreement or contention about the appropriate range.


Passage number 657.
MR. RICE. It might signal a fundamental change in monetarypolicy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply states the possibility of a signal for a change in monetary policy.


Passage number 658.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, you mean tolerate [higher] interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating what someone means by saying "tolerate higher interest rates."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 659.
MR. GRAMLEY. If we have an understanding that the Chairmanis going to consult if the funds rate is over 15 percent, that oughtto be the upper end of our range. We ought not to say one thing andhave an understanding on something else. If you're going to wait toconsult until the fed funds rate gets up to 16 percent, I'm not happywith that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley expresses dissatisfaction with the possibility of waiting to consult until the fed funds rate reaches 16 percent.


Passage number 660.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I must confess that I'm not either.In the end we might well have to, in some sense, let it go to 16percent. But I feel strongly enough about it that that is a pointwhere I would want to take a look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states the individual's personal opinion about a specific matter.


Passage number 661.
MR. MARTIN. I think consulting if it's over 15 percentsoftens the rigidity, and I would go along with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, agrees with the idea of consulting if it's over 15 percent.


Passage number 662.
MS. TEETERS. All we've ever done when it hits the ceiling islet it go through. [Consulting] hasn't triggered any action to keepit below that level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without expressing any opposing view or initiating any argument.


Passage number 663.
MR. PARTEE. It's a different understanding, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any statements or ideas that indicate contention or disagreement. Rather, it seems to be stating a fact or observation about something being different.


Passage number 664.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the understanding isbasically the same. All I'm telling you is that, indeed, I would want6/30-7/1/82to consult, which carries some implication that in consulting I mightbe biased toward making some allowance for it, as things now stand.Now, heaven knows what the conditions will be. If our money supplywent up $15 billion in the first week of July, I might feeldifferently. But right now I don't. I would not want to let thefederal funds rate mechanically go up to 16 percent, I must confess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a personal opinion or perspective.


Passage number 665.
MR. MEEK. Mr. Chairman, if you want to start with an $800million borrowing level, that is the borrowing level adopted at theMay meeting, when the funds rate range adopted was 10 to 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the borrowing level adopted at a previous meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 666.
That would be an unchanged--MR. GRAMLEY. There's another good argument for keeping itwhere it is. It looks awfully funny to me, if we're in a meetingwhere we are trying to make sure that we adopt a directive that doesnot countenance increased interest rates, to raise the upper end ofthe federal funds range. That just seems rather strange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Gramley, presents a different viewpoint from the previous statement ("That would be an unchanged"). He argues against raising the upper end of the federal funds range, stating that it would be contradictory to the goal of not increasing interest rates. This disagreement indicates contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 667.
MS. TEETERS. It seems strange to me that you're not loweringit when your objective is to lower interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests that the speaker finds it strange that the other person is not lowering interest rates despite having the objective to do so. This implies a disagreement or contention between the two individuals regarding the appropriate actions to achieve their objective.


Passage number 668.
MR. FORD. It's not my objective to force them down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Ford simply states that it is not his objective to force them down, without any indication of opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 669.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why don't you get a show of hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 670.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My reason, just to repeat, is that I wouldbe concerned substantively if the funds rate went above 15 percent.Whether we ultimately permit it or not, I'm concerned enough so I'dwant to consider it carefully. I also think it conveys some messageof being asymmetrical. If the market interprets that as our beingmore concerned about an increase than a decrease, I would say that'snot inappropriate. So, how many would find 10 to 15 percentacceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and considerations regarding the funds rate potentially going above 15 percent. They are open to considering it carefully and also mention that the market interpreting their concern as asymmetrical would not be inappropriate. However, there is no direct conflict or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 671.
MR. RICE. In the sense that's it's better than 11 to 16.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. Mr. Rice is simply stating his opinion that something is better than a specific range.


Passage number 672.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: In the given passage, it is not clear what the specific context or content is, as only a name is mentioned. Therefore, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 673.
MR. PARTEE. Preferable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a preference without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 674.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many prefer 10 to 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply asks about the preference for a certain percentage range without any conflicting opinions or opposing views provided.


Passage number 675.
MR. BLACK. And I'd rather see it go down than up, as I votethat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. The statement made by Mr. Black does not oppose or contradict any other statement or viewpoint. It simply expresses a personal preference.


Passage number 676.
MR. FORD. I like the rest of the specifications; it soundsreasonable to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, expresses that he agrees with and finds the rest of the specifications reasonable.


Passage number 677.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether I'm talkingabout 8-1/2 or 9 percent on M2; I guess I don't care that much. Letme just take M2. What do you want to put in for the upper limit onM2. It seems to me it's either 8-1/2 or 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply unsure about whether the value is 8-1/2 percent or 9 percent and is seeking clarification on the upper limit for M2.


Passage number 678.
MR. BALLES. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, we really haven't cometo grips yet with the point Jerry raised earlier: How do we, in ourdirective or instructions to the Desk, finesse this July bulge. I wasreminding Steve, who compared it to April when we faced that bulgebecause of the tax payment matters, that we phrased things in a way-77-6/30-7/1/82that we would tolerate a considerable bulge in M1 provided that M2 wasapproximately within its growth range for the year. So, the figure wepick for M2 may have unusually important consequences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 679.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm not prepared to have that kind ofproviso.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement by Mr. Partee expressing his lack of preparation for a certain type of proviso.


Passage number 680.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He hasn't suggested that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement as it simply states that "He hasn't suggested that."


Passage number 681.
MR. CORRIGAN. The July bulge is a different finesse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is a simple statement without any conflicting or contrasting ideas.


Passage number 682.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

"Exactly" is not a sufficient answer to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 683.
 He already said--MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that someone, Mr. Corrigan, has already said something.


Passage number 684.
 The way we want to handle the initialborrowings--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And we wouldn't have the M2 caveatthis time under Paul's formulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply discussing a particular approach or suggestion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 685.
MR. BALLES. Well, that's what I'm trying to find out. Whatis the intent on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is simply trying to understand the intent of something.


Passage number 686.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He already explained that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is because the statement "He already explained that" does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or arguments between individuals. It suggests that someone has previously provided an explanation, indicating agreement or confirmation rather than disagreement.


Passage number 687.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I wasn't intending a caveat of thesort we had then. We have whatever it is implied in the normal courseof events; the tolerance sentence would apply to both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying that they were not intending to introduce a caveat like the one mentioned before, but rather referring to something that is implied in normal circumstances. They state that the tolerance sentence would apply to both situations.


Passage number 688.
MR. BALLES. Okay, all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker's response is accepting and agrees with whatever was said before.


Passage number 689.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I would prefer 9 percent for M2. M2 hasbeen running strong relative to expectations almost persistently forthe last year or more. And, with the tax cut, I certainly think it'slikely to run strong in the period to come.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal preference or opinion regarding the interest rate for M2. They provide their reasoning based on the performance of M2 and the anticipated impact of the tax cut.


Passage number 690.
MR. GRAMLEY. If we were so fortunate as to see interestrates decline also, there would be the usual lag in the downwardadjustment of yields on money market mutual funds and hence a tendencyfor [funds to move] into those from market instruments, which wouldhelp keep the M2 numbers up. So, I would prefer 9 percent also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the preference of the speaker for interest rates to decline.


Passage number 691.
MR. MARTIN. I would also for the same reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion without any opposing viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 692.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Same here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 693.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mind 9 percent; I'm not sure howvalid that reason is. We exclude the institutional funds from M2 nowdon't we, which is why we got that May--SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the validity of a reason, indicating that they do not agree with it.


Passage number 694.
 Institutional--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it would help the individuals too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely stating that whatever is being discussed would be beneficial for both institutions and individuals.


Passage number 695.
MR. PARTEE. Household money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states "MR. PARTEE. Household money." This does not indicate any form of argument or disagreement.


Passage number 696.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But presumably [for households] it willcome out of other accounts that are in M2; that's a different thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing additional information about a different category or type of accounts within M2.


Passage number 697.
-78-6/30-7/1/82MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, no. I wouldn't say that it will comeexclusively out of other M2 accounts. I think we could get asignificant transfer of individual savings out of market instrumentsinto some funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about a potential transfer of individual savings out of market instruments into some funds.


Passage number 698.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some; I don't know how soon it would comein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that involve disagreement or opposition. It is a vague statement expressing uncertainty about the timing of something.


Passage number 699.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it's not [unlikely], so that 9 percentsounds better to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley agrees with the statement that "9 percent sounds better."


Passage number 700.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is the preference 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 701.
MR. BLACK. I don't mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Black, is expressing a personal opinion or preference. There is no indication of any opposition or disagreement by others in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 702.
MR. ALTMANN. Seven [members prefer 9 percent].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows contention or disagreement as Mr. Altmann states that seven members prefer a 9 percent rate. This implies that there are other members who disagree or have a different preference.


Passage number 703.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On M1, we're trying "about 5 percent." Isuppose we say both--about 9 and about 5 percent--in that samesentence, immediately followed by a sentence saying a somewhat highergrowth rate would be acceptable. What we can do is write somethingout and look at it immediately after lunch. But it would be somethingalong the lines [that somewhat higher growth] would be acceptable"depending upon an evaluation of liquidity pressures in the economy"or "if demands for liquidity appear to be related to uncertainty andprecautionary needs" or some language of that sort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a potential growth rate and suggesting different ways to evaluate liquidity pressures in the economy.


Passage number 704.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we're going to apply the toleranceof an overshoot to M2 as well as to M1, I have a mild preference formaking M2 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 705.
MR. FORD. Use the lower number and keep pumping.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward instruction without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 706.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I'm not going to do or die [overthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they will not be excessively committed or stubborn about the matter.


Passage number 707.
]MR. PARTEE. Maybe 11 or 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of a percentage.


Passage number 708.
MS. TEETERS. Maybe zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 709.
MR. PARTEE. Not M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Mr. Partee. Not M2."


Passage number 710.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In your testimony you're also goingto talk in terms of tolerating overshoots in both the Ms, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is asking a clarifying question about whether the testimony will discuss the tolerance of overshoots in both the Ms.


Passage number 711.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but of course we haven't really setthose targets. It depends upon what we do with M2, but if we kept theranges the same, we would have to do something presumably. Thearithmetic works out better, as you say, but you're getting within arange of tolerance where I don't really care that much. And if thatmakes people happier, I think we can live with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is agreeing with the other person's point and expressing a willingness to accommodate their preferences.


Passage number 712.
MR. PARTEE. I would like your sentence on some exception torefer not only to precautionary demands for liquidity but to temporarytax cut effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee, indicating his desire for a sentence to refer to certain exceptions.


Passage number 713.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that has to be mentioned too. Ijust don't know how to construct it. It might take another sentence,-79-6/30-7/1/82such as "It is also noted that in the short run seasonal uncertaintiescombined with these other things might lead to a bulge in July, whichwould be tolerated." That's the sense of it. I think we need that inthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their uncertainty about how to include certain information in their statement.


Passage number 714.
MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, the tax cut effect also couldbe in August because some people are not going to get it until the endof July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the possibility that the tax cut effect could occur in August for some individuals who will receive it at the end of July.


Passage number 715.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's say "in the immediate future" orsomething like that. But both thoughts--the seasonal uncertaintieswith the social security and tax cut effects and the more generalliquidity issue--will be in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing two thoughts or issues that will be present in a certain situation.


Passage number 716.
MR. PARTEE. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a single statement without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 717.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That leaves the borrowing level. Is $800million the right number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply posing a question and does not express any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 718.
 Or conceivably $750 million--MS. TEETERS. We've taken all the other specifications of "A"except the borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It presents a hypothetical scenario or suggestion regarding the amount of money (potentially $750 million) that is being discussed.


Passage number 719.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, what's the significance of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question at the end is seeking an explanation or further clarification, but it does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 720.
MS. TEETERS. I'm just questioning whether they arecompatible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is expressing doubt or uncertainty about the compatibility of something or what exactly she is referring to.


Passage number 721.
MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, we have a revised June. Iwould have some preference for tilting a little to the side of ease bymaking it $700 million. I don't feel strongly on the $800 million.It may not make so much difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee expresses his preference for a lower amount but mentions he does not feel strongly about the higher amount.


Passage number 722.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make this great refinement. We'llmake it $800 million with some effort to stay with $800 million andtake the risks on the low side rather than the high side of $800million in this very short-run period we're talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a refinement in a specific financial matter, mentioning the amount of $800 million and indicating a preference for low risks over high risks within that amount.


Passage number 723.
MS. TEETERS. Wasn't $800 million the target last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is simply asking for confirmation of a fact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 724.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Explanation: The mention of "Yes" indicates that there is disagreement or contention in the passage, although we don't have enough context to provide further information.


Passage number 725.
MS. TEETERS. And it averaged out well over $1 billion,didn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 726.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 727.
 We don't publish the initialborrowing figureMS. TEETERS. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is a straightforward statement given without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 728.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, what are we arguing about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any specific argument or disagreement. It only poses the question of what the subject of the discussion or argument is.


Passage number 729.
MR. ALTMANN. Not at the time; it's published after the yearhas been completed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the publication is released after the year has been completed.


Passage number 730.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. After what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: is shaping up to be a heated debate, it is clear that there is contention and disagreement in the passage. The phrase "heated debate" suggests that there are opposing views and strong disagreements being expressed.


Passage number 731.
MR. ALTMANN. It's in the annual report put out by the Desk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage given. This passage simply states that there is information in the annual report put out by the Desk. There is no indication of any disagreement or differing views.


Passage number 732.
-80-6/30-7/1/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In New York. Yes, but that's a yearlater.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a date and location without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 733.
MR. ALTMANN. At the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 734.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, but it determines the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply affirms that there is agreement but it determines the path.


Passage number 735.
MR. CORRIGAN. We can seasonally adjust it, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the possibility of seasonally adjusting something without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 736.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that clear. Should I attempt to repeatit all again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking if they should repeat the information.


Passage number 737.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not providing any conflicting information or differing opinions. It is simply making a statement without presenting any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 738.
MR. BLACK. No, it couldn't be done twice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the given passage, Mr. Black is stating that something cannot be done twice. This implies a disagreement or contradiction with someone who may believe it can be done more than once.


Passage number 739.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Let's vote." This statement is simply suggesting that a vote should take place, without expressing any opposing arguments or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 740.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black NoPresident Ford NoGovernor Gramley YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich NoPresident Keehn YesEight for and four against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage states that eight people are in favor (yes) and four people are against (no). This indicates disagreement or contention among the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 741.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. What happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something happened without providing any additional information or expressing any disagreement with it.


Passage number 742.
MR. TRUMAN. A folder fell off the chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that a folder fell off the chair, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 743.
MR. GRAMLEY. The folder was so shocked by the results.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply stating that the folder was shocked by the results, without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 744.
MR. FORD. By itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Ford, and there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 745.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are back on the long-term ranges. As Isaid, I don't think we have to push to a conclusion, but I'd like tohave a little better feeling [of the consensus] than we have at themoment. I've been operating on the assumption, implicitly, that ofall the various alternatives we have, which are considerable, we won'tchange any of the numbers for this year, but we will give a ratherclear explanation that in the light of the uncertainties of thesituation we are obviously prepared to tolerate some overshoots. Andwithin that context, while we're prepared to tolerate some overshoots,we're not exactly aiming at them; otherwise we would change thetarget. There's a difference between tolerating and aiming. But wedon't think an overshoot is wholly unlikely, and the Congress and thepublic ought to be duly warned that there could be an overshoot ifdevelopments continue the way they have in the first half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own assumptions and preferences regarding certain numbers and targets, but they do not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 746.
-81-6/30-7/1/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But rather than attribute it touncertainties, wouldn't you attribute it to the behavior of NOWaccounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement presenting a question and suggesting an alternative explanation.


Passage number 747.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the NOW accounts are a subcomponent.We can certainly point that out, but in that context we also wouldpoint out that we had the alternative, as indeed we said in February,of choosing a higher base and choosing the lower end of the target.And we cite that as giving some sense of the dimension of this: Thatif we had chosen the other base, we would still be within the rangeand so forth and so on. I might bring other analysis to bear, butthat's the essential message that would be given.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a decision and providing additional analysis.


Passage number 748.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I wouldn't want to limit it to NOWaccounts. I think it should be broader than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee expresses his agreement with the idea of not limiting something to NOWaccounts and suggests broadening it further.


Passage number 749.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Vice Chairman Solomon without providing any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 750.
 Okay, but I wouldn't refrain fromusing something like--MR. PARTEE. I would certainly mention NOW accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement seems to suggest that the speaker would not hesitate to mention NOW accounts, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument provided.


Passage number 751.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When we talk about uncertainties,that gets misread. It looks as though we'd do anything that the defacto situation pushes us to. I was just having a problem with theterm "uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing a potential misinterpretation or misunderstanding of the term "uncertainty."


Passage number 752.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, NOW accounts are certainly going toloom in the analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that NOW accounts are going to be analyzed.


Passage number 753.
MR. WALLICH. Would it be a temporary overshoot so that itwouldn't in principle raise the base for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking if something would be temporary and not raise the base for the following year.


Passage number 754.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that I want to facethat problem explicitly. In a sense we're talking about temporaryovershoots but with some warning that the overshoot may be long enoughto extend through the end of the year. But that's a fine balancing.I don't know exactly how to word it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about how to approach or describe a problem.


Passage number 755.
MS. TEETERS. It would be useful to get some of the attentionaway from where we actually end up in the final quarter or the finalmonths of the year because making it precisely in those time frames, Ithink, is a fallacious target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion that focusing solely on the final quarter or months of the year as a target is not logical or accurate.


Passage number 756.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that comes back to Mr. Corrigan'spoint about presentation, which we can think about a bit. It's alittle harder this year in some sense than last year. Last year wewere well within the implied annual numbers, as I remember. We endedthe fourth quarter low but looking at the year as a whole it was fine.This year it won't be the reverse, I don't think; maybe it will. Iwouldn't say until I look at the numbers more closely. I don't knowif there's anything else to be said for this year. For next year, myown inclination is that the simplest thing to do is just to say that,as we've shown this year, there's quite a lot of question about howdemand for money will go for a variety of reasons that we haveillustrated, so tentatively we're just going to keep the same rangesfor next year that we had this year. Obviously, that's subject tochange. We consider [next year's ranges] more tentative than usual,but obviously keeping the ranges unchanged for next year allows a lot6/30-7/1/82of room for slower growth next year than this year which, if velocitypatterns are normal, is what we would expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing their thoughts and uncertainties about the financial situation for the current and next year. They mention that keeping the same ranges for next year allows for slower growth, which is expected if velocity patterns are normal. There are no conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 757.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I would strongly encourage you todevelop the analytic line of reasoning you were presenting yesterdayfor how velocity [behavior] for the period ahead, if we succeed inbringing down inflation, can bring down interest rates. It may be avery different animal than what we've been dealing with before and wehave to be sensitive to that in setting our longer-range targets.That would give us another reason for not taking a step in a downwarddirection for 1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 758.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I would suggest is that I will hearany comments you have now, but I will reduce some of this to whatmight be in the actual language that we would adopt and circulate itto you over the next week or so. And that will be the precise focusfor a discussion over the telephone, leaving open the question ofwhether we have a bright idea and may want to change one of thesetargets. But that's the direction we seem to be going in at themoment, if I read this right. And I will give you some alternativelanguage that we could adopt over the telephone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply outlining their plan for further discussion and potential changes to the targets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 759.
MR. PARTEE. The 2-1/2 percent scares people. I think theyuse it more for rhetoric than anything else, but if we were to use2-1/2 percent as a real possibility for the lower end of the rangethis year, it would mean zero essentially for the rest of the year.If we use it for next year, growth would be dropping from the veryupper point of the range or even above the 5-1/2 percent [upper limit]down to 2-1/2 percent, which seems like a very low number. I justthrow that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee expresses skepticism about the use of the 2-1/2 percent as a "real possibility" and suggests that others may use it for rhetoric. He also questions the implication that growth would drop to 2-1/2 percent, seeing it as a very low number. This suggests a differing viewpoint or disagreement with the idea of using 2-1/2 percent as a benchmark for growth.


Passage number 760.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But you don't want to narrow thetarget range, do you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for confirmation or agreement on a specific point.


Passage number 761.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know. We could keep the targetrange equally broad by raising both the lower and the upper ends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is considering different options and discussing the possibility of keeping the target range broad by raising both the lower and upper ends.


Passage number 762.
MR. WALLICH. We usually look at the midpoint and we'reoperating already at the upper end conceptually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply explaining a common approach to evaluating data.


Passage number 763.
MR. PARTEE. But we never looked at the midpoint thatseriously this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 764.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. We said in the earliertestimony that we expected growth to be in the upper part. But do wegain anything by raising the lower limit. I guess in a way if weraise the lower limit, people take it more seriously. The reason Ilook somewhat toward not changing the range is what everybody said,which is that we don't know how to change it without possibly gettingourselves in more difficulty. A half-point change seems trivial. Ifwe go one point, I think we have to hit it. And we may not hit it.But then all this arithmetic will be running on full speed. Theinstant it's running close to 6-1/2 percent, everybody will be[focusing on] what next week's money supply figure will be. In a way,we have less flexibility if we change it than if we don't. That's myview; it's anybody's judgment, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own perspective and reasoning for not changing the range. They acknowledge that there may be benefits to raising the lower limit, but ultimately express concern about the potential difficulties and lack of flexibility in making a change. The phrase "That's my view; it's anybody's judgment, I guess" indicates that the speaker recognizes that others may have different opinions but does not imply disagreement or contention within the passage itself.


Passage number 765.
-83-6/30-7/1/82MR. CORRIGAN. Also, by not changing it now, we may beworking in a direction of creating the flexibility to be able tochange one of these targets sometime later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 766.
MS. TEETERS. Well, wait Jerry, we're just building up aprecedent that we never change the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Teeters, discussing how they are establishing a precedent regarding range changes.


Passage number 767.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, I think this time it works the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Corrigan is expressing his opinion, but there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 768.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Chairman is going to say thatthis is even more provisional than usual, that we're just leaving itwhere it is until we have a clear fix on it. It implies that it's notin a certain sense the usual target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The Chairman is simply stating that the current situation is more provisional than usual and it will remain as it is until they have a clear understanding of it. The statement does not involve any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 769.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, but then it seems to me we should go back,say, in August or September and change the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their own perspective and suggestion without arguing or disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 770.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, for the '83 numbers I was thinking morein terms of when we have to review them again next February. If westate now that in effect we're going to leave them where they arebecause we don't know where to put them, that works in the directionof giving us the flexibility then to change them in February. Atleast that's the way I would envision the logic of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is explaining his thoughts and reasoning regarding the '83 numbers and how they can be reviewed and potentially changed in February.


Passage number 771.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, but we're still going to run into the end-of-the-year problem with everybody expecting us to try to reducemonetary growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the end-of-the-year problem with everyone expecting a reduction in monetary growth.


Passage number 772.
MR. CORRIGAN. This year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Corrigan without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 773.
MS. TEETERS. Yes. Nobody knows where our range is for thisyear, so they're going to try to figure out where it is and we havegiven them no indication what we're going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that there is uncertainty about a range and no indication has been given regarding future actions.


Passage number 774.
MR. PARTEE. Except for the tolerance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 775.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, but we're not telling them what thetolerance is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 776.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think what Nancy is saying is that she wantsto put a number on the tolerance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply restating Nancy's perspective.


Passage number 777.
MR. MARTIN. If we tell them what the tolerance is, we have aquasi bracket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not include any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Martin regarding a potential consequence of providing information about tolerance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 778.
MS. TEETERS. But we're really going against the whole thrustof the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, which was in effect "Tell us what it isyou're going to do so we can begin to know how to react to it." Youknow, we may even want to add back in the old phrase "the feel andtone of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, disagrees with the current approach being taken, which goes against the Humphrey-Hawkins Act. She suggests adding back the phrase "the feel and tone of the market," indicating a disagreement with the current approach to decision-making.


Passage number 779.
"MR. CORRIGAN. That's what Governor Partee wants to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is stating Governor Partee's desire without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 780.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, have we concluded our discussion.Okay. I'm sorry, we skipped right over the Managers' reports. Do youwant to have some rapid reports by the Managers. We have to ratifythe transactions.-84-6/30-7/1/82SPEAKER(.). They want to change everything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply apologizing for skipping over a topic and suggesting a possible solution.


Passage number 781.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we have somewhat abridgedManagers' reports.SPEAKER(.). Very abridged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting the possibility of having somewhat abridged managers' reports.


Passage number 782.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had them implicitly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 783.
MR. MEEK. [Secretary's note: Mr. Meek summarized thestatement shown in the Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that Mr. Meek summarized a statement shown in the Appendix. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 784.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you go ahead, Ms. Greene, andthen we'll ask questions on and discuss all markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply giving Ms. Greene permission to proceed and indicating that they will then ask questions and discuss all markets.


Passage number 785.
MS. GREENE. I, too, will try to abridge my report.[Secretary's note: Ms. Greene summarized the statement shown in theAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Greene simply states that she will try to abridge her report. There is no indication of any conflict or disagreement with anyone else's statement.


Passage number 786.
]MR. RICE. Could I ask a question. How did we happen to hiton the figure of $21 million on the day of intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 787.
MS. GREENE. We didn't hit on it. We responded to marketconditions; we operated in relatively small size discreetly and it sohappened that the rates around which we were operating tended to beresistance points in the markets and no further operations werenecessary. The market felt the resistance there, accepted it, thoughtit was an appropriate place for the rise to peter out, and wecontributed to that sense of resistance and did not have to do more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains how the speaker's actions aligned with market conditions and led to a perceived resistance point in the market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 788.
MS. TEETERS. In other words, it wouldn't have been noticedif the [Under] Secretary of the Treasury hadn't announced it. Is thatcorrect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS is questioning the accuracy of the statement made by the Under Secretary of the Treasury, suggesting that it might not be correct.


Passage number 789.
MS. GREENE. No, I think the feeling was that the resistancepoint was confirmed and was noticed in the market. But it was atechnical reaction rather than a policy reaction at the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states their perspective on the matter without any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 790.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they wouldn't necessarily haveknown that we were intervening with our own resources.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting views or opposing statements. It simply states a possibility or likelihood that the other party mentioned may not have been aware of the intervention.


Passage number 791.
MS. GREENE. They would not necessarily have identified it asour operations. They would have identified the fact that somehow thedollar didn't seem to go above that [resistance] level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 792.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And after the Under Secretary and theSecretary proudly pointed out that day that they had authorized thisintervention to counter a disorderly market, the comment around WallStreet was: What was more disorderly about Monday than a lot of otherdays that we've had before and since.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a comment made by individuals on Wall Street. There is no explicit opposition or conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 793.
MR. FORD. It was the death of a sovereign ruler.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states a fact about the death of a sovereign ruler, without any conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 794.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I see. That's a good point.Particularly one with money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges a point made by someone about money.


Passage number 795.
MR. RICE. Was the $21 million all one operation or did youdo it in steps of smaller amounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification about the process of conducting the operation in terms of the amount of money involved.


Passage number 796.
-85-6/30-7/1/82MS. GREENE. We took steps in smaller amounts because we wereoperating in amounts that are trading amounts in the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about their actions in the markets, without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 797.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Typically, we don't operate with aparticular amount or number objective in mind. We wanted to keep itmodest if we could, but we operated when the market was moving inwhatever small amounts seemed to be helpful in terms of stabilizingthe market. It just happened that by the time the Desk got to $21million the market went the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their approach to operating in the market without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 798.
MR. WALLICH. To follow up Mr. Solomon's point, in yourjudgment how often were there cases of disorder in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply asking a question to gather more information.


Passage number 799.
MS. GREENE. I think anybody participating in the market--andit would probably be true of those of us in the foreign exchangedepartment at the New York Bank--would have a different number. It'sa matter of judgment. Certainly the markets have been subject toabrupt movements of rates during this period but it's not clear thatthe problems originated in the exchange market. Therefore, thequestion of whether intervention would be appropriate or not didn'tcome up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Greene is expressing her opinion but there is no opposing viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 800.
MR. CORRIGAN. I assume, Gretchen, in answer to GovernorWallich's question, that all of these people would have a number thatis larger than one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward assumption made by Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 801.
MS. GREENE. That's a fair assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 802.
MR. PARTEE. Paul, I lost track of the Comark situation. DidI understand you to say that the firm has now been liquidated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply one person asking for clarification and information from another person.


Passage number 803.
MR. MEEK. It's in the process of an orderly liquidation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Meek, is stating a factual statement about a process of orderly liquidation. There is no expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 804.
MR. PARTEE. No market bad news coming from that yet.Nothing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is no bad news coming from the market.


Passage number 805.
MR. MEEK. I should say there remains an uncertainty aroundthat firm. Whether it's a call on capital through its limitedpartners will be answered by the partners [if they] put up capital.It appears at the present time that there was a shortage ofsecurities. They owe customers on the order of $15 to $19 milliondollars. So, it's possible that some losses could come.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the uncertainty and the possibility of losses.


Passage number 806.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee without any conflicting views or opposition.


Passage number 807.
MR. MEEK. [There are amounts] due to some customers fromthem. But I don't think it's anything of a magnitude that would beparticularly disturbing to the market as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Meek is expressing his opinion about the potential impact on the market, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 808.
MR. PARTEE. They're expecting to get more capital out oftechnically limited partners.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone is expecting to receive more capital from limited partners.


Passage number 809.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The basic partnership agreement,which we've looked at, calls for the partners to put up the money. Onthe other hand, there are a lot of reasons why they might delay anddelay in the courts. When the management and the general partnershave been guilty of very sloppy management practice, if they havebeen--and there's some presumption that they have been--I wonder to-86-6/30-7/1/82what extent limited partners, as distinct from the general partners,are still bound to put up the money. If some of the thrifts who hadtheir securities lent out end up with a shortage, I assume there willbe lawsuits. So, it's unclear. But what is true is that we avertedthe initial bad psychological impact and the seizing up of the marketby getting Marine Midland to resume the clearings. The market istaking that whole thing very well and if at the end of the day thereare some shortages, I don't think that is going to come in a way thatwill be disruptive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 810.
MR. PARTEE. But there could be a loss to some more keylenders.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a potential loss to certain key lenders without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 811.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There could be a loss to those peoplewho have had their securities used.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is potential for contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests that there may be a loss to individuals who have had their securities used. This could spark disagreement or differing opinions as people may have differing views on the potential impacts of such actions. Some may argue that there will indeed be a loss, while others may argue that there may be alternative outcomes or mitigating factors.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 812.
MR. BOEHNE. With respect to the French devaluation, is theresome feeling that this and some other actions that were taken arelargely stop-gap actions on a deteriorating path or that thedeterioration is being arrested. What is the sense about the Frenchfranc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions two different viewpoints - one that sees the French devaluation and other actions as stop-gap measures on a deteriorating path, and another that believes deterioration is being arrested. The question suggests that there is no consensus on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 813.
MS. GREENE. Well, following the devaluation, the governmentdid announce an austerity program that included wage and priceguidelines. That has generated a fair amount of criticismdomestically by both employers and trade unions and is giving rise toa test and debate about economic policy in France. I think the peopleoutside of France feel that how this gets resolved is important intheir assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation:
The passage mentions that the austerity program announced by the government in France has generated criticism from both employers and trade unions. This suggests that there is contention or disagreement regarding the program. Additionally, it states that this issue is giving rise to a test and debate about economic policy in France, further highlighting the existence of disagreement.


Passage number 814.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The only real austerity, though, isthis wage/price freeze for a few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a claim without any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 815.
MR. TRUMAN. It hasn't passed their parliament yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the given passage. Mr. Truman simply states that "It hasn't passed their parliament yet" without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 816.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, but there has been noannouncement of a change in the overall fiscal/monetary approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply implies that there has been no announcement regarding a change in the fiscal/monetary approach.


Passage number 817.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, as they reinforce the notion that theywould stick to this guideline of a budget deficit of no more than [3]percent of GNP--. They had said that before and [appear] to take it alittle more seriously now, but the jury is still out on whether thegovernment--I'm speaking of the government as a whole--will be able toor want to stick to that guideline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 818.
 There is the question as well ofwhether, in a country like France which has been running for a fewyears a budget deficit of 1 percent of GNP, that number is reallyviable in terms of--MR. MARTIN. But isn't it true that the very position thatthe Mitterand government is now taking is a substantial change fromthe first period of their operation. At least at the verbal levelit's a reversal, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 819.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions "Mr. Truman" and does not provide any additional information or context to suggest any conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 820.
 It certainly is a necessary step, but whetherit's enough to--MR. MARTIN. But considering the rhetoric in the politicalcampaign, it's quite a step.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that it is a necessary step and the other person agrees by suggesting that it is a significant step considering the rhetoric in the political campaign.


Passage number 821.
-87-6/30-7/1/82MR. BOEHNE. They're coming into the real world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not display any apparent contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that "they" are entering the "real world."


Passage number 822.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't agree with that. It issimply that they have put some limits on the amount by which they'regoing to inflate the economy or increase the budgetary deficit. It'snot interpreted--certainly not in the international business communityin France or outside--as a reversal of policy. It's just putting someconstraints on what the left wing of the Mitterand party might havehoped they would ultimately go to. I would say that there is a fairlywidespread expectation that more devaluations will be necessary fromtime to time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is explaining a viewpoint or analysis without indicating any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 823.
 And if they come too frequently, that's the end of theEMS. I think the word reversal is much too strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion that the word "reversal" is too strong, but it does not create any conflict or disagreement with another viewpoint.


Passage number 824.
MS. GREENE. I think also that the action has to be seenagainst a background in which they have been fairly aggressive inletting interest rates decline. And that undercuts in another way thecommitment to austerity. Even though as a tool of monetary policythey have relied very much on credit guidelines, the fact thatinterest rates are coming down--and they are the only major countrywhere interest rates are coming down--supports Mr. Solomon's pointthat there is a credibility problem in the financial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing information and analysis.


Passage number 825.
MR. MARTIN. Well, I certainly wouldn't use the termausterity with regard to any of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin is expressing his opinion on the use of the term "austerity," but there is no opposing viewpoint presented or conflict evident.


Passage number 826.
 Three percent of the GNP ishardly austerity, but still it's an admission to constraints on theleft wing and that's--MR. FORD. It's the same percent of GNP as our budgetdeficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the percentage of GNP and budget deficit.


Passage number 827.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Ours is higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any specific information or context to suggest contention or disagreement. It simply states "Ours is higher" without any further information or comparison.


Passage number 828.
MR. GRAMLEY. Prospectively much higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence "MR. GRAMLEY. Prospectively much higher" simply states a statement made by Mr. Gramley, without indicating any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 829.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And a lower saving rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the fact that there is a lower saving rate.


Passage number 830.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions. Comments.Elucidation. We need to ratify. We'll have a joint vote, if that'sconceivable. We don't have any controversy on ratifying bothoperations in the same sweeping action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage primarily discusses the process of ratification and voting on two operations, indicating a sense of agreement and cooperation among the individuals involved. The use of words like "we" and "both operations" further emphasize the lack of contention.


Passage number 831.
MR. BLACK. I move it, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a simple statement or proposal without any opposing views being expressed.


Passage number 832.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do the majority join Mr. Black. We have amotion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if the majority are in agreement with Mr. Black and mentioning that there is a motion on the table.


Passage number 833.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides information about Vice Chairman Solomon but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 834.
 If we don't ratify them, the staffpersonally out of their own pockets have to--MR. BOEHNE. No, you do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The response "No, you do" indicates disagreement or contradiction with the previous statement.


Passage number 835.
MR. FORD. You're the captain of the ship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Ford is the captain of the ship.


Passage number 836.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hearing no objection, they will beratified. I will get some language to tell you what you just voted onif you don't object.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that if there are no objections, something will be ratified. They also mention providing clarification if someone wants more information.


Passage number 837.
MR. PARTEE. That's a dangerous gamble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply conveys an opinion or warning about the potential risks involved in a certain action.


Passage number 838.
-88-6/30-7/1/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a sentence that starts out withthe ranges that we discussed. This would be inserted: "Somewhat morerapid growth would be acceptable depending on evidence that economicand financial uncertainties are leading to exceptional liquiditydemands and changes in financial asset holdings. It was also notedthat seasonal uncertainties, together with increased social securitypayments and the initial impact of the tax cut on cash balances, mightlead to a temporary bulge in the monetary aggregates, particularlyMl." Well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence provided is simply stating some factors or concerns that might potentially cause a temporary increase in the monetary aggregates.


Passage number 839.
MR. ROOS. I think that's great, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "great" indicates agreement or positivity towards the previous statement or idea.


Passage number 840.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You agree. Do [the rest of] you agreethat that is what you voted for. I would note, just in the interestof completeness, that we will make a technical change in theboilerplate part of the directive. In referring to the long-runobjectives, which we did not change at this time, we insert "At itsmeeting in early February, the Committee agreed" to all these thingsand then we add at the end "These ranges were under review at thismeeting." And when we agree on them, we will insert an amendment. Isthere any further action that we need to take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is mentioning the need to make a technical change in the directive and proposing to insert an amendment in the future, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 841.
MS. TEETERS. No word at all about the possible overshoot onthe long term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is no mention of the possible overshoot on the long term. There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 842.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage or context, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement. Can you please provide me with the passage?


Passage number 843.
 Well, I think we can--MR. ALTMANN. This will hold until the next action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and there is no indication of any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 844.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This will all appear in the discussion butit doesn't say we reiterated the ranges. It says this is what weadopted in February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about what was adopted in February, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 845.
MR. ALTMANN. Pending the vote later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 846.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says we are in the midst of a review.When the directive comes out, it will have the other language. Well,with that understanding, I guess we have completed [our agenda].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a review process and the inclusion of other language in a directive.


Passage number 847.
[Lunch recess]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are resuming the meeting of the FederalOpen Market Committee. Would you read us that resolution exactly, ifyou have it, Mr. Winn. You were there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the meeting is resuming and asks for someone to read a resolution.


Passage number 848.
MR. WINN. I have it: "It is the sense of the Congress thatif Congress acts to restore fiscal responsibility and reducesprojected budget deficits in a substantial and permanent way, then theFederal Reserve's Open Market Committee shall reevaluate its monetarytargets in order to assure that they are fully complementary to a newand more restrained fiscal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that if Congress takes certain actions, then the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee will reevaluate its monetary targets. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 849.
"MS. TEETERS. Couldn't we take the position that they haven'tcompleted action yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting ideas or opposing arguments. It is a statement suggesting a potential standpoint without any indications of disagreement.


Passage number 850.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they've completed action on thisresolution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the action on the resolution has been completed.


Passage number 851.
 I think this is a substantive---89-6/30-7/1/82MR. WALLICH. [Unintelligible] meaningful reduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about a topic without any opposing viewpoints being mentioned.


Passage number 852.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, there are several points in ourdiscussion. [We had] an analysis of the budgetary situation and somebudgetary projections presented to us that were not the same bottomline as in the budgetary resolutions. But I think we might justindicate that we were aware the resolution existed and that we hadsome discussion of this at the meeting but didn't fully address theissue perhaps. I just think we should be a little more self-conscious. And maybe we need do nothing more than confirm what Ithink was implicit or even explicit in our discussion earlier.Whatever comment people want to make about the budget situation andits relevance to the monetary targets is appropriate. Of course, wehave not yet adopted the targets that are at issue here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that there were different perspectives presented regarding the budgetary situation, but they did not fully address the issue. They suggest being more self-conscious and open to comments about the budget situation and its relevance to monetary targets. The speaker also mentions that the targets have not been adopted yet.


Passage number 853.
MR. FORD. Well, in addition to the good staff analysis,there is the difference between the $104 billion in the firstresolution and the $160 billion or so that our staff comes out withbased on a different economic forecast. I'm not sure how to handle itpolitically to make it seem non-antagonistic, but if we could find adiplomatic way to do so, I'd point to the difference between the firstresolution and the actual deficit in the last three fiscal years.There has been a difference of about $52 billion, if one projects thedeficit at $98 to $100 billion. With two-thirds of [the fiscal year]behind us, we come out this fiscal year--and have in the last twofiscal years--with about a $52 billion difference between the firstbudget resolution and the actual deficit. I don't know what you mightattribute that to but I attribute it to the fact that the reasoningour staff does makes sense--not just prospectively but in fact,looking back, it makes sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a difference in economic forecasts and suggesting that their staff's analysis is more accurate based on past data. They are not presenting an opposing viewpoint or challenging anyone else's ideas.


Passage number 854.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What are you aiming for. Do you feelunder an obligation to respond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple direct question asking about the person's goals or objectives and if they feel any obligation to respond.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 855.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't know if we have an obligationto volunteer a response. We obviously face a question as to what wethought about this and I want to be sure about what we thought aboutit. Let me just say that I think what we were saying implicitlyearlier-- explicitly but implicitly tying into the resolution--wasthat there was great skepticism. We can say we welcome any restraintthat that resolution signifies or will result in and we encourage theaction in that respect, but we have a good deal of skepticism orquestioning at this point. It could be put more strongly. Or putmore politely there was no assurance, if I may put it that way, thatthe budgetary figure was going to come in at $104 billion orthereabouts next year. Part of that to be sure was a reflection ofdifferent economic assumptions; part of it was not. But certainlythere was some concern over the net result of the resolution. It isconstructive in the right direction but a concern was expressed by anumber of people about the budgetary outlook. Now, anybody else cansay anything they want to say. But explicitly we haven't adopted anyranges as a matter of fact. This is further background discussion forthe final [decision]. We will take into account the budgetaryresolution itself but, obviously, the evaluation of its practicaleffect and the practical budgetary situation apart from the resolutionis a factor in our thinking. Different people weigh it differently, Isuppose, but that's what I can say so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by phrases such as "great skepticism," "no assurance," "concern," and "different people weigh it differently." These expressions show that there are varying opinions and uncertainties about the budgetary resolution and its practical effect.


Passage number 856.
 I [don't] think we'resubject to any further---906/30-7/1/82MR. MORRIS. The implication of the resolution is that theFederal Reserve is currently following a tighter monetary policyregime because of the very large deficits and, therefore, if thedeficits are reduced, we should follow an easier monetary posture.But that in fact has not been the case historically. When we set thisyear's guidelines a year ago they were not set in anticipation of thekind of budget deficits that we're looking at now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the implication of the resolution and their interpretation of historical monetary policy.


Passage number 857.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's very embarrassing to say that weignore the state of fiscal policy in making our decision on monetarypolicy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The statement simply expresses the embarrassment that comes from not considering the state of fiscal policy when making decisions on monetary policy.


Passage number 858.
MR. GRAMLEY. But I don't think we have to say it that way,Tony. If you look back at the thrust of policy since late 1979, itbegan with the notion that fiscal policy would be reasonablyrestrained, and we continue to hold to that expectation. And thecontinuation of targeting along these lines has been made with an eyeto the expectation that fiscal policy will begin to provide theassistance that we want in bringing down inflation. We're not talkingabout a highly restrictive fiscal policy being put into effect. We'retalking about going back [from] what is potentially a horrendouslystimulative fiscal policy to where we thought we were on fiscal policyat the beginning of 1981. And we need to think about our monetarytargeting and our monetary policy generally in that context.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is stating his perspective and outlining the policy approach that has been followed since late 1979. There is no opposition or contradiction presented in the passage.


Passage number 859.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask you this question: If weknew that the Congress and the Administration were going to continueto run huge budgetary deficits over the next two or three years, howwould you change monetary policy. Incidently, I might say that wecalculate that and we've been on the mark exactly the last two yearsup in New York on the budgetary deficit. We calculate, on the Board'seconomic assumptions, that the deficit in fiscal '83 will be $180billion. On our economic assumptions it's only about $166 billion,but there's a lot in there aside from that--it's Bill Ford I'm talkingto. The difference between the $104 billion and the $166 billion isnot simply the difference in economic forecasts. For example, when wego to the specifics of these things, there's a judgment that themanagement savings are just nonsense; they won't materialize forvarious reasons. And there's some overestimation of certain revenues.But even if we assume the $20 billion, we still end up in the $166billion range with a similar set of economic assumptions. But comingback [to my question]: If you were to assume that the deficit isgoing to be $166 or $180 billion in fiscal '83 and that it's going tobe somewhere in the neighborhood of $200 billion in fiscal '84, howwould you change monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a hypothetical question about how monetary policy would be changed if there were large budgetary deficits in the future. The rest of the passage provides some calculations and explanations related to the deficit, but there is no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 860.
MR. GRAMLEY. I was asked by the Economic Advisory Council ofthe American Bankers Association whether the Federal Reserve wouldchange its monetary targets, if in fact we had the kind of explosionof budget deficits implied by current law. And I said we might, butI'm not sure which way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker was asked a question and gave a response without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 861.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what I'm asking you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question seeking clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 862.
MR. GRAMLEY. We talked about the possibility of adding ahighly stimulative monetary policy to a highly stimulative fiscalpolicy. I have no doubt that that's where we would end up. Thealternative of continuing on the course of a monetary restraint-91-6/30-7/1/82discipline in the face of these kinds of budget deficits hascatastrophic implications for the capital markets, for businessinvestment, for the thrift industry, for small businesses, and forfarmers. It is a nightmare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage expresses disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, argues against continuing with a monetary restraint discipline in the face of budget deficits, stating that it would have catastrophic implications for various sectors. This implies a disagreement with the current approach.


Passage number 863.
MR. PARTEE. It might require an easier policy simply to keepthe structure from collapsing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is suggesting a potential solution to a problem without any opposing viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 864.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand the argument. ButI'm not sure how the majority of the FOMC would come out on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing understanding of an argument but is unsure of the stance of the majority of the FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee).


Passage number 865.
MR. MORRIS. I think it's obvious that there is no way we cancontinue to reduce the rate of growth in the money supply in the faceof escalating budget deficits of that size. We will run into anabsolute financial wall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris expressing his belief about the potential consequences of continuing to reduce the rate of growth in the money supply in the face of escalating budget deficits.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 866.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Except there is the opposite argumentthat this is the one way of bringing home to the Congress that theyreally do have to change that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Except there is the opposite argument" indicates that a different viewpoint or argument is being presented.


Passage number 867.
MR. ROOS. Do you think the Congress is serious. If theyknew that we were talking this seriously and not recognizing it as apolitical byplay, I think that would make their whole Fourth of Julyweekend. They didn't really expect us to do more than put togethersome verbiage that would be respectful and dismiss it, did they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for the opinion of someone else and speculating about what Congress might have expected.


Passage number 868.
MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Gramley's response, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 869.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not really prepared to work onthat assumption. I will not psychoanalyze them. But they did pass aresolution and for that reason I think we have to take it seriously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their position and acknowledging that although they are not prepared to psychoanalyze them, they believe it is necessary to take the resolution seriously because it was passed.


Passage number 870.
MS. TEETERS. Don't we have a bit of an apples and orangesproblem here. They are looking at our December targets, which are for1982, and [asking whether] those are appropriate to a fiscal policythat is already established for '82. They are really working on the'83 budget and we haven't yet come down finally on what the '83targets are going to be. I think this needs to be straightened out.And, again, we need to emphasize the inappropriateness of trying toput '83 targets into place in July of '82. They don't know what wehave in mind yet for '83.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 871.
MR. MORRIS. And we don't know what they have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we" do not know what "they" have in mind, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 872.
MS. TEETERS. I know. That's right. That's why February isa much more appropriate time than July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or contradictory statements. It simply states that February is a more appropriate time than July without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 873.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Congress has passed a budgetaryresolution that says [in effect]: "Since we are tightening fiscalpolicy, you fellows ought to reevaluate and, by implication, ease."Therefore, if we conclude that the Congress actually is not tighteningfiscal policy, then presumably by the same logic the Congress wouldnot want us to ease because they haven't succeeded in taking thetighter fiscal action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply presenting a hypothetical scenario and discussing the consequences that would follow from it. It does not express any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 874.
MR. WALLICH. But easing under this framework can only mean aconstant monetary policy with interest rates falling because ofsmaller government borrowing. Looking to the distant future, any6/30-7/1/82increase in money growth that isn't for a very short period can onlylead to higher interest rates via higher inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their view that easing under the given framework would result in a constant monetary policy with falling interest rates due to smaller government borrowing. They also suggest that an increase in money growth over a longer period would ultimately lead to higher inflation and interest rates. This passage does not include any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 875.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me put the other side of thisforward. I'm not talking about the substance of what they've donewhich, with obvious skepticism, is clear. I'm just looking at it interms of the analytics. There is a respectable body of economicopinion that says there is some degree of tradeoff between fiscalpolicy and monetary policy. I'm not thinking of the structuralbusiness, but that theory is that the tighter fiscal policy is, themore room there is for increasing the money supply without any netinflationary impact. Now, individual members of the Committee may notbelieve that theory, but it's not a totally unrespectable body ofeconomic doctrine. One answer to them would be that nobody in theCommittee believes that particular theory. But I don't know whetheryou want to go that far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting an alternative viewpoint, but they do not argue or disagree with the original statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 876.
MR. WALLICH. In the long run there's very little support forthat view because even the people who would argue this for the shortrun believe in the long-run neutrality of money and that more moneytherefore just means higher prices, not higher output. Now, if we aretold to do this for a year and then everything changes and we go backto the old targets, that is at least intellectually defensible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his disagreement with the view that increasing the money supply will lead to higher output. He argues that even those who support this view in the short run believe in the long-run neutrality of money, which suggests that increasing the money supply will only result in higher prices, not higher output. Therefore, he sees very little support for this view in the long run.


Passage number 877.
MR. PARTEE. Well, definitely you have to key into yourthinking the fact that we're so much below an optimal utilizationrate. It might well be that a perfectly respectable economist who isa Nobel prize winner might take the view that there could be room formore expansive monetary policy [as] we are reestablishing a basis fora higher level of operations. And once we have established thoseoperations in the market and are getting that kind of effect, then Ithink people would say we do have to pull back. But we might betalking about a period of several years duration to bring us back.Nancy has pointed out how low the utilization rates are and how highthe unemployment rate is. Those things are not necessary. Whenpeople talk about monetary neutrality they are talking about a steadystate economy also, which we don't have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 878.
MR. MORRIS. But if you're talking about the monetary/fiscalmix, you would have to conclude that fiscal policy is going to getmore expansionary from this point on. The question is: How much moreexpansionary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about fiscal policy becoming more expansionary.


Passage number 879.
MS. TEETERS. We don't really know, Frank, until we see whatactions they actually are going to take this summer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker, Ms. Teeters, is unsure of what actions will be taken and expresses the need to wait and see.


Passage number 880.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 881.
 Just on the basis of any set of projections wenow have--MS. TEETERS. But there is no final action. We don't knowwhat they're going to come out with so we're left literally in limboas to what next year's fiscal policy is going to be. We suspect it'sgoing to be very expansionary; I share that expectation. But we don'thave anything from Congress at this point on any side: on taxes, onappropriations, or anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there is no final action and uncertainty regarding next year's fiscal policy. They also mention their suspicion of it being expansionary, but highlight the absence of any input from Congress on taxes or appropriations. This indicates a lack of agreement or consensus on the future fiscal policy.


Passage number 882.
MR. CORRIGAN. What we should say to them on this is not toworry too much about this mix question just yet. My inclination would-93-6/30-7/1/82be just to state that there is no evidence to speak of that theunderlying structural problem of the deficit has been dealt with. Andas long as we're faced with prospects for deficits [of the magnitude]that Mr. Kichline has for 1983, there's simply not room for theeconomy to behave in a reasonable way. This analysis-- with thoseflow of funds numbers, as imperfect as they are--to me is justoverwhelming. We can't have the government soaking up 50 percent ofthe credit in the whole economy and expect that the economy is goingto work well. It's an intolerable situation. That just can't work.And there is nothing we can do in terms of wiggling the money supplyby a couple of percentage points that is going to make a bigdifference as long as we have that situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker (Mr. Corrigan) is presenting his analysis and opinion on the deficit and its impact on the economy.


Passage number 883.
MR. GRAMLEY. The real problem is not so much the size of thedeficit for fiscal '83; it is the continuing expansion of the deficiteven in the face of a well-functioning economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is discussing the problem of the deficit and highlights that the size of the deficit for fiscal '83 is not the main issue. Rather, he focuses on the concern of the deficit's continuous expansion despite a well-functioning economy.


Passage number 884.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's what I mean by the statement that theunderlying structural problem simply has not been dealt with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements. It simply states the speaker's belief that the underlying structural problem has not been addressed.


Passage number 885.
MR. WALLICH. And there is no way we could cure thatsituation by accelerating the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Wallich is presented as a fact and there is no indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 886.
MR. GRAMLEY. One could argue as to whether or not there is acrowding out going on at the moment, at least in terms of the level ofshort-term interest rates. But there is simply no question whateverthat in a well functioning economy, if the deficit rises to 5-1/4percent of GNP, there is no way to avoid extensive crowding out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It presents a statement about crowding out in the economy without any opposing arguments or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 887.
MR. CORRIGAN. Again, those GNP comparisons are interesting;but the one that just hits me dead between the eyes is that 50 percentof the total credit flows in the economy [will be taken bygovernment].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is expressing his personal reaction to the statistic that 50 percent of the total credit flows will be taken by the government. The phrase "hits me dead between the eyes" suggests that Mr. Corrigan strongly disagrees or is shocked by this fact.


Passage number 888.
MR. GRAMLEY. Even better yet is to take the ratio of the netprivate savings. Net private savings is between 7 and 8 percent ofGNP, as a rough estimate, so you're talking about 3/4 of the totalbeing taken by the deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information about the ratio of net private savings and how much of the total is taken by the deficit.


Passage number 889.
MR. PARTEE. There has to be a current crowding out, Lyle.After all, I think anyone would agree that there would be more housingdemand if interest rates were significantly lower and that, therefore,interest rates are crowding out some housing demand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. PARTEE, is expressing his opinion that there is a current crowding out effect on housing demand due to high interest rates. He assumes that anyone would agree with this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 890.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I have no doubt that interest rates arehigh. What I'm questioning is why. My theory is that I have a hardtime explaining the level of short-term interest rates as a phenomenonassociated with the deficit. Now, the long-term rates clearly are,and there is some crowding out from that standpoint because of theexpected future interest rate impact of this deficit impinging oncurrent investors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that interest rates are high but questions the reason behind it. The speaker's theory suggests that the deficit may not be the main factor driving short-term interest rates, whereas long-term rates are more directly impacted by the deficit. This implies a disagreement or contention regarding the specific relationship between the deficit and short-term interest rates.


Passage number 891.
MS. TEETERS. Our problem is not the current amount that isgoing to the federal government. It's the fact that it's going tostay that large as we move back into [higher rates of] capacityutilization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the current amount going to the federal government and expressing concern about it remaining large as capacity utilization increases. It does not involve disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 892.
-94-6/30-7/1/82MR. CORRIGAN. That's correct. It's going to grow. We candebate whether we have a crowding out problem today. But if we getinto '83 and have any kind of growth in the economy and any kind ofprivate credit demand building up because of healthy developments inthe economy, boom, there's no place to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "We can debate whether we have a crowding out problem today" suggests that there may be differing opinions or perspectives, but it does not indicate any direct disagreement or contention.


Passage number 893.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, Lyle, you're aware that the highrates in the bond market are forcing companies to go much more heavilyinto short-term credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact or observation about the current situation in the bond market, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 894.
MR. GRAMLEY. I don't find that argument at all convincing.The reason why long-term interest rates are high is because investorsare reluctant to buy long, so they buy short. And we're transferringthe credit demand as well as the supply into the short-term markets.So, I don't see why that should have an effect on short-term ratesexcept to the extent that the fear of deficits is generating increaseddemand for the aggregates that the Federal Reserve controls. And tothat extent, yes, one can explain high short-term interest rates thatway except that a central bank which recognizes what is going onpresumably has the option to increase the growth rate of thoseaggregates to take that into account. So, on net, I end up saying thefear of the future deficit causes high long-term rates now but I'm notsure at all that it should affect short-term interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, disagrees with the argument being presented and offers his own perspective on the reasons for high long-term interest rates and their potential effect on short-term interest rates. He questions the validity of the argument and suggests that the central bank could adjust the growth rate of certain aggregates to counteract the impact of the fear of future deficits on short-term rates.


Passage number 895.
MR. PARTEE. Of course, the budget resolution gives as acondition, as I understand it, obtaining substantially lower orpermanently smaller deficits. We don't have the crowding out problem,Jerry, if that part of the resolution comes about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement of understanding and agreement regarding the budget resolution condition.


Passage number 896.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually looking at the passage itself. Please provide the passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 897.
 They haven't got--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose one assumes that spending orrevenue [measures] of some cyclically adjusted level were going to besubstantially approved by something like what is implied by the budgetresolution. Would that cause people to think differently about thesetargets, which we haven't decided upon yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is posing a hypothetical scenario and does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 898.
MR. CORRIGAN(.). Not I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Corrigan is not involved in something, without any conflict or disagreement being mentioned.


Passage number 899.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 900.
 I would--MR. GRAMLEY. I certainly might. I would want to keep myoptions open. I think that could have a major effect on expectedinflation rates and, therefore, on current interest rates. It couldhave a major effect on demands for the monetary aggregates because ofwhat happens to the level of interest rates and expected inflationrates. I would want to keep an open mind to the possibility thatcomplete and thorough resolution of the budget problem would give usan opportunity to follow a more expansive monetary policy. I grantHenry's point that in the long run what determines prices is the stockof money, providing one makes sufficient assumptions about thecompetitive character of the markets and so on. But I'm afraid thatlong-run period exceeds my term as a Governor; so, during the periodwhen I'm here, I'd like to think about adjustments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that resolving the budget problem could allow for a more expansive monetary policy, while acknowledging the long-term impact of the stock of money on prices. This implies a difference in opinion on the appropriate approach to monetary policy.


Passage number 901.
MR. WALLICH. You can write your Congressman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply mentions the action of writing to one's Congressman, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 902.
-95-6/30-7/1/82MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that we could risk trying to geta fuller utilization if there wasn't so much fear and concern andcrowding out and everything that comes from very large budgetdeficits. That would be another way of putting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 903.
MR. BOEHNE. We could say that, if we had a credible outlookfor smaller deficits, interest rates would come down in the normalcourse and that the Open Market Committee would certainly besupportive of those drops.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Boehne is stating a hypothetical scenario and expressing a general consensus. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 904.
MR. FORD. Not unless we widen the band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the absence of any contrasting viewpoints or conflicting statements. Mr. Ford simply states that widening the band is not necessary.


Passage number 905.
MR. GRAMLEY. Let's go back to the Chairman's discussion.That decline in interest rates, together with reduced expectations ofinflation, might have an important bearing on the trend increase inthe velocity of money. We would need to take that into account. Ithink Chuck has a good point. We are a long ways from full employmentof our resources. We do need to be concerned about the speed withwhich we get back to a higher level of resource utilization, and oneof the factors we clearly need to take into account is what fiscalpolicy is doing in this respect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, agrees with the point made by Chuck about the need to be concerned about resource utilization and the impact of fiscal policy.


Passage number 906.
MR. PARTEE. The chart we had yesterday shows us not gettingback at all in the forecast period. As a matter of fact, it looked tome as if utilization rates were drifting off a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is stating his observation about the chart.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 907.
MR. ROOS. What is the purpose of our response. Is it reallyto offer an intelligent guide to these fellows on Capitol Hill or justto get a response done. I think they are not asking for economicanalysis; they're playing politics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrase "I think they are not asking for economic analysis; they're playing politics." It suggests that there is a difference in opinion or perspective regarding the purpose of the response and the intentions of those on Capitol Hill.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 908.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but when Paul appears to testifyhe may be asked what the reaction of the FOMC was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions a potential disagreement or contention regarding Paul's testimony and the FOMC's reaction.


Passage number 909.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I may have to volunteer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the speaker's personal thought and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 910.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then do you want to summarize thisacid discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if the listener wants a summary of the discussion.


Passage number 911.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I reserve the right to handle that in theway I think appropriate but I think I may have to volunteer something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal discretion and intention to handle something in their own way.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 912.
MR. WALLICH. You may get a technically oriented questionalong these lines: If stimulus is withdrawn through a lower deficit,is the reduction in interest rates that follows from that sufficientto counter that withdrawn stimulus. And you'd have to stretch a pointconsiderably in order to say yes. You really have to assume thatinvestment is enormously responsive to a decline in interest rates forthat to happen. So, on a temporary basis, one cannot deny that areduction in the deficit generates some reduction in expansion. Butthe difficulty of getting back on track with monetary policy is alwaysthe primary thing. And the fine-tuning that we can do for a half-yearor a year seems to lead us back to where we used to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker argues that a reduction in the deficit does generate some reduction in expansion, but ultimately the difficulty of getting back on track with monetary policy is the primary concern. This implies a disagreement about the effectiveness of reducing the deficit as a means of stimulating the economy.


Passage number 913.
MR. PARTEE. If the Chairman has to say that if Congressreduces the deficit we'll certainly have a less good economy thanotherwise, he might as well stop making the comment because that's akiss of death in terms of trying to bring about more discipline on the-96-6/30-7/1/82fiscal side. So, at the very least, we would want to have a monetaryeffect from the combination of interest rates and targets that wouldequal the loss of stimulus that would come from a reduction in thedeficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a general opinion about the potential consequences of reducing the deficit.


Passage number 914.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's another way of approachingthis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states that there is an alternative approach to something without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 915.
 If we say that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I was suggesting earlier--thatthere is a respectable body of economic doctrine that suggests that.And everybody said no, that's not true. I'm not sure it's altogethernot true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is presenting their previous suggestion and acknowledges that there may be some truth to it, but they are unsure. However, there is no direct conflicting opinion mentioned.


Passage number 916.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response without more information about the passage.


Passage number 917.
 No, I think--MR. WALLICH. It's not true in the long run.SPEAKER(.). I'll agree with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers express agreement with the statement.


Passage number 918.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 919.
 I'm not even sure about that, but I--MR. GRAMLEY. There's another way of approaching it, which isto say that we have to base monetary policy on the assumption of areasonable fiscal deficit, which does not involve excessive crowdingout and which is, therefore, in the neighborhood of, say, 2 to 2-1/2percent of GNP. Accordingly, that's the fiscal policy assumption thatour monetary policy is based on. Now, automatically, if the Congressdoesn't hit that kind of reasonable fiscal policy, then monetarypolicy bites harder. And that reminds Congress of where itsresponsibilities are. I'm only saying that half seriously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker is suggesting one approach to monetary policy, while another person interrupts and suggests a different approach.


Passage number 920.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot grow a beard.


Passage number 921.
 I wouldn't put the last phrase quite that way, butthe idea--MR. ROOS. Is Congressman Fauntroy going to put you throughthis kind of exercise, too, at his hearing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a slight disagreement with the wording of the phrase but agreeing with the overall idea.


Passage number 922.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I think any Congressman would. Idon't think it's entirely a political maneuver. Obviously, that is insome people's minds and some of their political coloration. But Isuspect that if you ask a typical Congressman whether he thinks thisis a real issue, he is going to say yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that most Congressmen would consider the issue at hand to be real, despite acknowledging that some people may view it as a political maneuver.


Passage number 923.
MR. ROOS. Because he wants to pass the buck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement in the passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone wants to pass the buck.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 924.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who's passing the buck. He says he wantsto be responsible and he asks straightforwardly: How much easing ofmonetary policy can we get when I commit political suicide bytightening the budget. I want to do the right thing for the country.But I'm not going to go through all this agony if I don't think it'sgoing to make any difference in monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is frustrated and seems to be questioning the effectiveness of their actions in influencing monetary policy. They also express concern about the potential consequences of tightening the budget. This suggests a disagreement or conflict between the speaker's desires and their perception of the potential outcome.


Passage number 925.
 It's a very--MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage doesn't contain any statements or information that could lead to contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 926.
 Yes, but when the politicians--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Most of the economists in the UnitedStates are telling them that is right--that it's a relevant question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage. The phrase "Most of the economists in the United States are telling them that is right" implies that there is a difference of opinion between the politicians and the economists on the relevancy of the question being discussed.


Passage number 927.
6/30-7/1/82MR. MORRIS. But the issue for the Congress is not the rateof growth of the money supply; it's interest rates. It seems to me wecan tell them unequivocally that if they get the budget deficit down,interest rates will be lower than they otherwise would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an opinion or perspective by stating that the issue for Congress is interest rates rather than the rate of growth of the money supply. It then suggests that lower interest rates can be achieved by reducing the budget deficit.


Passage number 928.
 And thatclearly is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've told them that any number oftimes. They go on to say: Can you help it with increasing the growthof the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has communicated something multiple times and then mentions a question asked by someone else.


Passage number 929.
MR. WALLICH. We help by not absorbing that by a fasterreduction of the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, suggests a faster reduction of the money supply as a means of assistance.


Passage number 930.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you, Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage, as it simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Wallich.


Passage number 931.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. CORRIGAN" simply provides a name or a reference to someone, without expressing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 932.
 Can't you make the point that if we have thisbrave new world where all these nice things would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a view that is very widely held, Iwould say, in the market as well as in the halls of Congress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a widely held view.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 933.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, it's in the official Democraticparty approach: If you tighten fiscal policy, then there would be aneasing of monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that there is a contention or disagreement within the Democratic party regarding fiscal and monetary policies. Some members of the party support tightening fiscal policy, while others argue for an easing of monetary policy.


Passage number 934.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some distinguished members of the businesscommunity as recently as last week [suggested] this approach.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 935.
 But they're not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they are subject to it. Well, somepeople have hinted at the point or approached it in a differentdirection. In terms of all the psychological signals we're sending, Iwould feel more comfortable about taking chances when we make allthese tactical decisions on monetary policy against a background of astrong budget than I do when the budget is not strong. And there'ssomething real in it too. If they suddenly cut $100 billion out ofthe budget, I think we would have a lot more psychological freedom, ifI may put it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker first states that they believe monetary policy decisions should be made against a strong budget. However, they mention that some people have hinted at or approached the point in a different direction. This suggests a difference of opinion or disagreement regarding the relationship between monetary policy and the strength of the budget.


Passage number 936.
MR. WALLICH. Perhaps we could offer not to cut theaggregates the following year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a suggestion or proposal being made by Mr. Wallich.


Passage number 937.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we could discuss different tactics,Henry, but I would say what I feel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on discussing different tactics.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 938.
MR. PARTEE. Henry, you're getting to the point of exceedingLarry Roos in the rigidity of your position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of words like "exceeding" and "rigidity" implies that there is contention or disagreement between Henry and Larry Roos. The passage suggests that Henry's position is becoming more extreme or inflexible compared to Larry's.


Passage number 939.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I listen a great deal to the accord of[1951], which is--SPEAKER(.). That's a profane remark, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is stating that he listens to a certain accord, and the speaker interrupts with a comment about the remark being profane. However, this doesn't indicate any direct contention or disagreement between the two individuals.


Passage number 940.
MR. WALLICH. This tradeoff of fiscal versus monetary policyexists, of course, in the old framework where monetary policy isinterest rates and fiscal policy is fiscal policy. But when monetary-98-6/30-7/1/82policy is money supply, there's only one thing that influencesinterest rates, and that's fiscal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is providing a description of the relationship between monetary policy and fiscal policy.


Passage number 941.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Real.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any specific statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 942.
MR. WALLICH. Real [interest rates], that's right. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 943.
MR. CORRIGAN. Can you make the analytical point, to giveourselves a little more movement and maneuvering room, that if thisproblem were dealt with, it would leave open the possibility at leastthat the public's demand for money--the thing we call money--might behigher at any level of interest rates. So, in those circumstances,quite apart from Henry's arguments, we might conclude that a highermoney growth rate would be entirely appropriate and not in any wayassociated with higher inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a hypothetical scenario and making an analytical point. There is no opposing argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 944.
MR. MARTIN. "Might" be appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context for us to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The statement "Might be appropriate" does not necessarily indicate disagreement.


Passage number 945.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or interactions that suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 946.
MR. PARTEE. That's awfully vague.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The person speaking simply expresses that the statement being made is vague.


Passage number 947.
MR. GRAMLEY. It would certainly be my sense that it would beappropriate for us to follow a course of policy, whatever that meantin terms of monetary aggregates, that would not only let interestrates decline in the context of reduced deficits for the future butdecline enough to do what Chuck says--to improve the performance ofthe economy. And I certainly would stand ready to follow anaggregates policy consistent with that because I do think it wouldtake away the fears of inflation. It would give us an opportunity toshade on the up side, without nearly as much worry that we would losecredibility and lose control of the inflation problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, agrees with the idea of following a policy that would let interest rates decline and improve the performance of the economy. He also believes that such a policy would help reduce fears of inflation and maintain control over the inflation problem.


Passage number 948.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments that peoplewould like to make. I assume that when we vote on these [long-runranges] you will all have the Congressional considerations in mind,however you may dispose of them. I heard a variety of views. I don'tthink I can report a conclusive opinion on the part of the FederalOpen Market Committee as to precisely what it would do if it wereconvinced that the budget was going to be substantially better. But Icertainly hear a certain amount of opinion that it's something to betaken into account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there are various views and opinions on the topic.


Passage number 949.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And you also can report that there'sunanimity that as yet we don't see any evidence, nor do the markets,of a credible tightening [of fiscal policy].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that there is unanimity, meaning agreement or consensus, that there is currently no evidence of a credible tightening of fiscal policy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 950.
MR. MARTIN. Do we endorse the first step that they've takenseparately. At least there is a resolution, however dubious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges that there is a resolution, but expresses doubt or skepticism about its validity or effectiveness, implying some disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 951.
 We haveto put some positive--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not so sure that a phonyresolution like this helps or is a useful first step.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "I'm not so sure that a phony resolution like this helps or is a useful first step" indicates disagreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 952.
MR. MARTIN. Would you rather have a phony resolution or noresolution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply posing a question and does not express any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 953.
-99-6/30-7/1/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that's unfair. I don't thinkit's a phony resolution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is voicing their opinion but there is no indication of a disagreement or argument between multiple parties.


Passage number 954.
 They probably will pass the tax measure inthe next few days in the Senate, but they wouldn't pass it withoutgoing through--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, that's probably around $15 or$18 billion. Okay, we get that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a statement and a response without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 955.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And [there likely will be] some spendingcuts that they would not have done otherwise. These are not easydecisions for them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating that the decisions to make spending cuts are not easy for the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 956.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there are some things in therethat just can't possibly be achieved, such as the managementobjectives that they've built in and a few other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a personal opinion and expressing skepticism about the achievability of certain things in a specific context.


Passage number 957.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there is any question thatwe can legitimately express some question about the whole thing. Butthat's not the same as saying: "You didn't do anything and it's aphony resolution." I don't think it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there can be legitimate questions about the situation, but they do not outright say that someone did nothing or that the resolution is fake.


Passage number 958.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, they might have faced up to theproblem more if they had a more realistic assessment of what went intothat $103.9 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement presenting a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 959.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a political question. Therewasn't a very big margin in getting this one passed; and thealternative, I suppose, would have been to be left with nothing. Theydid what they could do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement describing a political situation without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 960.
MS. TEETERS. The estimates OMB is going to release on orabout the 15th of July don't come to $103.9 billion, I assume. Theirestimates are closer to ours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is acknowledging that the estimates from OMB are similar to their own.


Passage number 961.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but I heard a lower figure recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions that they heard a lower figure recently, but it does not imply any disagreement or contradictory opinion.


Passage number 962.
MR. FORD. They are closer to ours, you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Ford is simply repeating and confirming what the speaker said before.


Passage number 963.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They may be reducing their projecteddeficit. I think maybe they are nearer the Administration's estimatesnow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the subject may be reducing their projected deficit. The phrase "I think maybe they are nearer the Administration's estimates now" suggests that the speaker's opinion aligns with the possibility of the reduction. However, without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is any significant disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 964.
 How much they believe it--MS. TEETERS. So, we're not going to be the only voice in thewilderness that says $103.9 billion is a fake--or is optimistic,excuse me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that there may be other voices who also believe that $103.9 billion is not accurate.


Passage number 965.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, we're not alone in terms of themarket and all the rest. But I tell you, the Administration faces asubstantive problem, obviously, in terms of what they really think.I'm sure they will then [unintelligible] to think about what they wantto say as opposed to what they think. I don't know where they'regoing to come out precisely on those grounds. But I think we haveconsidered this about as much as is fruitful at this point, unlesssomebody wants to put anything else forward. And while we are meetingwe can confirm the date of the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the Administration's thoughts and considerations without presenting any contradictory opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 966.
MR. ALTMANN. August 24th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a date without any opposing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 967.
-100-6/30-7/1/82 -101-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. August 24th is the date of the nextmeeting and we will now conclude the Open Market Committee meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 968.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it is a long time between meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about the time between meetings being long.


Passage number 969.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, it is a long time. Well, we can alwaysmeet on the 22nd of July if we all have to come back to testify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no apparent disagreement or contention in this passage. MS. Teeters simply suggests a date (the 22nd of July) for the group to meet if they all have to come back to testify.


