Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 20, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 20, 1985, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanBallesBlackForrestalKeehnMartinParteeRiceSegerWallichMr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, 1/ General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, Prell,Scheld, and Siegman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting after action to approve minutes for the July meeting.Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Jack Guynn, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of AtlantaMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, and Lang, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Kansas City, and Philadelphia, respectivelyMessrs. McNees, Miller, Pearce, and Beebe, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Minneapolis, Dallasand San Francisco, respectivelyMr. Stevens, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ClevelandMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements or information that could be contested or disagreed with. It is simply a listing of the individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 20, 1985CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes of the lastmeeting. [Secretary's Note: Approved without objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The minutes of the last meeting were approved without objection.


Passage number 3.
]MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 4.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 5.
MR. WALLICH. The drop that you described, which goes back tothe peak, has been quite substantial--I think 20 percent against themark and 16 percent [overall]. Do people regard that as a very rapidslide in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents figures and seeks people's opinions.


Passage number 6.
MR. CROSS. Well, I don't think it has been a dramatic slide.It has been on average about 17 percent or so, and against theEuropean currencies it has been more than that. So, it is certainlyenough of a decline in the period of six months or less that it hasattracted attention. It seems that the dollar has made this rathersubstantial adjustment, but I don't think there is a lot ofexpectation that it is necessarily going to fall off the table.Certainly, there is a generally bearish tone to the dollar and to themarket's attitude toward it. And to the extent that these things canbe generalized, there seems to be an expectation of possiblecontinuing softness unless our economy changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's perspective on the decline of the dollar without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 7.
MR. MARTIN. You put quite a bit of emphasis on the Treasuryrefunding as an indicator that foreigners, including the Japanese, arenot going to rush to sell their U.S. securities. I am not quarrelingwith that implication of your comment, but can you broaden thatanalysis a little. Are foreigners tending to shorten their maturitiesas they roll securities over. What kinds of, for want of a betterterm, leading financial indicators are we getting out of theEuromarkets with regard to holdings of dollar-denominated versusotherwise denominated securities--these securities, whatever you callthem, on which the interest is paid in one currency and the principalin another. Can you expand on that a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a request for further explanation and expansion on a particular topic.


Passage number 8.
MR. CROSS. Well, it is difficult to say very much because wereally don't have enough information. Before the last refunding,which of course was a substantial one, there had been concernsexpressed that [foreign investors] might stay away from thatparticular operation and that it would be in difficulty as a result.That didn't seem to happen. It was more the case of a nonbarking dog.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is not enough information to make a definitive statement and providing an example to support this point.


Passage number 9.
MR. MARTIN. But of course we didn't have a special offeringto foreigners either, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question being asked by Mr. Martin.


Passage number 10.
MR. CROSS. That is correct. What we do know--or what we seeand hear about--is that the Japanese, at least beginning in June, havetended to start doing more hedging. They continue to have substantiallong-term outflows into dollars and U.S. securities, but they havetended, for I think the first time, to be doing more hedging. Also,we hear at least anecdotally, but it is very difficult to know howmuch attention to pay to these things, that one of the factors thathas tended to keep sterling somewhat strong has been the tendency ofinvestors to diversify a little toward sterling, which has been paying8/20/85very high interest rates. But these [reports] are anecdotal; youcan't really get a very sound understanding of something as large andas complicated as this market on the basis of a relatively smallnumber of conversations and what you hear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 11.
MR. MARTIN. Not even a shortening in maturities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Martin.


Passage number 12.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I could add a little comment on that too.Governor Martin. What we are hearing anecdotally also suggests alesser pace of foreign buying, but continuing interest in theintermediate and long-term area. I don't get any sense, particularlyfrom the dealers who have active Japanese operations, of a shorteningof maturities. They are taking a little less but are continuing tolook at the 10-year and longer area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents information and observations without conflicting opinions.


Passage number 13.
MR. WALLICH. If I may comment on this: The idea ofshortening [maturities] is that they are more liquid and investors canget out more rapidly, which is a concern. But the investors whobelieve that they can ride out a substantial fall of the dollarpresumably look at the long end and they probably would be right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own perspective or comment on the idea of shortening maturities and acknowledging that investors who believe they can handle a fall in the dollar may be looking at the long end. There is no contradiction or argument present.


Passage number 14.
MR. PARTEE. Sam, the price of gold has increasedsignificantly over this period that you are talking about too--that isto say, the dollar has dropped relative to gold. Gold wouldn't havechanged much in price in terms of marks or Swiss francs, I don'tsuppose. Is that all that is being reflected here: that the market ismade in Switzerland and Germany. Or do you think there is somethingelse behind this move in gold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is asking Sam about the reasons behind the increase in the price of gold and whether it is solely due to changes in the value of the dollar or if there could be other factors involved.


Passage number 15.
MR. CROSS. Well, I think the interesting thing about gold isthat the price has risen somewhat as the dollar has weakened, as yousuggested, but it hasn't risen all that much. And in terms of theSwiss franc, it has been reasonably stable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply provides information about the price of gold and its stability in relation to the Swiss franc.


Passage number 16.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that is probably right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
MR. CROSS. One of the interesting things has been that thedifficulties in South Africa do not seem to have caused a greaterincrease in the price of gold. Now, there are all kinds of questionsabout that. There is a feeling that substantial supplies are beingwithheld from the market by the main producers, the South Africans andthe Russians in particular. As the price moves up, then they tend tosell a little more and then it goes back down again. That seems tohave been the pattern. One might have thought, with the concerns inSouth Africa and the possibility being talked about of mining strikesand other potential supply disruptions, that the price might haverisen more than it has. It's now about $336 today, and that's not upall that much from where it was before so much attention was beingpaid to this. What has happened is that the price of platinum hasgone up. I gather that South Africa is more critical to the platinummarket than to the gold market, and platinum has moved up much morerapidly. But gold in a sense has shown relatively less buoyancy, inlight of all these factors, than one might have expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker mentions that there is a feeling that substantial supplies of gold are being withheld from the market by the main producers, but this is not supported by direct evidence. The speaker also states that one might have expected the price of gold to have risen more due to concerns in South Africa, but it has not risen as much as expected. These statements introduce differing viewpoints on the reasons for the relatively low increase in the price of gold.


Passage number 18.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Partee, simply observes or acknowledges something.


Passage number 19.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage or information provided about Mr. Sternlight.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
8/20/85MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement is presented as evidence, but without context or further information, it is not clear what the contention or disagreement is about.


Passage number 21.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 22.
MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, was there any particular reaction tothe Bank of America dividend action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks about a particular reaction to the Bank of America dividend action.


Passage number 23.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we were following their fundingoperations closely on the heels of that, and they did experience aslight widening of spreads--maybe by 0.5 or something like that. Itwas not a big reaction. They have a quite liquid operation; they havean enormous local deposit base. They generally are sellers ratherthan buyers in the overnight fed funds market. They have had a littleerosion of the commercial paper funding of the holding company but,based on our observations, I would say they are weathering it prettywell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about a company's funding operations and how they are managing it.


Passage number 24.
MR. GUFFEY. What are the current spreads on the Farm CreditAgency--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a question from Mr. Guffey.


Passage number 25.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The current spreads would range from about 5to 15 basis points on maturities up to one year--and those had beenjust about even with Treasuries earlier--to maybe 40 or 50 basispoints on some of the longer maturities, which earlier had spreads ofmaybe 20 to 25 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating the current spreads on different maturities without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 26.
MR. KEEHN. Did they defer a long-term issue within the lastweek or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 27.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Not that I am aware of. I think the marketis looking for them to announce a term issue within the next fewweeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's belief about the market's expectations.


Passage number 28.
MR. MELZER. Peter, how would you characterize dealerpositions right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 29.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Given all the hedges on positions that aretaken these days, it has become very difficult to make sensiblecomments about where dealer positions are. My impression is thatthere has been a pretty good distribution from the refunding that wasjust paid for a few days ago. I'd say they are on the moderate side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's impression of the dealer positions, indicating that they are on the moderate side.


Passage number 30.
MR. WALLICH. Peter, you mentioned the Japanese firms. Ihave always felt quite strongly about national treatment but I see inthe press a statement that Karl Otto Poehl made after the lastBundesbank meeting that he takes a very different line. He refers toJapanese firms that want to come into the German market to assume thislead role; [the German authorities] have told them "no" untilsomething is worked out with German banks in Japan. That's just asidelight on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply mentioning a different viewpoint expressed by Karl Otto Poehl, but he does not express his own disagreement or contention with that viewpoint.


Passage number 31.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. I think in the UK also there has beenmore of an attitude of looking at it as reciprocal--looking forspecific olive branches and reciprocity before Japanese firms arewelcomed into the developing gilt market in London. We have beenfollowing the situation and I'm still collecting impressions of justwhat the situation is in Japan; but my impression so far is that atleast a respectable number of U.S. firms--8 or 10 or something like8/20/85that--have quite good access to Japanese investors, in terms ofselling U.S. securities in the Japanese market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes different attitudes in the UK and Japan regarding reciprocal treatment of firms in the gilt market. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 32.
MS. SEGER. Peter and I discussed this a little because Ithink this is a bigger issue than just the Open Market Desk in thathow we deal with Japan has general public policy interest. We have sofew levers to use on them, and people I know on Wall Street tell me[the playing field] is not even. Maybe it is in a narrow governmentdealer sense; I don't know. But certainly, looking at the financialmarkets across the board, we treat them a lot better in this countrythan they treat us. I think we ought to consider a lot more anglesthan whether or not the dealer in securities is well capitalized anddoes a big volume of business. I am a competitive person, and I thinkit is only fair that it go both ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a perspective on the issue of how the US deals with Japan and the fairness of the relationship.


Passage number 33.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [If no one else has] any comments, wemight as well turn to Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It suggests that if no one has any comments, the speaker proposes turning to Mr. Kichline.


Passage number 34.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating that someone named Mr. Kichline made a statement. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 35.
]MR. PARTEE. You depend on a levelling out of net imports toget this improvement in GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The mention of "levelling out of net imports" suggests a disagreement about the potential improvement in GNP.


Passage number 36.
MR. KICHLINE. That is right. Was that a question to me orto Ted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply confirms that the statement made by someone else is correct.


Passage number 37.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you made the presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  MR. PARTEE is expressing that the presentation was made.


Passage number 38.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, there are two parts that really areimportant. We have very clearly much slower growth in final sales;instead of numbers in the 5 percent area, we are talking about numbersmuch less than that--something in the 2-1/2 percent area. So we aretalking about a substantial slowing. What is going to happen in thisenvironment for us to get 3 percent growth is essentially thatinventories are not negative--that they are basically a smallcontributor--and that the deterioration in the trade balance comes toa halt pretty quickly. Ted, maybe you want to talk a little aboutsome of those numbers. Maybe not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 39.
MR. TRUMAN. Maybe not. One contributing factor clearly isthat there is going to be less demand here. That certainly will beone factor slowing down the rate of increase in imports. It is alsotrue that the rest of the world, while not booming, will be growingsomewhat faster than we will. We feel that the export level wasdepressed, perhaps somewhat artificially, in the second quarter andthat it should pick up some. I think that we have put in a relativelyconservative--well, maybe "agnostic" would be a better way of puttingit--trajectory for non-oil imports. Those imports in real terms hadbeen running somewhat higher than the historical relationships wouldpredict. It is not clear to what extent that is associated withstructural changes in the world economy or with responses to exchangerates, which are not picked up by historical relationships. As thedollar has declined, and assuming it will continue to declinesomewhat, we have chosen not to reverse that. In that sense we havebeen agnostic. Now, you could also say that we have not been sopessimistic as to believe that the phenomenon is going to increase inmagnitude. Basically what we have on the import side is that importsare being driven by the slower growth in the United States and the8/20/85decline in the value of the dollar, some of which has occurred alreadybut much of which--basically for the projection period--is ahead ofus. It is clear that there is considerable uncertainty in thesenumbers, as Jim indicated and as we have indicated before, becauseamong other things they have been bouncing around quite a lot. Icertainly wouldn't rule out the possibility that imports in particularcould rise substantially faster than we have forecast. In fact, wehave the imports in real terms continuing to rise marginally throughthe early part of 1986. It is also true that if they did rise morerapidly, everything else including demand being the same, thenproduction obviously would be lower. On the other hand, to the extentthat we may have been too conservative or shouldn't have beenagnostic, or to the extent that more push comes from the exchange ratethan we have built into the forecast, things could go somewhat theother way. There is some potential possibility that a sharper declinein the dollar, or a faster response to that, could produce more in theway of a cutback earlier than we have put into the forecast. We don'thave anything really happening until early 1986 in quantitative terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the factors that may affect the rate of increase in imports and is presenting different possibilities and potential outcomes.


Passage number 40.
MR. PARTEE. You ordinarily would expect quite a lag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The character is stating a fact or a general expectation.


Passage number 41.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but you get quantity effects that begin toshow through within a quarter or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a response to a statement or question, and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 42.
MR. PARTEE. Within a quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a statement by Mr. Partee without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 43.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but again, you have to go four quarters inorder to get half of the effects and a couple of years before you getall of them. There is considerable difficulty in knowing how tointerpret the first quarter phenomenon where the dollar went far upand came back down. How much in the way of imports were discouragedduring that period or weren't discouraged during that period. That isone of the conundrums involved here. Should you throw out thatexchange rate [move] as basically not affecting anybody's decisions.Or should you include it. If you include it, then you would say thatyou were going to have the lagged effect of the first quarter in somesense feeding on through the remainder of the year. Since we'reforced to fall back on more or less historical relationships, we havebuilt some of that in. I think we could argue that a conservativeapproach to putting the forecast together can be justified on a microor disaggregated level to the extent that we have had and willcontinue to have higher imports of Japanese automobiles in this newfull year and that will work somewhat in the other direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing uncertainties and difficulties in interpreting the effects of the exchange rate and how it may have discouraged imports during a specific period. There is no disagreement or conflict between different viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 44.
MR. PARTEE. If I might ask another question: Jim, what doyou make of the fairly pervasive weakness in nonresidential indicatorsin the last couple of months. Contracts and most of the elementsthere have been off quite substantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking Jim for his perspective on the recent weakness in nonresidential indicators.


Passage number 45.
MR. KICHLINE. As you know, in the office building area, wehave been anticipating for a long time that it would slow down. Thatwas the domestic [equivalent of the] exchange value of the dollar; itkept rising and we said it was supposed to go down. It has been goingdown now. If you look at construction put in place as well ascontracts, as you noted, and permits, the whole ball of wax suggeststhat that indeed is slowing. Now, it slows rather slowly because ofthe fact that there is a long construction lead time. So it is notsomething that we think will collapse. The problem in that area is8/20/85that other indicators of activity--even in industrial buildings,public utilities and so forth--give us a sense that basically it hasbeen weakening. So, in this forecast we have small declines; theycould be larger depending on the assumptions one wants to make. Butthroughout the forecast period we have some small declines. Now, Iwould note that some of these data are very volatile; we have beencaught before where the numbers go down for two or three months andthey snap back. But I think that the fundamentals in vacancy ratesand other things would argue now that perhaps we are in a period wherewe should expect small declines in real terms. And that is what wehave built in throughout the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their observations and analysis of the office building area, specifically regarding its anticipated slowdown and small declines in activity.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 46.
MR. BOEHNE. The main case for getting 3 percent is that theleakages from the foreign sector and inventories don't leak as much.On the other hand, there is the consumer sector, which is 60 somepercent of total final demand. And there are at least some hints--income not growing quite as fast, the debt problems, mortgagedelinquencies up a touch--that maybe that will not go on as it has.There is nothing dramatic, but at least there are a few straws in thewind. In the housing area, as you rightfully pointed out, one wouldexpect some sluggishness in the multifamily area. But in the single-family area, while you would expect a drop in mortgage rates to havesome effect, I wonder if you would expect a drop to have the sameeffect in an era when most mortgages are at variable rates compared toan era when most were at fixed rates. I guess I would expect a dropin rates to have some positive impact on single-family housing starts[but] not be as much of a stimulus in this kind of environment. Iwould like for you to comment some on the downside risks, two of whichI pointed out: the consumer side and single-family housing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne presents the case for getting 3 percent, mentioning that the leakages from the foreign sector and inventories don't leak as much. However, he also points out potential issues with the consumer sector and single-family housing, indicating that there are some downside risks. This indicates a disagreement or contention between the two sides of the argument.


Passage number 47.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't feel quite as nervous aboutpersonal consumption expenditures at the moment as you suggest, if ourincome is right--if we are generating enough income in other sectors--because I think we have basically fairly mild expectations forpersonal consumption expenditures. We have to get some monthlyincreases, however, to get the 3 percent. I think I pointed that out;it is not in the bag. What we are expecting is literally 1-1/2 to 2percent annual rates of increase in personal consumption expendituresfrom now on over the balance of the forecast period. In the firsthalf of the year we have seen 5-1/4 percent increases--just a surge.At that time the saving rate dropped and debt was being taken on insubstantial volume. What we have here is essentially a fairly lowsaving rate, income growth just tracking along, and not really abullish environment. But you can point to the negatives, and the debtside is certainly one. Income growth, I think, is a little risky;there is not a lot of income growth being generated and you don't haveto have too much happening in other sectors to lead to slower growth.So, I don't view it as a big risk in that we really do have a muchslower pace of consumer spending in store.The housing area is one where we may have the lags wrong. Inthinking back, we said some time ago that we had seen a drop of acouple of percentage points in mortgage interest rates and, given thelags, we ought to be seeing some pickup. And we just haven't. Ithink I would abandon that story about the time the August numberscome in. Basically, our notion was that this should have happenedthis summer and it just has not happened yet; if the August numberscome in [and don't show a pickup], I think I will conclude that we8/20/85really have miscalculated what may be driving that. We have gonethrough fairly carefully our sense of what ought to be happening.There is an awful lot of anecdotal evidence floating around: mortgageloan applications are up; appraisers are very busy; and existing homesales have picked up. But new home sales haven't done anything.Single-family starts haven't done anything. We have gone through andidentified some of the positives. With lower interest rates,mortgages are more affordable; the demographics are strong, andhousehold formation is good. On the other side is an environment inwhich expectations of major capital appreciation are not there,probably; tightened mortgage underwriting standards may be doingsomething at the margin; and there is uncertainty over the taxtreatment of interest and property tax deductions. How you slice thatis very important. If we had put this forecast together today, wewould have a lower housing start number and a little lower residentialexpenditures. Those data came in after we put the forecast togetherand were weaker than we had built in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker in this passage is presenting their own thoughts and opinions, but there is no clear contention or disagreement with another person or idea.


Passage number 48.
MR. MARTIN. Jim, let me address Ed's question in a littledifferent way. I don't have any problems with what you said. Butisn't it true that, as the housing market has matured, there has beena shift in the direction of fixed rate mortgage originations and awayfrom adjustable rate mortgage originations. If you go back a fewmonths and take out the spike in the fixed mortgage rate, you reallyhave a decrease of 100 to 150 basis points in that rate; the shift hasbeen to using fixed rate loans. If you go along that line then, thetightening of credit underwriting can offset 100 or 150 points; itcan't offset 200 or 300 points, probably. Perhaps there has not beenthat much improvement at the point of sale fixed rate mortgage,[given] that no appreciation in the house is looked for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is providing additional information and building upon a previous statement, but there is no conflicting point of view or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 49.
 So, just tocomplicate it further--MR. BOEHNE. You know too much about that market, Pres.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 50.
MR. PARTEE. Yesterday I was reading--I think a number of usreceived this--a letter from the home builders. They really had quitean upbeat letter this time on traffic in the subdivisions and on salesand the outlook for sales over the next six months. For them it wasas optimistic as I have seen for a long time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is relaying information about a letter they received from the home builders, which was upbeat and optimistic.


Passage number 51.
MR. KICHLINE. They also had one in June; it was sort ofgoing off the charts in terms of single-family home builders'expectations. That fits with other evidence; I'm just saying that wedon't see it yet in terms of starts having picked up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the evidence suggests an increase in single-family home builders' expectations, but this increase has not yet been seen in terms of housing starts.


Passage number 52.
MR. MARTIN. I never talk personalities but that is aSumicrast survey of home builders and the Colton projection is still1.6, 1.7 million. Let the record not show that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or providing information.


Passage number 53.
MR. BALLES. Jim, now that we have a budget resolution ofsorts, I am wondering what your analysis shows with respect to therevised deficit realistically interpreted for the coming fiscal year.How, if at all, would you change your forecast as a result of thatCongressional action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the analysis and potential changes in forecast based on the recently revised deficit and Congressional action.


Passage number 54.
MR. KICHLINE. The differences from our earlier assumptionswere really quite small. We had assumed a package of about $50billion on our basis and we interpret what actually was accomplished8/20/85and our reading of what likely will be done in the following steps toamount to $45 billion. It is really quite close; we have onlyadjusted a little for that. The way we come out, though, is much lessoptimistic than some. In part, we have a weaker forecast so thatthere is some [difference in the] economic assumptions and lessrevenue. But we also have felt that many of the actions requiresingle-year appropriations bills and that they will be addressing thisyear-in and year-out. There clearly are pressures now in the farmarea to overrun those targets. There are some phony things, but it isstripping away the phony things. It really does take persistentaction. So, in the near term we are fairly close; where I think Iwould be much less optimistic is in year two and year three. There wehave not gone through an explicit process, but of course the CBOrecently came forth with some numbers and they were considerablyhigher by the time you get to the third year. The Congress used veryoptimistic assumptions and also assumed actions that appear to usrather difficult to undertake. So I think it is a story that may haveto be revisited. Our [estimate] on their basis of the total deficitis about $191 billion for fiscal year 1986 in contrast to theirassumed $175 billion or so. We are in the range of $15 to $18 billionhigher than Congress would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the differences in assumptions and forecasts made by Mr. Kichline and Congress regarding the budget deficit.


Passage number 55.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Axilrod or any context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 56.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is simply the introduction to a statement by Mr. Axilrod. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 57.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now it's all very clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Now it's all very clear" suggests that there is a clear understanding or agreement among the individuals involved.


Passage number 58.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't know he had stopped. Don't you haveanother paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their lack of knowledge about someone stopping, without any indication of argument or disagreement.


Passage number 59.
MR. BALLES. Could we pursue this issue of a shift in thedemand for money a little more, Steve. What is your best guess. Isthere a shift going on. There is that possibility, as you talkedabout. If that is not it, what is causing the drop in velocity of Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for more information and clarification.


Passage number 60.
MR. AXILROD. I think it is semantics as to whether you callit a shift or not. I suspect at the moment that there is a changesimply in the distribution of savings flows. And it could have arelatively simple explanation. If time deposits that are now maturingwere put in a year ago--we don't have adequate data on when they wereput in--they were earning 10 percent. Now they are earning 7 or 7-1/2percent; I have forgotten the exact rate. And people may just simplyout of psychological disappointment say: "Well, I will just put mymoney in this account where I can get at it rapidly and maybe rateswill be a little higher later. I am used to earning a higher rate."There may not be any actual sense of real uncertainty or doubts aboutthe economy in that context. I tend to think something sort of simplelike that may be occurring at this point. And there is no way thatthe models pick up something like that--whether you call it a wrongelasticity or a demand shift. The surveys of consumer confidence arenot so weak as to make you think that people are making a big broadshift in their pattern of saving. I don't know whether that kind ofmoney behavior will in the future lead to the kind of strength of GNPthat these models--this rather simple look at lagged money versus GNP--would lead you to think. One would say "no"--that that kind ofsaving behavior doesn't necessarily entail strong growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their own perspective and analysis of the situation, but there is no contradictory viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 61.
8/20/85MR. BALLES. Would it be fair to say, based on thatexplanation or view of yours, that we could at least expect thisovershoot of M1 from our new midyear targets not to carry with it theusual inflationary implications that it might otherwise have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or confirmation of a statement.


Passage number 62.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I think it wouldn't so far. If you wereto ask me after it had gone on for four to six months, I would have tosay that I think there is enough in monetarism to say that the risk isvery strong that it would. And I am not so sure that I wouldn't thinkthat there is a little risk at this very moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about the potential future outcome of a situation.


Passage number 63.
MR. BALLES. That's the $64 question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply a figure of speech used to emphasize the significance or difficulty of a question.


Passage number 64.
MR. MELZER. Steve, your projected money growth for August is14.3 percent, which is [a month-end level of] about $602.8 billion andwe are at $601.9 billion. What do you think the risk is in thatforecast. Obviously, it implies very little additional money growthover the month of August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply presents some data and asks for the other person's opinion on the potential risks associated with the forecast.


Passage number 65.
MR. AXILROD. A drop from what we had assumed. Well, we aregoing to get some data very soon and it is hard to say before that;but I guess the risk is probably that August might be a little lowerand September higher. That's how I would tend to guess it, but myinstinct is that we could be there or a shade higher as of now. Idon't expect any great weakness. This NOW account behavior seems tome a little difficult to explain. The rate spreads are widening andare making time deposits a little more attractive and market rates alittle more attractive, so I expect some shifting away from that soon.It is hard to say exactly when that will occur, but that ought tooccur. Whether it will occur now or in September or October is hardto say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and uncertainty about future data, but there is no evident disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 66.
MR. MELZER. By the way, on your point about the psychologyof single digit rates, my feeling would be that there is some validityto that--that people have a very hard time accepting committing theirmoney over a longer term for less than 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and agrees with the idea that people may have a hard time committing their money for less than 10 percent over a longer term.


Passage number 67.
MR. WALLICH. If you did a survey of 40 banks with a largeexpansion in NOW accounts, you might stop those the way you stoppeddemand deposits in your surveys.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is suggesting a possible course of action (conducting a survey) and is discussing a potential outcome (stopping demand deposits in surveys). There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 68.
MR. AXILROD. We did the survey after the demand depositsstopped.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence provided is simply a statement about conducting a survey after demand deposits stopped.


Passage number 69.
MR. BLACK. Are you suggesting that as a new control device.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question.


Passage number 70.
MR. WALLICH. He seems to have discovered one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Wallich is presented as a simple observation without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 71.
MR. AXILROD. Old M1A, or old M1--currency and demanddeposits--in July rose 3.3 percent, so it is much less. And if ourprojections are right for August--we still have [data for] less thanhalf the month--it would be rising 5-3/4 percent. So it has dropped[from the rapid pace in the spring]. The quarterly average, giventhat and a very reasonable September, would be about 8 percent. Itgrew 6.8 percent in the first quarter and 8 percent in the second; andon a quarterly average basis it has [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the growth of Old M1A or old M1 currency and demand deposits.


Passage number 72.
8/20/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What has the old M1A done through thisyear so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states a date and asks about the accomplishments of the "old M1A" up until that year.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it was 6.8 percent in the first quarterand 8 percent in the second quarter--a couple of points below currentM1. But it is much more below in July and August; it is deceleratingmore at this moment. Old M1 was 13 percent in May and 18-1/2 percentin June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident when Mr. Axilrod states that the current percentage is "much more below" in July and August, indicating a difference in opinion or information compared to the previous figures mentioned.


Passage number 74.
MR. BLACK. Steve, some time back you were experimenting withthe predictive qualities of M1A. Have you played around with thatlately to see whether it has any promise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Steve about his recent experimentation with M1A without expressing any disagreement or differing opinion.


Passage number 75.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I did for that paper that I sent to theCommittee before the last meeting. I did it in an excessivelysimplified way and it did not look very much different one way or theother. That is the conclusion I drew from it. In another approach,looking at it since 1982--not using the sort of model that I used, butin a simple way just looking at lagged M1 and lagged M1-A versus GNP--the deviations between M1 and GNP and M1A and GNP favor M1. They arenarrower in M1 than in M1A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their findings and observations without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 76.
MR. MORRIS. I have a technical question, Steve. In theBluebook you mentioned state and local government advance refundingborrowing. Are they included in the net debt number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or confirmation about the inclusion of state and local government advance refunding borrowing in the net debt number.


Passage number 77.
MR. PRELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement from Mr. Prell without any contrasting or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
MR. MORRIS. Isn't that double counting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The use of the phrase "Isn't that double counting" suggests disagreement or a challenging tone in response to a previous statement or claim.


Passage number 79.
MR. PRELL. Well, it is one of many forms of double countingthat are in practice unavoidable because there are many layerings ofborrowing and lending in the accounts. They are included and theyhave been sizable this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the presence of double counting in accounts due to multiple layerings of borrowing and lending.


Passage number 80.
MR. MORRIS. So, that is a fairly major factor inflating thedebt number now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris simply states a fact about the factor inflating the debt number without any opposition or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 81.
MR. PRELL. There has been about $20 billion worth ofrefundings thus far this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about the amount of refundings that have occurred this year, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 82.
MR. MORRIS. Since interest rates are down, what they do isfund municipal issues and invest the proceeds in government[securities] and pick up the differential. Or, I guess maybe theTreasury doesn't let them do that anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 83.
MR. AXILROD. No, there is a special issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the speaker, Mr. Axilrod, simply states that there is a special issue without expressing any conflicting opinion or argument.


Passage number 84.
MR. STERNLIGHT. They usually have to take a special issuefrom the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between parties. It simply states that individuals usually have to take a special issue from the Treasury.


Passage number 85.
MR. PARTEE. Of course, a corporation can do the same thingand call it defeasance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 86.
MR. MORRIS. Yes. So, I should think those should be nettedout of the number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their opinion without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 87.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is a little hard to know where to stop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that it is difficult to determine a stopping point for something without providing any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 88.
-10-8/20/85MR. PRELL. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage is a statement, not a disagreement or contention between multiple parties.


Passage number 89.
MR. MORRIS. Presumably, we don't include bank liabilitiesand also include bank investments in short-term securities. So wehave tried to net where we can. It seems to me that if we have anarea where clearly we have double counting and can identify it, thatit ought to be eliminated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is expressing his opinion and suggesting that double counting should be eliminated.


Passage number 90.
MR. AXILROD. I think we did mention it the year before lastas one of the factors causing credit to be strong along with themergers and the drop in equity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod mentioned a factor (the drop in equity) as a possible cause for credit being strong along with other factors like mergers.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does $20 billion amount to--1/4 ofone percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement about the value of $20 billion, stating that it amounts to 1/4 of one percent.


Passage number 92.
MR. PRELL. Let's see. The [monthly] flow is about [$1700million]; if it ran [$20] billion for the year, it would be about 1/2of a percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and performing a calculation based on that fact.


Passage number 93.
MR. WALLICH. Did the lagged study that you did differentiatebetween the impact of M1 on inflation and on the real.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is difficult to determine without more context. The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 94.
MR. AXILROD. No. I was just doing what some people do intown here. It was the short run, looking at M1 versus nominal GNPwith various quarterly moving averages--3, 6, and 9 months. It wasnot a very scientific study of looking ahead through models. No, theprice effect, we still think, would take longer; this was just tonominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the methodology used in a study, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All these charts here would suggest thatwe are about to launch into a sizable boom, if you believe that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting charts that suggest a forthcoming boom and is questioning the reader's belief in them without expressing personal disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 96.
MR. PARTEE. In the third quarter; we're right there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact ("we're right there") without any conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you could argue, depending upon whatlag you put in, that it could be delayed to the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "depending upon what lag you put in" suggests that there may be different arguments or perspectives about when the delay could occur, but no specific disagreement or contention is expressed in the given statement.


Passage number 98.
MR. PARTEE. The question is: Does anybody see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone sees something.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is the question that I raise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 100.
MR. BLACK. I don't think that there is anything out therenow, but I think it is going to be out there some time, with a laterlag. In 1982-1983, velocity behaved very unusually and yet we had avery strong pickup in 1983 and nobody expected that. The only thingthat predicted it was M1. So, I am a pragmatist, and my faith isbeing shaken to some extent, but I still believe I am going to bevindicated on that somewhere down the road. It would be very unusualif it didn't happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal belief and acknowledging that it may be different from what others expect, but they still have faith in their prediction.


Passage number 101.
MR. MARTIN. Laffer says that's the first effective date ofthe supply-siders' tax cuts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements expressing disagreement or contention. It simply states Laffer's claim about the effective date of the supply-siders' tax cuts.


Passage number 102.
MR. BLACK. Well, I'll have to [unintelligible] and find whenthat went in. I don't remember exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black simply states that he doesn't remember exactly and needs to find information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
MR. MORRIS. The leading indicators showed a little firmingpattern in May and June, but what sort of depressed me is that the-11-8/20/85July numbers for the leading indicators that we have don't look allthat great. They reflect a definite weakening from the May-Junenumber.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris expresses disappointment and concern about the July numbers for the leading indicators, stating that they reflect a definite weakening compared to the May-June numbers. This disagreement indicates a difference in interpretation or expectation regarding the state of the leading indicators.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the figure that hasn't beenpublished yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that a figure has not been published yet. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 105.
MR. MORRIS. No, I'm just looking at the individual[components that we have].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating that he is examining the individual components.


Passage number 106.
MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that the only way that we couldget a major increase in economic activity would be if suddenly therewere a change in the trade account, and that just strikes me as beingunrealistic. We already have gross national expenditures, if you lookat it from the expenditure side, probably rising 4 to 5 percent; ifyou take out the leakages, you get down to this 2 percent. So unlessone can say we are going to have a big turnaround in the tradeaccounts in the near-term horizon, it is awfully hard to say that weare going to have a major increase in economic activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that a major increase in economic activity is unlikely unless there is a significant change in the trade accounts, which they find unrealistic. They provide supporting evidence by mentioning the current gross national expenditures and the fact that removing "leakages" brings it down to 2 percent.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A characteristic of the forecast youalluded to earlier is that we are going to have--I hate to call itmajor--a significant change in the trade trend and a weakening of thegross national expenditures of some magnitude. That is what theforecast is anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about a forecast and describing a significant change in trade trend and weakening gross national expenditures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
MR. BLACK. Lyle is already pumping us for information. Heasked me last night if I thought we would still get 8 percent in thefourth quarter, and I told him that it might be as late as the firstquarter before we got that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black mentioned that it might be as late as the first quarter before they achieve 8 percent, indicating a disagreement with Lyle who believes they can achieve it in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 109.
MR. BOYKIN. There is not anything down our way that leads toa whole lot of optimism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there is not much optimism in the speaker's location.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 110.
 Just about everything--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your directors don't seem to think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "Your directors don't seem to think so" suggests that there is disagreement or difference of opinion between the speaker and the directors.


Passage number 111.
MR. BOYKIN. That's for sure. The major thing, of course, isuncertainty in energy. We talked about that. Texas A&M University ispredicting a 40 percent drop in farm income for this year. The Bureauof Business Research at the University of Texas is saying that Texasis already in a recession. There are uncertainties developing. Ourunemployment rate has matched the national average, which is not allthat bad, but it is rather bad compared to what we are used to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts and opinions about the current state of the economy, without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 112.
 Thewhole sense, in an anecdotal way, is for not very much--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is happening in the energy area. Isthere anything new.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not expressing any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there is not much happening in the energy area.


Passage number 113.
MR. BOYKIN. No, nothing that I am aware of, other than[lingering] concern and predictions, at least, of further softening inoil prices. I don't think we are hearing quite the same scaryscenario of [a decline to] something less than $20 a barrel, but westill are expecting some further decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the speaker's awareness of concerns and expectations regarding oil prices. There is no explicit disagreement or contention mentioned.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Drilling activity is doing what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 115.
-12-8/20/85MR. BOYKIN. The drilling activity is down. The rig count isdown about 25 percent from what it was a year ago, I believe. It'sapproximately that in Texas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the drilling activity and rig count being down from a year ago.


Passage number 116.
MR. RICE. But isn't it up in the most recent period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 117.
MR. BOYKIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage only provides a name "MR. BOYKIN" and does not provide any context or information for there to be contention or disagreement.


Passage number 118.
 It's up slightly, but for the nation--MR. RICE. Not for Texas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a factual statement, indicating that the increase is only for the nation as a whole and not specifically for Texas. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 119.
MR. BOYKIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual content of the passage being provided.


Passage number 120.
 For Texas--MR. FORRESTAL. It's up slightly for Louisiana.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents information about the increase in something for Texas and Louisiana.


Passage number 121.
MR. BOYKIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "Mr. Boykin" without any additional information or context that may indicate disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
 I was thinking we were still running about [thesame as] last time, which was about 25 percent--MR. RICE. I don't have any quarrel with the comparison to ayear earlier, but I somehow got the impression that within the lastcouple of months the rig count had climbed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes a disagreement about the rig count climbing within the last couple of months. The speaker initially thought they were running at the same level, but the other person disagrees and suggests that the rig count has actually climbed.


Passage number 123.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's a 25 percent drop from a pretty lownumber.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply stating a fact about a percentage drop, without any indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 124.
MR. BOYKIN. From a pretty low number, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "From a pretty low number, yes" is a straightforward response without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 125.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does anyone have a differenteconomic outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 126.
MR. AXILROD. If it were helpful, partly for purposes ofunderstanding the process, I could offer a scenario coming off of thismoney supply that would lead to maybe not much increase in real GNPbut more in nominal and prices. Assume a little further decline ininterest rates, which probably would be needed to start it, andsuppose the natural rate of unemployment is more like 7 to 7-1/4percent and that the productivity growth over time isn't going to bemuch more than 1/2 to 1 percent--taking some extreme assumptions--andthat the Committee makes a strong effort to have real GNP grow 2-1/2to 3 percent in that environment. Assume further that foreigncountries loosen up a bit--and interest rates have declined in a few.It may very well be under those circumstances that the present goodbehavior of wages would begin to unravel as people would have to bid alittle harder to get some decent labor. Commodity prices around theworld, instead of dropping, could begin rising a bit more and we couldget some rise in inflationary expectations in that environment.Because the restraint is being undone in other areas, we could at somepoint begin to get more upward pressures on prices and maybe a littlereal GNP, but not as much as many think is potential. It would bereflected more in the price element than in nominal GNP somewhere inthe fourth quarter or in the first or second quarter of next year;that wouldn't be terribly inconsistent with the strong money growththat we have had, assuming that continues for a couple of monthsahead. But all that is predicated on very weak productivity growthand attitudes in the labor market that would say the present rate ofunemployment is something like the natural rate, plus an effort topush the economy beyond what its productivity would permit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a hypothetical scenario and discussing potential outcomes based on certain assumptions.


Passage number 127.
-13-8/20/85MR. BOEHNE. On the economy, the mood in my part of thecountry is better than in Bob's, but I think that has to do more withthe regional comeback than with anything of national significance.There are an awful lot of [help] wanted ads or signs in the windowsabout jobs available, but I don't see any boom. Again, I don't attacha great deal of national significance to this, because I think it isjust a regional correction from the kinds of things that we saw in theother direction in the 1970s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply sharing their perspective on the economy without contradicting or challenging another viewpoint.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a lot of evidence that theNortheast is doing better than other areas of the country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a factual observation without any conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 129.
MR. RICE. Could I just ask Steve a question. Do you thinkthere are good reasons for expecting that a slight decline in interestrates would stimulate the economy significantly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 130.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage because it only consists of the name "Mr. Axilrod."


Passage number 131.
 I don't know that a slight--MR. RICE. Well, within a range of 1/2 to 3/4 of a point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a numerical range without any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 132.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I would think that if short rates camedown 1/2 point or so with some definiteness, in the short run the longrates could come down. It would be helpful in the mortgage market andwould probably be on the stimulative side. Whether it would besufficient to get more than 1/4 or 1/2 point on real GNP over time, Idon't know, but it is certainly in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing his opinion and uncertainty about the potential effects of lowering short rates and its impact on long rates and real GNP.


Passage number 133.
MR. RICE. My guess is it wouldn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 134.
MR. MARTIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't have a very positivescenario. I think the staff work was careful and conservative. Itseems to me that if you look at the sectors in which they are pickingup that increase in real growth from 1.7 or 1.5 percent--or whateverthe revised figure is going to turn out to be--to 3.0 percent, you getfederal spending, residential spending, inventory change, a bit ofbusiness fixed in the producer durable equipment area, and a littleincrease in consumption. But as I look at those categories and thinkof the downside risk in most of them, it seems to me that it is nottoo much like Cassandra to look at the chance of a recession. I willtake the other end of the spectrum from Steve. Certainly, we have theimbalances in this expansion. They are not the usual imbalances thatwe are used to: it isn't capacity utilization pressing against athreshold; it isn't rising interest rates. But goodness knows, thereare imbalances: the foreign trade side, the farm situation, and allthe rest of them we know about. I think that the mortgage backedsecurity market is extremely vulnerable, and that is an $80 billion ayear market. On the federal spending side, could we have a realcutback there or a real expansion for that matter. I think neither.The procurement criticisms, the resignation of one procurementofficer, and the hearings in the Congress are all constraints onWeinberger and company. So it is quite unlikely, even if they wantedto, that they could give a big push to the economy by saying they haveall of this [spending] authority, now let's spend it. Nor is itlikely, given the philosophical [mind] set of Mr. Weinberger and hisboss, that there would be the opposite--a real cutback in that area.So that's probably a small contribution on the plus side.-14-8/20/85 -15-We have spoken of the consumer. Employment is still going upa little, unlike the Europeans. The debt burden looks like it hasadjusted a little. With tax refunds coming in, those credit cardcredits have dropped a little, so maybe the debt burden can behandled. In the residential area, I think we are very vulnerable inour forecast. Jim, this will come as absolutely no surprise to you: Ithink the talk about a 16 percent spurt in residential spending isoverly optimistic. It might be half that. That's a couple percentagepoints off the growth increment maybe. I already made a comment withregard to the importance of the fixed rate mortgage, but there are theTICOR mortgage-backed security losses and private mortgage insurancecompanies are already talking about $50 to $100 [billion] in lossexposure. I don't know whether the Swiss reinsurance process is goingto work here; it has never been tested in this particular kind ofinsurance. I don't know whether REITs, as they are called, will comein and make the settlements and back up the private mortgage insurancecompanies so that you can get that $80 billion continuing as fundingfor the residential spending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a negative scenario and suggesting the chance of a recession, while also mentioning the vulnerabilities and imbalances in the economy.


Passage number 135.
MR. PARTEE. They won't do it willingly, that's for sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses a certain level of certainty that the subjects will not willingly do something, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
MR. MARTIN. No, they won't do it willingly--not when you aretalking $50 million at a clip per company. So I think there is a realexposure there. As for inventories, goodness, what swings there are:We can get a $50 million help or we can get a $50 million hurt. Theinventory situation is puzzling all of us, in terms of its swings. Itcould help or not. So it seems to me that there are vulnerabilitieswith regard to the very careful forecast of Jim and his associates foran increase up to 3 percent real GNP. The risks are on the down sidein every one of those areas and in other areas that we all know about.The risk of recession, though, seems to turn on some kind of systemicfinancial--well, not collapse--but real troubles that are hard tohandle. I'm talking not just about the ag banks and the thrifts andall of the things that we have talked about so many times, butsystemic--[all] financial institutions [unintelligible] privatemortgage insurance companies don't pay. And the mortgage-backedsecurities side of the market--I am stretching to get the biggestfigure I can--may be in the widest sense a $350 billion market. Idon't think that is the most probable occurrence, but the risks are onthe down side. We need to keep those in mind as we set policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, acknowledges that there are vulnerabilities and risks in various areas such as inventories and financial institutions. However, he also states that the risks are on the down side and that the most probable occurrence may not be the worst case scenario. This suggests a difference in opinion or perspective on the severity of the risks and the potential impact on policy-making.


Passage number 137.
MR. MORRIS. Do you also have double counting in the mortgagebacked securities in the debt number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a clarifying question about the presence of double counting in mortgage-backed securities in the debt number.


Passage number 138.
MR. KICHLINE. No. Mortgage pools are not in the domesticnonfinancial debt aggregate. The mortgages themselves--that is, themortgage originations--are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward declaration of fact.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 140.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I normally have afairly optimistic outlook on most things in life, but I must say atthe moment that it has been damped somewhat. In our area of thecountry there has been a great deal of discussion about agricultureand what may happen. At the moment, as I think most of you know, wewill have an outstanding wheat harvest and the prediction on corn, soybeans, sorghum, and so forth is very, very good. On the other hand,there already has been a 20 to 25 percent drop in prices for those8/20/85commodities; for each of them the price is now below the break-evenpoint for production. At the same time, red meat prices, hogs andcattle, have dropped roughly 20 to 25 percent over the last 60 days.And those producers now are either at a break-even or a loss position.The energy problem somebody has mentioned--the rig count is indeeddown by 25 percent from a year ago, but it is flat or going on down inOklahoma, Wyoming, and Colorado. Mining is flat on its back.Aircraft sales, which are a fairly large component of the output inthe Tenth District are flat--flat being no sales at all unless to themilitary. As a result, there is not a great deal of happiness outsideof the metropolitan areas, where economic activity is still goingfairly strong in terms of auto production and other activity.Let me say further that I take no comfort in the budgetresolution that has been passed by Congress, because if you look atthe history of what has happened in this so-called new budgetenvironment, the budget resolution has not meant very much in thepast. Indeed this time, if you look at the agricultural sector,whether you like it or not, the government is going to end up withabout 2/3 of all of the production this year as a result of the sign-ups for CCC; the producers simply are going to walk away because thetarget prices are higher than the commodity price in the market. Andthat all is a direct tap on the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses concern and dissatisfaction about multiple issues, including the drop in agricultural prices, the decline in red meat prices, the energy problem, the state of the mining industry, flat aircraft sales, and the lack of happiness outside of metropolitan areas. They also express skepticism and criticism of the budget resolution passed by Congress, specifically regarding its impact on the agricultural sector.


Passage number 141.
MR. PARTEE. Is that a potentially big number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking about the potential size of a number.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 142.
MR. GUFFEY. That's a very big number--somewhere in the $24to $30 billion range. It is something like $18 billion above whatotherwise would have been projected. So in my own view, the budgetdeficit problem is far from resolution and it is going to get worserather than better. It seems to me that with respect to monetarypolicy, we have one of two choices. One is in some way to get realinterest rates down, which will help marginally in agriculture andsome of these areas; and to me the only lever we have to pull is lower[nominal] interest rates and that implies monetization of the debt.As a result I am gloomy and not very optimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, expresses his view that the budget deficit problem is far from resolution and is going to get worse. He believes that the only lever they have to pull is to lower nominal interest rates, which implies monetization of the debt. This suggests that he disagrees with the current approach to monetary policy and is pessimistic about the situation.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't sound like a highlyinflationary report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply describes the report as not sounding highly inflationary, without any contradictory or opposing claims.


Passage number 144.
MR. GUFFEY. Not with farm commodity prices dropping.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about farm commodity prices dropping without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you sense land prices are doingnow. I was talking to some farmers the other day who claimed thatthey were going down faster, if anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking for someone's perception of the current trend in land prices and sharing their own observation from a conversation with farmers.


Passage number 146.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, it is very difficult to tell what landprices are doing simply because there are foreclosures but there areno sales. And as a result, you can get the survey--as we do and Ithink Minneapolis and Chicago do--and it shows that they are stilldeclining. But those are numbers that are not based upon sales. Theamount of land now being held by the Farm Credit Bureau is large. Thenumbers that I know come out of Wichita and Omaha and they are verylarge numbers. Most of the agricultural banks that have been deeplyinvolved, and indeed are in trouble, are holding considerable amountsof real estate and simply have hired somebody to try to farm itbecause they can't sell it. The question, I guess, involves not onlythe gloom that already has spread, but there is a systemic problem in-16-8/20/85the financial area that evolves out of the agricultural bankingproblems that I think is very great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and sharing their perspective on the topic, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I apologize, but the given passage you provided does not contain enough information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement present. Could you please provide more details or the complete passage for a proper evaluation?


Passage number 148.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I am certainly in no way disagreeing withJim's forecast and there really is very little I can add to previousreports that I have given at other meetings. Weak sectors in theMidwest are continuing to be very weak, with no particular signs ofimprovement. And I think at this point some of these very heavyindustries really won't experience a significant change this cycle.But offsetting that, those parts of the economy that have been doingbetter continue to do well, and from that perspective the currentoutlook is pretty good. In autos, for example, the people I've talkedto say that despite some aberrations in the current numbers, theunderlying demand continues to be pretty good. Construction activityis relatively strong and consumer spending seems to be okay. Butperhaps for emphasis, I would echo Roger's comments about theagricultural situation. Land values as we look at them continue todecline. In Iowa, for example, in a statistical sense land values aredown almost 30 percent from last year and some 45 percent from thepeak. I agree with Roger that this is a statistical look at landvalues; the transactions that are occurring, are in fact [at pricesthat are] substantially under that. And given the pressure oncommodity prices, I would think that land values are going to continueto come down. Whereas in the past we have had the view that this isall containable and not systemic, I do think it is beginning to backup--both from the banking sector as well as from the farm creditsituation. In sum, with the passage of time and with continueddeterioration, it begins to take on some systemic implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 149.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information about Mr. Forrestal to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 150.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, in the Southeast wecontinue to experience some moderation in the economic growth. Ithink what is happening there is basically an adjustment to a lessboom-like atmosphere than we had previously. While there are someareas of weakness, I think the strengths in our local economy outweighthose weaknesses at the present time. Louisiana is clearly a veryweak area at the moment because of the energy sector, agriculture, andnonresidential building. And while nonresidential building iscontinuing in the rest of the District, it is a source of concern; Ithink the absorption rates are not going to be good enough to takethis glut of office space that we are getting in most cities of theSoutheast, and I think that is going to catch up with builders andfinancial institutions before too much longer. The recent decline inthe dollar has given some hope to the textile and apparel people,although I think most of them realize that it is going to take quite along time before they feel any particular impact from that. Just aparenthetical observation: I have been very, very surprised at thestrength of the protectionist sentiment that I am hearing around theDistrict. In fact, it is not really just from around the District.For example, I had a meeting with the board of directors of a localcorporation that has directors from all over the country and thevirulence of the protectionist sentiment and the anti-Japanesesentiment was really remarkable to me. I thought we were back inWorld War II. If this is true around the country, when Congressreturns I think we are going to hear a good deal more about this.-17-8/20/85The virulence and the "them against us" sentiment was really quiteremarkable. I had no idea it was that strong.As I look at the economy as a whole, I guess I would revisemy forecast down somewhat, although basically I would agree with theGreenbook forecast both for the rest of 1985 and for 1986. Myconcerns would be that the dangers are on the down side. I think wemight be lucky if we get 3 percent growth. And I say that because Iam not very sanguine about consumer spending. Given the level ofconsumer debt and the lower personal income that has come in, I am notso sure that the consumer--although consumer confidence appears to behigh--is going to spend at quite the levels that the forecast implies.I am also not so sure about the inventory buildup. I think that thereis a feeling among many people that they don't have to build theirinventories because of the [excess] capacity that we have in thesystem--that production times are lower and, therefore, they don'thave to have as much inventory. Also, I think the uncertainties aboutthe economy are causing some people to reconsider their inventorybuildup. So given all of that, Mr. Chairman, I too am not terriblyoptimistic, although I don't fear a recession. And people I havetalked to don't fear a recession, but nobody that I have talked tosees any particular boom for the rest of the year and nobody sees anygreater danger of inflation either. So in terms of monetary policy,we are in the usual dilemma in light of the sluggishness of theeconomy and the growth of the money supply. My hunch would be that weought to stay about where we are; I will talk about that a little morelater when we get to the specifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, expresses concerns about the economy, particularly in the Southeast region, citing weakness in the energy sector, agriculture, nonresidential building, and the glut of office space. He also mentions his surprise at the strength of protectionist sentiment and anti-Japanese sentiment he encountered. While he agrees with the Greenbook forecast for the economy, he revises his own forecast down and expresses concerns about consumer spending and inventory buildup. This disagreement and concern about the economy shows contention in the passage.


Passage number 151.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 152.
MR. MELZER. I don't have anything to add on the regionalside other than to say that in June we had an increase inmanufacturing employment at a 2 percent annual rate, which was anencouraging sign. But some of the other indicators are flat to down.One comment I would make is that I appreciate the risks onthe down side in the forecast as well, but I think there really issomething to be said in terms of addressing the long-term imbalancesin the economy arising out of the trade deficit and a moderate rate ofgrowth at this period of time. I know that has implications for howthe budget deficits are ultimately financed, but I think in the longerterm enduring a lower rate of growth for a period of time could bevery constructive in terms of addressing some of these imbalances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is only providing information and expressing their own opinion.


Passage number 153.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Enduring what, these slower rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only presents a fragment of a sentence without context.


Passage number 154.
MR. RICE. Lower rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states "MR. RICE. Lower rates," which suggests agreement or support for the idea of lower rates.


Passage number 155.
MR. MELZER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The response "Yes" is addressing a question or statement that is not provided in the passage.


Passage number 156.
MR. WALLICH. I have very little to add but maybe a littlebalance on the up side. The case for a resumption of growth at anyrate of speed certainly has diminished. Still, I think thepredominant view outside this room is that [the expansion] willaccelerate a little to the 3 percent--and some people think more--range. I don't think anybody is concerned about a cumulative downturnthat in retrospect, if we hadn't done anything, would have required usto take immediate stimulative action. Even if the economy weakens a-188/20/85little further and then turns around, it would be a great mistake tohave done a great deal and found ourselves having to backtrack. SoI'd exclude from my thinking doing something expansionary. Now, onthe expectation of a stronger economy, I think we have something tolook forward to in the longer run as the main cause of our troubles.I think as the trade deficit begins to mend--at first stabilizes andthen, God willing, is very substantially diminished--that that willhave some expectational effects, though nothing very decisive in theshort run. But in regard to the possibility of an acceleration, whichdoesn't seem to be fitting very well into this conversation, thedanger that it will run too far I think is also not very great becausewe have enough leeway. In my view we are well above the natural rateof unemployment and if it were to happen that the economy speeded up,we could accept that for awhile. But that is evidently not the mainrisk that is being discussed here. I just want to argue that the riskof a significant slowing seems not very strong and the consequences offalsely assessing that seem to be quite great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing his own views and providing a balanced perspective on the potential for economic growth and the risks involved.


Passage number 157.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Governor Partee, making it impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 158.
MR. PARTEE. Well, in order to counterbalance you, Henry, Iguess I would have to say that I think the possibilities of arecession are distinctly there now. The way I would visualize itoccurring is that we have had enough sapping of the strength of theeconomy through the net imports, which I don't think will level off inthe immediate future, that income growth will slow to very little.The saving rate is as low as it can get. The best forecast the staffcan give us is for really very little final demand. And with thatvery small final demand, I think the credit system will start tounwind. We have this disaster awaiting us in income properties and itis getting closer every month than it was the month before. Inaddition, as the Chairman and others have pointed out, in the last twoyears the equity buy-backs and mergers and so forth have added todebt, and [firms] just have to have increased revenue in order tosupport those quantities of debt. Without the increased revenue thatis associated with rising sales, we are going to have more and moretrouble in that category of finance also. And the farm creditsituation is so bad that it is really hard to see what could happennow that would do other than get us into a crisis. I realize thatthis is a very quiet period, but that is just because the fall has notcome and these notes have not come due yet. When they do, there aregoing to be very few people who are going to have any money to servicetheir debt. I think the fundamental source of [the problem] is theimbalance caused by the import situation, but where [the crisis] isgoing to occur, if it does occur, will be in the credit area as we getinto the fall and winter--in the credit quality problems that theeconomy now faces. I don't know that there is anything much thatpolicy can do about it. Indeed, it might be a mistake to followstrongly with expansion to try to deal with it because I think theultimate result of that would be more inflation in the country. And Iguess I have a little streak of monetarism in me too, or at least I dobelieve that in the long run money matters and that if you get a lotof money out there, sooner or later it is going to bring inflation.So I say this hesitantly because I don't have a solution to deal withit; but I do think we must recognize that recession is a distinctpossibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own viewpoint about the possibility of a recession and acknowledges that they do not have a solution to deal with it.


Passage number 159.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 160.
-19-8/20/85MS. SEGER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage consists solely of a date and the name "SEGER," which does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 161.
 I hate to make this a bias of the Supervision andRegulation Committee, which I think is the way it will look since--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their concern about potentially appearing biased, but does not directly disagree with anything or express conflicting opinions.


Passage number 162.
 Well, if it is the right bias--MS. SEGER. --since I am on that Committee with GovernorPartee, but I agree that there is a risk of recession. I think thereal vulnerability is the financial system; I just don't know whatwill be the specific trigger to ring the bell there. I don't knowwhether it will be in farm credit, whether it will be some falloutfrom what is now going on in Maryland, or whether it will be somethingmore in the mortgage-backed securities area, but my stomach tells methat [the financial system] will be the trigger that will cause theunwinding.I had a couple of conversations recently with some peopleabout the import situation, since imported cars from Japan are a verybig portion of that total number. You might find it interesting thatDetroit, at least, does not see any big fall-off in imports. In fact,they are surprised that the Japanese reacted so quickly to the endingof the "gentlemen's agreement" or whatever you care to call it thathad been on the books for four years. Apparently, they would havesent more cars over faster but they could not get them on the ships.Now they are [on the ships] and the sales of imports would have beenstill stronger except for the strike of the car haulers; the importdealers are far more impacted by that than the domestic dealersbecause they have to get the cars from the ports to the dealer lots.Anyway, I don't see this import issue going away. I see it getting alot worse. And the "big decline in the dollar" is in terms ofweighted averages; if you look at the dollar vis-a-vis the Japaneseyen, the decline isn't that much. These people out in the trenches donot expect the Japanese--even if the dollar were to decline further--to quickly adjust the prices of the autos upward. In fact it wouldnot surprise them to see the Japanese cut car prices to get a muchbigger chunk of our market. That did not make me feel terribly good.I don't care what the theory is, but what may go on in a businessstrategy sense is very, very key to this in my judgment. Also, acouple of people I talked with are in the process of cutting theirtotal sales expectations figure. Before, they had a decline of300,000 units between the expectations for 1985 and for 1986; I don'tknow what they will come out with when they get through the revisionprocess. This is something that already is a big drag on the economyand I think it is going to get worse. Maybe I am just being aparochial Midwesterner, but I think that this is a really significantsapping of economic strength, and when the foundation gets termites init the house eventually feels it. So, that is my concern, and I dothink that lower interest rates help in these particular situations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and concerns about the economy, but there is no mention of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 163.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 164.
MR. STERN. I don't think there is any doubt that we have asluggish economy on our hands but nevertheless one that is continuingto grow. I think the sluggishness is due to the imbalances that weall have been discussing, and those stem in large measure from theforeign trade situation. I am not sure there is very much thatmonetary policy can do about that. As best I can judge the situationin our District, this rather sluggish pattern is likely to continuebecause the sectors or areas that are doing well are continuing to do-20-8/20/85well and those that are in trouble are going to remain in trouble. Ithink we are kind of stuck here without a lot of good options. If Itake the Greenbook forecast as a starting point, the one question Ihave about the outlook is the inventory situation, in part for some ofthe reasons that Bob Forrestal mentioned but also in part because Idon't know what it means when we are satisfying as much final demandas we are from abroad and what that means for domestic inventoryaccumulation. I have a concern that maybe it means that moreinventory is going to get held abroad relative to what one wouldexpect otherwise and that that is going to filter into domesticproduction and domestic inventory levels in a conservative way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and observations about the sluggish economy and the potential impact of the foreign trade situation on monetary policy and the future outlook. There is no mention of opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 165.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 166.
MR. RICE. I really don't have much to add to what hasalready been said. I don't see a high risk of recession over theforecast period, but I agree with the views that have been expressedthat the risks to the forecast are on the down side. I think theprobability that we will be able to see 3 percent real growth in thesecond half is probably less than 50 percent. And I think the rate ofgrowth we get in the second half will not be satisfactory. But justas I see nothing to encourage me to believe that we are going to getsome significant acceleration, I don't see anything that is going topush us into recession; I think we are just going to bump along withslow growth. And I agree with Chuck that there is probably verylittle that monetary policy can do about that at the present timewithout making things worse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the views expressed and states their own opinion without contradicting anyone else.


Passage number 167.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. There is no statement or mention of any disagreement or conflict between individuals or groups. The passage only provides information about "Mr. Corrigan" without any indication of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 168.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I feel as comfortable with theforecast in the Greenbook as I can feel, and I don't at the moment seea recession looming immediately in front of us. In terms ofdevelopments in the last 6 or 8 weeks, the thing in the economy thatprobably has surprised me most is housing. I certainly did expectthat we would see a little more spark there than we have seen, whichled me to believe that maybe this rise in delinquency rates that wehave seen in the home mortgage sector was telling us something. Buteven that doesn't seem to hold up because, for example, on closerinspection we find that the delinquency rates are higher in theNortheast than they are in the South and the West, even though thereverse pattern seems to apply in terms of where the housing shortagesare versus the surpluses. So I am at a complete loss to rationalizethat. More generally, I sense a much more acute dilemma growing outof the dollar situation than a number of the comments around the tablewould seem to imply. For one thing, barring a recession in the UnitedStates, which would obviously raise havoc with the LDC situation, Isee more risk in the possibility of some kind of sudden tumble in theexchange rate, notwithstanding all that the exchange rate implies inthe current situation for the trade account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses surprise and confusion regarding the housing market and delinquency rates, as well as a disagreement with the comments around the table regarding the dollar situation.


Passage number 169.
 But more importantly,when you look through the exchange rate situation and the tradeaccount, barring that precipitous drop in the exchange rate that wouldcreate its own problems, it seems to me that we are looking at a quitereal possibility for at least a couple--or maybe even three, four, orfive--years of having trade and current account deficits of $100billion, which in turn--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To be optimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas. It is simply discussing the possibility of trade and current account deficits.


Passage number 170.
-21-8/20/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's probably right.As a matter of fact, we did an exercise that suggested thateven if the exchange rate fell 25 percent over the next two years fromwhere it is now, the current account and trade deficit would tend onlyto stabilize at around $100 billion. I might add that that was withfaster growth in the industrialized countries than is now beingprojected. But regardless of what number you put on it, the fact ofthe matter is that any kind of scenario like that implies clearly awillingness on the part of foreigners to continue to accumulatedollar-denominated assets at a pretty rapid rate. And as far out inthe future as we considered, it also implies that foreigners are goingto be continuing to finance a big chunk of our budgetary deficit. Sothat situation in itself has worked itself into a classic Catch-22problem that, in my judgment, aggravates the policy dilemma to a veryconsiderable degree.Now, I would associate myself with the comments that Marthaand Chuck made on the financial situation. I too cannot quite shakethe feeling that something, someplace there could pop in anunfortunate way at any moment. But there too what to do about thatfrom a policy perspective is not at all clear. One could make anargument that the whole situation, notwithstanding the problems in theeconomy and the problems on the international side, could point moreeasily in the opposite direction from a policy perspective than whatthe economy itself would say.You raised a question, Mr. Chairman, about this energysituation. Just by way of a quick anecdote:told me the other day that when they had to bail out thatenergy bank up in this spring, in the process theyacquired some oil rigs which at that time they valued at about 35cents on a dollar. They now think they are worth a nickel to a dimeon a dollar. Now, is not the universe, but I thinkthat is symptomatic of the general situation. So I can't find much tocelebrate about here, to put it mildly. But the policy dilemmasimplicit in all of this, I think, are as acute as they have beenperhaps for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and opinions about the current economic and financial situation.


Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we better celebrate with a cup ofcoffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply suggests celebrating with a cup of coffee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 172.
 We really ought tothink about rewriting them in a more basic way, but I don't think wecan do that in the next--MR. PARTEE. We have had a sort of informal desire not tochange the directives in the mid-quarter meeting. It will be prettyhard to avoid that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests rewriting the directives in a more basic way, but Mr. Partee counters by stating that there has been a desire not to change the directives during the mid-quarter meeting. This indicates a disagreement on whether or not to rewrite the directives.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will have to change M1. I would liketo say that the latest figures that we have on M1 are not terriblydifferent. They don't suggest any [big change] in the M1 estimates.If anything, they are consistent with a less optimistic view--if thatis the way to express it. They are slightly stronger but growth isnot substantially different from the very high August number we weretalking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is mention of different figures and views, there is no clear disagreement or contention between them. The speaker is simply discussing the consistency and lack of substantial change in the M1 estimates.


Passage number 174.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I would favor moving a littleinsubstantially in the direction of--I wouldn't say tightening, but oftrying to rein in M1 a bit more. The main reason I feel this way isbecause the credibility of the Federal Reserve and its targetingprocedures may well be at stake at some point soon, and I wouldn'tlike to see us lose that credibility. So, I would like to indicatesome perceptible move or effort toward bringing M1 back toward the topof the band by the end of the year. I don't want to do anythingsubstantial, as I said; I just want to indicate that we want M1 tomove back. So I would be in favor of doing a little more thanalternative B and possibly a little less than alternative C, if thatcould be done. And I would even be prepared to see borrowing around$500 million. But my main concern would be to show some concern for-24-8/20/85what has been happening to M1. There is a lot of liquidity out therenow and I don't think that a slight rise in interest rates will haveany perceptible effect on the economy at this point any more than Ifeel that a slight decline in interest rates will have any effect onthe economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is expressing his opinion and making a suggestion, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 175.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I pretty much agree with theeconomic outlook as discussed here earlier. In the West it isessentially flat or down in most traditional areas: mining,manufacturing, and agriculture. Those things that are going well area number of the service industries, whether financial services ortelecommunication, and of course defense is going through somewhat ofa boom. But by and large it is hard to see anything that is going topush the economy up with any real vigor and our staff forecast isessentially the same as the Greenbook forecast. I would agree withJim Kichline that, if anything, the 3 percent real GNP growth in thesecond half has more risk on the down side than the up side. While I,too, have a streak of monetarism in me, I am prepared to ignore thisovershoot of M1 as long as we have this peculiar and unusual, andhopefully not permanent, behavior of M1 in terms of the decline invelocity--whether it is a shift in money demand or differentelasticities than we thought existed. I would be prepared to overlookthat overshoot because of the risk of possible recession, although Ithink the risk is more toward sluggish growth. Therefore, all thingsconsidered, bottom line I am essentially in agreement with theposition you expressed: that this is not the time to make anysignificant moves, either easing or tightening. I think thatalternative B pretty much expresses the sort of policy I would like tosee between now and the next meeting, with a borrowing targetsomewhere in the range that was specified in alternative B of $350 to$450 million, probably centered on $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is agreement among the speaker and the person he is referring to. They both agree on the economic outlook and the need for cautious policy.


Passage number 176.
MR. KEEHN. My view would be very consistent with Emmett'scomments. It does seem that we want to be very careful of what we do.But we have a high trajectory of the aggregates, particularly M1, andI also think that we need to begin to scale down as we come toward theend of the year. So I would end up being in favor of alternative B.I'd also move up the borrowings just very slightly to about the $500million range, as a way to begin to take these initial steps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker's view aligns with Emmett's comments and they both acknowledge the need to be cautious in what they do. The speaker also mentions their support for alternative B and suggests a slight increase in borrowing as a preliminary step. Overall, there are no conflicting opinions expressed.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me interrupt the flow here because Iforgot to get confirmation of the transactions of the domestic Desk.It occurs to me now and I raise it now or I will forget about.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker interrupts to mention a forgotten task and receives confirmation and support from the other speaker.


Passage number 178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, "Without objection" indicates that there is no disagreement or contention. It suggests that there is unanimous agreement among the parties involved.


Passage number 179.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I am very close to Emmett Rice onthis. Even if we are in the midst of a one-time downward shift in M1velocity such as apparently occurred in 1982-83, or if we have a oneor two percentage point drop in the long-term trend of velocity, stillI think by any measure that a rate of increase of 11.5 percent sincelast October has to have provided plenty of financial underpinningsfor expansion. I am concerned that we will run into this credibilityproblem that Emmett outlined very clearly, so I think we ought to take-25-8/20/85an unequivocal action to try to bring M1 down somewhere near at leastthe top of its long-term range. Alternative C seems about the rightsort of alternative to me. But in addition to selecting this path, itis important that we also think about our methodology a bit, becausemerely choosing that path doesn't insure that we will hit it. I thinkthat we ought to be prepared to take some kind of action to hit this.The relationship between the level of borrowed reserves and the growthof M1 is very tenuous and we keep getting fooled by that. I think itis going to be exceedingly difficult, if not impossible, to predictthat, so I would like to see us insert in our operating instructionsto the Desk something a little more explicit. We have provided thatactions will be taken in the light of what is happening in theeconomy, what is happening in the domestic markets, the foreignexchange markets, inflation, and the like. And I would like to passon firm instructions to Peter that we would raise our borrowed reservetarget if we start exceeding that unless the economy shows decidedsigns of weakening beyond what we now expect. It has been very hard,at least for me anyway, to know what was going to be done once we leftthis meeting in the way of actions in the intermeeting period. And Iwould like to see us tighten up those procedures if I can persuade youto do so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and suggestions.


Passage number 180.
MS. HORN. Well, Mr. Chairman, as seems to be the consensusof this Committee, I don't find any reason to argue for much changetoday in the way we are conducting policy. So I would come outwanting more of the same, which would be alternative B in my mind.However, I would associate myself with some previous speakers whosaid, with a background of a pretty reasonable forecast in theGreenbook and a background of quite a bit of liquidity in the economy,that we can't go on at this rate forever. So I would like to suggestthat some more insubstantial tightening, as the period progresses andas we see events unfold, might be appropriate. And it might beappropriate--more than accomplishing something substantive in terms ofthe growth rate of money--just as a small signal to markets that infact we think it can't go on forever and that we are waiting for theright time to take further action. I suppose that would be reflectedin the directive, based on the same kind of language we used the lasttime--that is, the "would" and "might"--that we would react in theevent of higher-than-expected growth and might on the lower side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 181.
MR. MELZER. My view would be very similar to what GovernorRice expressed at the beginning. I think we have an opportunity herepossibly to slow down the rate of reserve growth without a substantialimpact on rates. I was struck by the fact that banks apparently havebeen running off some of their term liabilities, the Fed has snuggedperhaps imperceptibly here over the last period, reserve growth hasslowed down, and yet in terms of the impact on the funds rate reallyall we washed out probably was an unwarranted expectation that therewould be a further cut in the discount rate. We really have notfirmed beyond the equilibrium level we thought funds might trade atwith a slightly easier borrowing target. I asked Peter before aboutdealers' positions; they seem to be in pretty good shape. So I thinkthere is an opportunity here possibly to slow down the rate of growthof reserves somewhat and perhaps buy a little more flexibility for thefuture, particularly against the backdrop of 14 percent money growthexpected in August. We don't have a lot of flexibility in terms ofcredibility in foreign exchange markets and so forth to ease reservepositions without damaging that credibility. So I think there is an-26-8/20/85opportunity here, as I say, to buy some flexibility for the futurewithout a dramatic impact on rates. I would say that "C" is toodramatic a shift, but I would position myself somewhere between "B"and "C;" perhaps a target of $500 million is about appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their view and suggests a possible course of action, without presenting any opposing viewpoints or indicating any disagreement with others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 182.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, to adhere at this time to anemphasis on the monetary aggregates, which has been [our approach]since 1979 or at least from 1979 to 1982, is not justified by what weknow about them or what we can predict in terms of the pattern ofchange in the aggregates, particularly in M1. Well, let me correctmyself: the narrow aggregate is still behaving in a pattern outsidethe modeling of projections plus or minus some standard error. Ithink there is increasing merit to the thesis that there has been ashift in the demand curve. It seems to me that there's a cumulativeeffect on the public of financial crises in state after state and intype of institution after type of institution. I am not just talkingabout Ohio and Maryland and thrifts in California and industrial loancompanies in Utah and institutions in Texas and so forth; I'm thinkingof the cumulative effect on the public's consciousness of thisconstant news about failed financial institutions following a multi-decade period in which nobody failed. Take Chicago--pardon me Silas--where the two biggest S&Ls and the two biggest banks, the fourdominant financial institutions there, are on sufferance. There'sBank of America, Seafirst, Financial Corporation of America, TexasCommerce--you could go on and on. [There are problem] maritime loans,energy loans, and now real estate loans.I think we will see more evidence as time goes by that therehas been a shift in the demand curve. And for us now to gear ourpolicies around bringing M1 down simply is not warranted given theextreme degree of uncertainty. So I would not support any move whichwould raise interest rates at this time. Think of the leverage--I usethe term badly--that interest rates have in the foreign exchangemarkets, in less developed countries, in debt coverage servicing, andon and on. While we should not dismiss M1 entirely, of course, wedon't know [what drives] M1 at this time. Eventually we will; ex postwe will look back on this period and say it was quite obvious that X,Y, and Z were the reasons why M1 behaved in the way it did. So, do welose credibility if we continue to treat M1 the way we have. No oneknows. But we have a Chairman who communicates pretty well with thefinancial community. After all, we have sublimated or at least setaside to some degree the narrow aggregate to date; we have two otheraggregates and we have the debt number and other measures; and we havean able spokesman here. What I am trying to say here is to someextent heresy and that is that I think in this six-week period weshould concentrate more on the fed funds rate in the execution ofpolicy. I would mean by that that we would keep the rate exactlywhere it is now. We would not let it drift up or push it up as somehave advocated. I believe we can maintain credibility by maintainingthe rate. While I would go for "B," I would hope that in theimplementation by the Chairman and the staff that we would keep ratesrelatively stable. I think stable interest rates might be acontribution to this short-run period. We have heard of stable rates;we have experienced those--it is hard to remember--and I think thatmight add to our credibility and to some measure of stability in anunstable world. It might even add stability to the decline, andhopefully the gradual decline, in the dollar. I would hope in thatregard, Mr. Chairman, that in the [wording of the directive] we would-27-8/20/85move the [reference to] foreign exchange markets up in position and/orhave language indicating that we are paying considerably moreattention to that part of the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Martin disagrees with the emphasis on monetary aggregates and argues for a focus on the fed funds rate instead. He also questions the credibility of using M1 as a measure of monetary policy and suggests that stable interest rates could contribute to stability in the short-run.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the interest of clarity, where doyou interpret the federal funds rate to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 184.
MR. MARTIN. Well, I was going by the report of our StaffDirector who said 7-5/8, 7-3/4, 8 percent. I would hope that theChairman wouldn't see fit to go above 8 percent, and I would thinkthat would be consistent with about $350 to $450 million in borrowingand whatever excess reserve path goes along with a cap of 8 percent.I wouldn't want to see 8 percent in the directive but I would hope--failing some gyration in the dollar, which I think is the thing thatwould be a more important factor now--that we could keep it at 8percent to 7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and hope regarding the interest rate and borrowing, but there is no direct disagreement or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Having had this strong endorsement of Ml,I think it is appropriate that we turn to Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply introduces the subject of Mr. Morris after mentioning a strong endorsement of Ml.


Passage number 186.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with everything thatGovernor Martin said. The outlook is extremely uncertain. I don'tthink there is very considerable risk of a recession developing, but Ithink there is a considerable risk of a sub-optimal [economic] growthrate, more of the same that we have had in the first half. And itseems to me that there is no need for even a moderate upward movementin interest rates until we have some conviction that the economyreally is strengthening, and I don't see that in the numbers yet. Isee it in the forecast, but I don't see it anywhere else. As to thiscredibility issue, it seems to me that if we were in a position wherethe credibility of the Federal Reserve was rather shaky, one couldmake a case for moving--despite the uncertainty about the economicoutlook--simply because a loss of credibility would have veryimportant consequences in the foreign exchange market, for example.But I don't see that as I observe the foreign exchange market. Idon't see participants in that market worried about the FederalReserve following inflationary monetary policies. So I don't see thatthere is a need, in order to maintain our credibility, to do somethingthat we don't think necessarily has to be done because of the state ofthe economy. So it seems to me that a stand-pat policy is anappropriate policy here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, agrees with everything that Governor Martin said and expresses similar concerns about the economic outlook and the need for interest rate changes.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 188.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, Governor Martin made myspeech for me as well. Given the state of the economy--the sluggishnature of what is going on and an outlook not all that marvelous--Ithink money market conditions are about where they should be. I don'treally see any case for tightening except if one wanted to concentrateon the narrow money supply. I think that would only exacerbate thetrade problem. Equally, I don't see a great need for any significanteasing. I would be a little concerned about the effect of anyappreciable easing on the foreign exchange market. The dollar needsto come down but, as you indicated earlier, a free-fall is certainlynot what we want. Given all of those factors and all of theuncertainties that we have in the markets, I would think that stayingwhere we are is right. And if that means letting M1 run over thetarget, I think we just have to let that happen and explain it as best-28-8/20/85we can. So, I would opt for a stand-pat policy, and that to metranslates into alternative B with a directive that would beasymmetric leaning toward alternative A. I think the borrowing levelof $350 to $450 million, centering around $400 million, is aboutright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any significant contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, is expressing his opinion and reasoning behind his stance on the current state of the economy and money market conditions. While he mentions different possible courses of action, he ultimately concludes that staying where they are is the best approach.


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 190.
MR. PARTEE. Well, this certainly is a time that separatesthe sheep from the goats. I am not enough of a monetarist to be ableto bring myself to do something because of the behavior of themonetary numbers that has absolutely no confirmation in the realeconomy or in the outlook for the real economy as we can see it.Indeed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


Passage number 191.
 I would be in favor of easing if it were not for the monetaryaggregates--MR. RICE. So would I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals express agreement and support for easing, but mention a specific condition that would change their stance.


Passage number 192.
MR. BLACK(.). I would too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a statement made by Mr. Black expressing agreement with an unspecified topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
MR. PARTEE. --because I think we are going through a verydifficult period in which a little ease in rates might not hurt. Itmight be pushing on a string and it might not accomplish too much, butit certainly would not hurt. I am also quite bothered by the foreignexchange market. I think that Jerry and Paul are right: that we couldget quite a drop in that. And I suppose a material move toward easierrates would increase the odds that that would be true. I think alsothat there is a little question about the credibility of the FederalReserve developing out there. I have seen quite a few reports andheard from quite a few people who say: "Well, we don't see anyinflation immediately but you really are setting the stage for it--youare providing all of the liquidity--and we think the result of this isgoing to be inflationary in the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses concern about the foreign exchange market and questions the credibility of the Federal Reserve. They suggest that a drop in rates might help, but also acknowledge that it might not accomplish much. This shows a disagreement or uncertainty about the best course of action.


Passage number 194.
"MR. MORRIS. It is not showing up in the bond market or theforeign exchange market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the bond market and the foreign exchange market.


Passage number 195.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's showing up in the foreign exchangemarket and I think it's showing up a little in the precious metalsmarket. And I believe that is something that we have to be somewhatconcerned about. But, as I said, I just cannot bring myself totighten interest rates--to be specific about what tightening means--onaccount of this behavior in M1. Therefore, I guess I am stuck prettymuch where the Chairman was, except I would sort of like to see thefunds rate drift back to about 7-1/2 percent, where it was when westarted out, rather than see it cruise along in the high 7s--at 7-3/4to 8 percent. I think there probably has been a little questioningout there in the market as to whether these numbers mean that therehas been some [slight] tightening that has been planned by the FederalReserve, so I guess that would mean that I would lean toward the lowside on this range of borrowings. A $500 million level certainlyseems too high to me; $350 to $400 million I think would probably doit and I hope that M1 comes back [within its range]. That certainlyis not a plan to bring M1 back; that's a hope that M1 will come backwhile we continue what is, in market terms, an unchanged policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his personal views and preferences but does not contradict or challenge any other opinions or statements mentioned.


Passage number 196.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I feel most comfortable with staying wherewe are with alternative B--not because I think it is the right place-29-8/20/85to be, but because I just feel uncomfortable about either tighteningor loosening. The more interesting question, as we go past theinitial couple of weeks after this meeting, is: What kinds ofcircumstances would cause one to want to change that to eithertightening or loosening. Someone earlier brought up the point that weought to harden up the procedures. I don't see how we can do that. Ithink that we are just in a highly judgmental period. However, my ownbias is that we ought to have a significant burden of proof [beforemoving] in either direction at this point. I would go into the periodwith pretty much an open mind--a symmetrical mindset as far as thedirective goes. I could foresee circumstances in which looseningwould be the better way or, conceivably, tightening, but I don't thinkwe can nail down those procedures in any meaningful way. But I wouldnot want to see a substantial change in reserve provision unless therewere some really pretty good reasons and not just somewhat marginalchanges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and personal discomfort with both tightening and loosening. They also state that they have an open mind and can see circumstances for both tightening and loosening, but acknowledge that it is difficult to determine specific procedures. Overall, there is a sense of neutrality and open-mindedness in the passage.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich. No, Mr. Stern first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
MR. STERN. I would favor alternative B with a slight tilttoward alternative C; that, in my mind, is associated with borrowingof perhaps $400 to $500 million. This credibility issue seems to meto be a troublesome one because in the abstract it can cut both ways.There are risks in ignoring M1 and there are also risks in reacting toan aggregate whose behavior we don't seem to understand very well. Atleast in my mind the foreign exchange market is perhaps decisive atthis juncture and it seems to be expressing some doubts about the kindof disciplined policy that is being pursued in this country. Largelyfor that reason I would tilt in the direction of "C," as I indicated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Stern is advocating for alternative B with a leaning towards alternative C, while expressing concerns about the risks of ignoring M1 and the behavior of the foreign exchange market.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine the level of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 200.
MR. WALLICH. I would not want to see a great change inpolicy. I would like to lean toward the harder side just todemonstrate our good faith with having rebased and then set a newrange. I agree that M1 is very dubious; I think there has been ademand curve change. Nevertheless, I think credibility is anobjective fact. It's not what people think; it's the way they aregoing to forge expectations and the way they are going to react toother things we do. So there is an investment there and something isat stake. I think "B," if I read the Bluebook correctly, would by thefourth quarter or the end of the year get us back close to the cone.Is that right, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 201.
MR. AXILROD. That's the projection, but the projections havebeen consistently wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the projections being consistently wrong. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 202.
MR. WALLICH. As of now, one could say that we aim to bringM1 back on track by the end of the year. That, I think, is arespectable reaction to the overshooting of a not-very-reliablevariable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on a course of action and there is no indication of conflicting views or opposition.


Passage number 203.
MR. PARTEE. It takes a small fourth quarter to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Partee about the requirement of a small fourth quarter. There is no indication of any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 204.
MR. BLACK(.). It sure does; it's moving away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is confirming that something is moving away.


Passage number 205.
MR. RICE(.). He doesn't give it a very high probability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply reflects Mr. Rice's opinion on the probability of something without any conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 206.
-30-8/20/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's his best guess. It has a probabilityof 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the given information is the best guess with a probability of 10 percent.


Passage number 207.
MR. WALLICH. I would not invest a great deal in the effortto bring it back. I think there have been a great many challengesfrom sensible people to our credibility and I would like to establisha record of having tried, without doing any serious damage by doingso. So, I think "B" and going to $500 million with the funds ratewhere it is now--it could be 8 percent--and the same funds rate rangethat we have now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and explaining their rationale for not investing a large amount of effort in bringing something back. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 209.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For reasons I stated before, I'm inthe "B" camp with a little tilt toward the "C" camp as well. I thinkthere is something at least at the margin to this credibility questionright now, so that reinforces my own thinking. As far as thespecifics are concerned, I would have borrowing of $400 to $450million going perhaps as high as $500 million if we got into troubleon the exchange rate. But barring that, I think $400 to $450 millionshould do it. I would have a very modest preference--certainly nothingI would go to war about--for specifying the aggregates at 8-1/2 and 6-1/2 percent. But that's symbolic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and preferences.


Passage number 210.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 211.
MR. BOYKIN. I would also look at "B," obviously for all thereasons that have been stated. My tilt--and it would be a very slighttilt--would be toward "C," which would be a very slight increase. Ido have concern about the credibility problem; what is happening to M1is extremely difficult to explain. I think some stability, if youwill, in interest rates would not be bad. I start getting a littlenervous when I hear words that seem to say that we need to peg the fedfunds rate. I get uncomfortable with that. That would not be theobjective, but some stability would be good. Borrowings of about $450million would be all right with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, expresses his preference for option "B" and a slight increase in borrowing, but also acknowledges his concern about the credibility problem and the need for stability in interest rates. He also mentions his discomfort with the idea of pegging the fed funds rate but ultimately states that borrowing of about $450 million would be acceptable to him. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints in this passage.


Passage number 212.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 213.
MS. SEGER. I was thinking about the objectives set at thelast meeting and the fact that a position of no change in reservepressure produced borrowing going from $350 million up to about $800million in one of the maintenance periods and an average above $500million in the other periods, and short and intermediate rates creptup something in the neighborhood of 35 to 50 basis points, dependingupon which series you look at. So, if that is what no changeproduced, then I guess today I would like to vote for alternative A,which is an easing. My thinking is that maybe an easing position orless pressure on reserves will produce no change in rates, which iswhat I think is really needed. In fact, I would like to see therecent uptick unwound or undone and the borrowings back to the targetmentioned last time. So I guess I will vote for alternative A with aborrowings target of about $300 to $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing her own opinion and voting for alternative A with a specific borrowing target.


Passage number 214.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the interest of clarity, thedecision last time was something like $350 million tilted toward thehigh side, with the directive saying that we might move higher if themoney supply was higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement of fact and does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 215.
-31-8/20/85MS. SEGER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage: -31-8/20/85MS. SEGER. This statement seems to be a random sequence of characters or codes, and there is no clear information or context to suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 216.
 But I thought it was in the context of someother--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the context of some other things aswell. But the dollar was down and the economy [unintelligible]. Now,we had an odd week in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and mentioning various factors in the given context without expressing any contradiction or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 217.
MR. PARTEE. If I understood Mr. Black correctly, we didn'ttighten enough, given the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his understanding that they didn't tighten enough, while Mr. Black may have expressed a different opinion or perspective.


Passage number 218.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states "MR. BLACK" without providing any context or information that would indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 219.
 But I dissented in May because I thought 6percent was too much; we got twice that much and so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey, I guess you're the only oneleft out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 220.
MR. GUFFEY. That may have been intentional, Mr. Chairman. Ithink that everything has been said. In my view, we are neutered withregard to policy at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion about the current state of policy.


Passage number 221.
MR. BLACK. We are neutered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 222.
MR. GUFFEY. We are neutered to the extent that we don't knowwhat is happening in M1 and we don't know what is going to happen tothe economy and, as a result, I don't see any reason to change policy.Thus, if "B" represents no change, that's my preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their preference for not changing policy based on their lack of knowledge about the economy.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would rather describe it as a wellbalanced, astute, careful--. We have a great predominance, obviously,for "B" with some shadings as to what that means. Now, in what wayshould that be tilted. A range of $350 to $500 million encompassesalmost everybody's view; that's a wider range than we normally talkabout. I want to be ecumenical in this exercise. What are borrowingsrunning this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. It is discussing different perspectives and ranges of views on a specific topic, without any clear disagreement or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 224.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We are using $400 million in the path; ithas been averaging, through yesterday, slightly over $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply provides a statement of fact regarding the usage and average amount of $400 million.


Passage number 225.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where were we last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is simply asking for information about a previous location.


Passage number 226.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The last full two-week period was $480million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the last full two-week period being $480 million.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 228.
MR. RICE. No change from where we are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that there is no need for change from the current situation.


Passage number 229.
MR. PARTEE. That's $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a monetary value.


Passage number 230.
MR. RICE. No, we were a little over--around $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a specific amount of money without any conflicting opinions or opposition.


Passage number 231.
MR. PARTEE. No, they're targeting $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply states that they are targeting $400 million.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's where you can read it one way oranother, depending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that different interpretations are possible.


Passage number 233.
-32-8/20/85MR. AXILROD. Governor Partee, we have to write down anumber, so we wrote down $400 million. But I think, in essence, ithas been $350 to $450 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply stating a different figure ($400 million) than what he believes the actual amount to be ($350 to $450 million). This does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 234.
MR. PARTEE. Well, my point is that this doesn't say where ithappened to have come out; the [issue] isn't where we are now. It'swhat we were planning, targeting, expecting to do. That is where weare now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It appears to be a clarification or further explanation of a point being made.


Passage number 235.
MR. MORRIS. Even if we aren't there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or remark made by Mr. Morris.


Passage number 236.
MR. PARTEE. It's always either above or below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 237.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if we could consider someflexibility as we look out, along the lines suggested by Ed Boehne.If growth in the aggregates should slow markedly, we could move towardease rather promptly. But if they continue to grow at current rates,we could tilt in the other direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is suggesting considering some flexibility in a hypothetical situation without stating any opposing point.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's one variable. We would haveto define that a little more. Given what we have now on the moneysupply, it would be awfully hard to get that down over the next threeor four weeks to a figure that to many people seems low for thequarter. I guess this doesn't answer your question. It just raisesthe question of what you mean by weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing explanations and discussing the intricacies of defining certain variables.


Passage number 239.
MR. RICE. I would say the rate of growth is weak if it slowsto the 8 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a personal opinion stated by Mr. Rice regarding the rate of growth.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage.


Passage number 241.
MR. RICE. For the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or a question without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the given passage. The statement only mentions the title of Chairman Volcker without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 243.
 Well, I'm not objecting to what you say,I'm just saying that as a practical matter--MR. RICE. It's not going to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is not objecting or disagreeing with what the other person is saying, but rather providing a different perspective or adding a practical consideration.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it might. But we're not going toknow until shortly before the next meeting. That doesn't say weshouldn't do it. But since we are going to get a high August, to getdown to 8 percent we would have to have--. The projection already isfor a lower September. I don't know when we next meet; it's the firstof October. It might become apparent along about September 20 unlesssomething very surprising happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 245.
 I'm not saying you're wrong; Ijust wanted--MR. RICE. Yes, I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker states that they are not saying the other person is wrong, expressing a non-confrontational attitude.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we put it in that kind of number, thereis no substantial prospect of easing purely on the M1 number for amonth. That may be all right, but I just want to make clear theimplication of what you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not displaying contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing potential implications and seeking clarification.


Passage number 247.
MR. PARTEE. We had specified 5 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For the quarter, anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "for the quarter, anyway" is neutral and does not indicate any conflicting or opposing perspectives.


Passage number 249.
-33-8/20/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only way it could be different wouldbe if we had a $5 billion drop or something like that right away. Itwould have to happen in next week's figures. If I were to write downa number, I would say $400 to $500 million, depending upon theaggregates and the dollar. If the economic news clearly weakened, wewould have to say that we may go below it. If the money supplyremained very strong, or if the combination of a strong money supplyand a declining dollar produced a progressive loss of confidence orloss of credibility, if that's the right word--I'm very chary of thecredibility argument for all the reasons that have been stated. [Wecould have] a great increase of credibility with the monetarists inthe short run and if the economy plunges into recession or we have agreat financial crisis, we will suffer an enormous loss of credibilityin a more basic sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the potential impact of different factors on the economy.


Passage number 250.
MR. RICE(.). An insubstantial change, though, is unlikely todo that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing an opinion about the likelihood of a certain outcome, but it does not involve any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't expect that to happen. Ithink there is something to this credibility issue as appreciated bythe markets. Whether or not it's dependent upon M1, I am not so sure.But I think there's something to it. It's not the only factor. Itdepends upon what's happening to bond prices, the gold price, thedollar, and the economy. Well, I have to get some expression ofconsensus here. I'd say $400 to $500 million; $450 million is notmuch different. A lot of people just said $350 to $450 million, alittle lower than what we have been running.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker shares their thoughts and opinions but does not present conflicting viewpoints or engage in argumentative discourse.


Passage number 252.
MR. MARTIN. How about $350 to $500 million and a funds rateof 7-1/2 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents a potential offer or suggestion without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That $350 to $500 million is a wider bandthan we have been expressing, but I don't think it's unrealistic. Thestarting point or the center of gravity is $425 million, if I averagethe $350 and $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information and expressing their perspective on the potential amount of money.


Passage number 254.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I wouldn't want to specify the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that Governor Martin issuggesting that; he's thinking that's the center of gravity of thefunds rate with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is stating the opinion of the speaker without indicating any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 256.
MR. MARTIN. I wouldn't want to specify it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Martin is expressing a personal preference but does not indicate any disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just try that, in the interest ofevoking a response. I don't know what the $350 to $500 million means,except where we start. It's kind of an acceptable range within whichborrowing would be varied--nothing much different happening from whatwe have now--depending upon short-term tactics. It says that thenumber that Mr. Axilrod would write down would be $425 million. Ifthings changed enough so that we deliberately would go above $500million or below $350 million, it might be a point where we would havean intermeeting consultation anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 258.
MR. KEEHN. If, say, M1 in September came in on the low side,the way that Steve suggested in the Bluebook, does that mean that infact we would move the borrowing down to $350 million, whereas if that-34-8/20/85expectation does not come to pass--if we have a higher number--wewould aim toward the $500 million. Is that the operative translation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification on how borrowing would be adjusted based on different outcomes.


Passage number 259.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am afraid I cannot translate itquite that simply. You have to tell me some other things that aregoing to happen too. It would certainly go in that direction, if youwere just looking at M1. But, if you were telling me that M1 growthwas going down at the same time housing starts were coming in at 2million a year and leading indicators were shooting up and everybodywas feeling ebullient about the economy, it might or might not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that in order to accurately translate a situation, they would need more information and context.


Passage number 260.
MR. KEEHN. I was assuming all other things might be equal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their assumption about a situation, without any indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All other things equal, I would tend toagree with you. But if the economy looked as sluggish as it did andall the rest--. I would also remind you: We have worried about thedollar falling in an atmosphere of lack of confidence, but if thedollar for some reason were very strong in this period--I don't thinkwe expect that--that would be a factor I'd put certainly on the sideof taking my chances with M1. It wouldn't be an atmosphere suggestinglack of confidence and credibility and all of the rest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different hypothetical scenarios and considering various factors that may affect their decision.


Passage number 262.
MR. MORRIS. Did we contemplate buying foreign [currencies]in a situation when the dollar is rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is asking a question about the intention or plan to purchase foreign currencies when the dollar is rising.


Passage number 263.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if it rose exceptionally I would.I'm not [sure] the Treasury would even though it would seem to makelots of sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whether the Treasury would agree with their perspective, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 264.
MR. MORRIS(.). Has anyone talked to the Treasury in thatforward-looking sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states a question from Mr. Morris about whether anyone has talked to the Treasury in a forward-looking sense.


Passage number 265.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have not found that terribly productivebut I think if that happened, the question would be raised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their personal experience and thoughts.


Passage number 266.
MR. KEEHN. Hearing the way you described that range,certainly from my point of view that would be an acceptable approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply agrees with the way the range was described.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anyone else like to respond to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given statement is simply inviting others to provide their own response or opinion on a previous statement or question. It does not show any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 268.
MR. RICE. Well, the range is fine; the midpoint is not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is contention or disagreement because Mr. Rice is expressing disagreement or dissatisfaction with the midpoint.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want an assymmetrical midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the statement; it simply states a desire for an asymmetrical midpoint without presenting any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 270.
MR. PARTEE. The midpoint being $425 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical value without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 271.
MR. RICE. The midpoint being $425 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the midpoint being $425 million.


Passage number 272.
MR. PARTEE. It is a little high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage. The statement is subjective and does not elicit any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 273.
MR. RICE. A little low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The statement is a simple response to a question and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 274.
MR. MARTIN. It must be about right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Martin.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is what makes a horse race.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "That is what makes a horse race" is a common saying and does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is a light-hearted way of acknowledging that the unpredictable nature of horse racing is what makes it exciting and interesting.


Passage number 276.
 Well,--MR. PARTEE. Of course, if something happens: say, the moneysupply comes in stronger than has been projected or other things8/20/85happen in the economy, you would expect borrowing to run above that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 277.
We are talking about a beginning range, aren't we, for the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would interpret this ordinarily aswhere we are. As I said, we just start at $425 million here. And youare right, within experience. But I guess I would interpret this widemargin as saying that something outside of that--not necessarily[unintelligible] obviously--might be the occasion for a little mid-meeting discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a range and indicating that further discussion may be needed based on certain circumstances.


Passage number 278.
MR. PARTEE. So, unless something pushes it rather stronglyin one direction or another, it does become the operating range forthe period. It is different than what we have done before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about a different approach that is being taken compared to previous actions.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this will be a little differenttwist. There is some mistake, I guess, to reading this[unintelligible] as you tell me. But I think this is a littledifferent from saying, for instance, $425 million and then raising ita little or [lowering it] without specifying the reasons. Excuse me,did somebody have something to say down there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and seeking clarification, but there is no clear conflict or disagreement present.


Passage number 280.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I am a bit puzzled. We are in the middleof August now, and if the projections for the money supply in Augustare somewhat correct, there would have to be a very dramatic movementit would seem to me from the projected 4 percent in September for usto move off the $425 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and puzzlement about the projected movement of the money supply in September. There is no indication of any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you are only looking at the moneysupply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 282.
MR. GUFFEY. Okay. I am satisfied with the answer then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that Mr. Guffey is satisfied with the answer provided, suggesting agreement or lack of contention.


Passage number 283.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, just to clarify one thing: I amnot sure what the Committee feels or what you individually believeabout the dollar. My own personal view is that continuation of agradual unwinding of the dollar from the excessively high valueprobably would be for the good of the country--just thinking of theimport-export situation. I hope that it will continue and that agradual orderly drop in the dollar would not trigger our moving uptoward the upper end of the borrowing range. I'd like to hear whatyour views are, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of the speaker's personal view and a request to hear the views of others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if I could blink my eyes and wake uptomorrow with a lower dollar and no accompanying change in attitudes[as a result of] that, I might argue that that is a good thing. Butthat is an impossible scenario. The question is: How do we get alower dollar if that is what we inevitably have to get over time,without throwing inflation off course, interest rates off course, andwithout overshooting on the down side, in some short-term senseanyway, and if that would bring more pressure on the industrial sectorthan we can stand because we are so far behind the eight ball there.And we do have to shift literally--it is going to happen. It's notgoing to happen in the [unintelligible] but it may happenexpectationally and in terms of prospects. What does it come to now,Mr. Truman, with a $150 billion trade deficit--maybe 15 percent of ourmanufacturing output. If we went from where we are now to balance intwo years or three years we wouldn't have the capacity to meet [the-36-8/20/85export demand] without a lot of inflationary pressures, I am afraid,assuming the economy generally isn't otherwise in recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is considering the potential benefits and drawbacks of having a lower dollar value. They mention the challenges of achieving a lower dollar without disrupting inflation, interest rates, or the industrial sector. This shows disagreement and conflicting considerations.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: In this passage, the word "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement. However, without more context, it is not clear what exactly is being contended or disagreed upon.


Passage number 286.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes. It depends on how you think capacity wouldbe going otherwise. But it is clear that demand depends on what elseis going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the demand for something depends on other factors or circumstances.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are at what [on manufacturing capacity]--roughly 80 percent--if you believe these figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statistic without challenging it or expressing opposing views.


Passage number 288.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "MR. TRUMAN" is a standalone phrase that does not convey any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 289.
 We have done a crude calculation that wouldsuggest on one scenario that, in fact, we would be over 100 percent onthe capacity utilization index, if--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is not going to [happen]. It isanother way of saying it is impossible to correct the trade balance inthat timeframe. But if we had a set of conditions that went in thatdirection and put in that kind of potential demand on our capacity,even though we could not meet it in three years, we would have a[difficult] circumstance in the manufacturing sector of the economy interms of sustainability, inflationary pressures, or whatever. Lookingat this more broadly here, we are importing 3 percent or more of theGNP. We are consuming 3 percent more than we are producing. If wecorrect that, we are going to have to have some period of time whenconsumption is rising by 3 percent less than GNP. Countries don'tfind that very easy to do. It means lower real incomes. Ifproductivity were rising by 3 percent a year, which it is not--.Let's be realistic about it; it could be rising by 1 percent a year;so it takes three years' growth of productivity to do that withoutincreases in real income.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply presenting a series of statements and calculations regarding the trade balance and capacity utilization.


Passage number 290.
MR. PARTEE. On John's question, Paul: I think that is areasonable question. He was talking about the exchange rate, not therate of change in the balance of trade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply acknowledging that John's question is reasonable and clarifying the topic of discussion.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context to indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without any further details.


Passage number 292.
 Well, I got off the question a bit but--MR. PARTEE. Was it a 4 percent decline since the lastmeeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that they have strayed from the original question.


Passage number 293.
MR. TRUMAN. A little more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement by Mr. Truman without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 294.
MR. KICHLINE. It was a little over 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It was a little over 4 percent" is a straightforward and factual statement that does not involve any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 295.
MR. PARTEE. A little more than that. Is that too much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" and does not provide any information or context to indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 297.
 It's not too much if it doesn't--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The problem is that there is athreshold level in there someplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states a problem without any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. One would hope to get it down asfast as when it first began coming down and get it over with and thenhave a feeling of greater stability. Could we take another 4 percent[decline]. That depends, really. If people thought we were concernedabout 4 percent and concerned about the inflationary impact, we would8/20/85get a different situation. What I would fear the most is a feelingthat we were driving it down, that we were easing policy to drive thedollar down, saying "Let's get this thing going." That, I think, isfraught with danger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a disagreement or contention about whether or not to take another 4 percent decline in relation to policy decisions regarding the economy and the value of the dollar. The speaker expresses fear and potential danger in driving the dollar down intentionally.


Passage number 299.
MR. BALLES. Well, I would certainly agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. The speaker simply states agreement with an unspecified statement or idea.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The situation with that 4 percent may bethat it's the first 10 percent of a 40 percent drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is presenting a hypothetical situation, suggesting that a 4 percent drop could be the beginning of a larger 40 percent drop. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement, as it is simply presenting a potential scenario.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 301.
 So long as thereis a feeling that it's not getting out of hand, I think--MR. CROSS. It's very unrealistic, isn't it, to think that wecould really have a soft landing that people talk about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "It's very unrealistic, isn't it" indicates disagreement or contention, as it challenges the previous statement about the possibility of a soft landing.


Passage number 302.
 Graduallymoving the dollar down and having this not generate all kinds ofresponses that would accelerate it and make it happen in 10 minutes--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's my problem. We may just have animpossible problem. But to the extent the dollar is declining becausepeople feel genuinely better about let's say, Germany and Japan--. Orit could decline against sterling. Sterling got very low and to theextent that people feel that was overdone and sterling went up, oneresult would be a decline in the dollar exchange rate. But I don'tthink that is the kind of thing that sets off great expectationalmovements in the rate; it is much less likely to. I don't know how toquantify it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and stating that they do not know how to quantify the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 303.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask Sam toexplain a bit further why he thinks that a soft landing for the dollaris a very unrealistic possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is wondering why Sam thinks that a soft landing for the dollar is unrealistic. This suggests that Mr. Balles disagrees with Sam's belief and wants further clarification or explanation.


Passage number 304.
MR. CROSS. Well, if you are really talking about a softlanding, a continuing steady decline, it seems to me that all thepeople who are sitting there holding dollars are going to beinfluenced by what they see going on. And I think they will eitheranticipate it continuing or take other steps, and it just won't golike that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 305.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Just in conceptual terms: If therewere a firm feeling in the market that the dollar was going to declinegradually, I assure you it would decline suddenly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a hypothetical scenario and there is no indication of contention or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 306.
MR. CROSS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Cross. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 307.
 It would happen overnight once they--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, it might not be the worst thing inthe world if it happened--if, as I say, you woke up tomorrow and thedollar was 10 percent lower and people said: "That is the end of it.We are down there now. We have great confidence in the dollar at thislower level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage expresses two different opinions about the potential devaluation of the dollar. The phrase "It would happen overnight" suggests a sense of concern or disagreement about the possibility, while the following statement "it might not be the worst thing" implies a more positive or accepting perspective.


Passage number 308.
" That would be great, but I--MR. CROSS. It is not going to happen that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement and enthusiasm with the statement, but then Mr. Cross interrupts to assert that it won't happen as suggested.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 310.
 The question is whether they think thefirst 10 percent is--MR. BALLES. It's hard to get from here to there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles disagrees with an unidentified person's opinion about the difficulty of reaching the destination.


Passage number 311.
MR. CROSS. It is impossible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Cross is suggesting that something is impossible.


Passage number 312.
-38-8/20/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Long before we got any of thebenefits on the trade side we would get the financial effects of thatkind of sudden drop. It would be very messy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is stating a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it is not even the suddenness. Ithink we are getting along within limits. If it were sudden andpeople thought it was over, that's fine. But I don't know how youarrange that particular scenario. What you want is a littleconstructive uncertainty in the market concerning all the ways itcould go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts on a particular scenario and expressing a desire for uncertainty in the market.


Passage number 314.
MR. CROSS. You would have to have it move [down] and go up alittle and then sideways and then everybody would wonder [which way]it is going. That is the only way you can get there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by MR. CROSS explaining a hypothetical situation or scenario. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have been pretty lucky so far,that is, with what the dollar has been doing in a very compressed timeperiod. But it is so compressed that markets are not going to forgetthat this trend is pretty clear and sharp. Even though we may getstability for one week, it may go down 2 percent the next week. Sofar we have been able to play that quite nicely--again by luck, lotsof luck. Whether we can continue that, I don't know; it is the bestscenario we could have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's opinion and uncertainty about the future performance of the dollar in relation to the market.


Passage number 316.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You get stories even from theJapanese people who theoretically are in longer-term Treasurysecurities that they have this calibrated down to the tee in terms ofwhat set of expectational circumstances with regard to the decline inthe dollar would make them move and move fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states that Japanese people, who hold longer-term Treasury securities, have a clear understanding of the circumstances that would cause them to react quickly to the decline in the dollar.


Passage number 317.
MS. SEGER. What if today's levels of exchange rates areconsistent with still higher deficits in the balance of trade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply posing a hypothetical scenario about the relationship between exchange rates and trade deficits.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be, and that is a reason why thedollar has to come down. But that does not tell you how to get thereeasily. We cannot cure the underlying problem that we are borrowing$150 billion a year abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It presents a statement and acknowledges a reason for the statement, without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 319.
MR. GUFFEY. Or $200 billion at home.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of a figure.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that you can't dispense with thatwithout it having other consequences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is making a claim about the consequences of not dispensing with something, without mentioning any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 321.
MS. SEGER. Well, the American banks would buy governmentsecurities and make less consumer loans and tighten up their standardsthere. Is that all bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not explicitly state any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by one speaker, Ms. Seger, explaining a potential action that American banks might take.


Passage number 322.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And never sell them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 323.
MR. TRUMAN. You'd have less consumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Truman is simply stating a fact or opinion without opposing or contradicting any previous statements.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Within limits it is probably not all bad.But you are saying tighten up on consumer loans, tighten up on allother kinds of loans. What you are saying is higher interest rates.That is one consequence, I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that there may be negative aspects but also agrees with the idea of higher interest rates as a consequence.


Passage number 325.
-39-8/20/85MR. WALLICH. Well, at this level of capacity utilizationwhat would it do. Three percent of GNP would be about 4 to 5 percenton capacity utilization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact regarding the impact of a certain percentage of GNP on capacity utilization.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. You have to look atmanufacturing capacity. That is where. You say [85] percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the manufacturing capacity needs to be taken into consideration.


Passage number 327.
MS. SEGER. Well, you have to look industry-by-industry too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests considering industry-specific factors.


Passage number 328.
MR. WALLICH. Manufacturing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage consists of a direct quote from Mr. Wallich discussing the topic of manufacturing. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Truman has a subtotal of 100 percentcapacity utilization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a straightforward statement about Mr. Truman's capacity utilization, indicating that it is at 100 percent.


Passage number 330.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but that's with no give.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposing viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 331.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is probably exaggerated alittle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses a personal opinion with a hedging phrase ("probably") and a minimizing term ("a little"). There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 332.
MR. TRUMAN. That is simply the counterpart to your [85]percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "That is simply the counterpart to your [85] percent" suggests agreement or alignment between the speaker and the person they are addressing.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not going to happen that fast. Butthe tendency, with a sharp enough decline in the dollar, would be inthat direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 334.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it would have to be more thanthat because you would have to compensate for the oil imports; youwouldn't be able to stop those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical scenario and mentions a logical consequence of that scenario.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let us return to an operatingdecision here. We had a proposal on the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to go back to discussing a decision that was previously mentioned.


Passage number 336.
MR. PARTEE. $350 to $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions a specific dollar amount.


Passage number 337.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we are saying in traditional terms is$425 million with a band of flexibility around there that issignificant but not huge. It's barely significant, I suppose, interms of its flexibility. If we got much beyond that, conditionsprobably would justify some discussion. That, I guess, is fairlyobvious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and expressing their perspective.


Passage number 338.
MR. PARTEE. And the specifications of "B".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only presents a statement by Mr. Partee without any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't looked very carefully at these.Has anybody thought or felt some strong predilections. We have acouple of alternatives here. Which alternative do we start with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking input or suggestions from others.


Passage number 340.
MR. RICE. Mr. Corrigan put some specifications on the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is simply stating that Mr. Corrigan has provided some specifications.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, apart from the specifications, wehave some language labeled alternative I and alternative II. Is thereany feeling between alternative I and alternative II, apart from whatnumbers we pick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking if there is any distinction or preference between alternative I and alternative II, without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 342.
MR. PARTEE. Pres does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is likely referring to the term "Pres" as an abbreviation for "President" without any conflicting opinions or disputes being expressed in the statement.


Passage number 343.
-40-8/20/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Alternative I spotlights the overshoot onM1; that's the substance of the difference in approach. It may beappropriate. Having not read it carefully yet, I will express anopinion that the fact that M1 is kind of out of bounds would lean metoward II just in terms of format, not substance, here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing different approaches, but there is no disagreement or conflict expressed.


Passage number 344.
MR. MARTIN. It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that alternativeII is a somewhat fuller discussion of M1 growth--what we expect andwhat its implication is--than alternative I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 345.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's my offhand feeling. Shall we workfrom alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their personal or immediate opinion ("offhand feeling") and suggesting the possibility of working from an alternative option.


Passage number 346.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 347.
MR. BALLES. I would prefer it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of preference by Mr. Balles.


Passage number 348.
MR. FORRESTAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Forrestal has agreed or acknowledged something.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Let's for the moment work fromalternative II. I think we are saying "maintain" basically, but thatdoes leave a question in my mind. Either here or in the discussion[in the policy record]--maybe we can do it just in the discussion--wemight say that we did have an insubstantial firming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing different options and considering potential questions or concerns, but there is no clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
MR. AXILROD. We would put it in the policy record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say here "maintain the degree ofpressure on reserve positions sought in recent weeks" and then explainin the policy record that that is very slightly tighter than when wesaid maintain last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is discussing maintaining a certain degree of pressure on reserve positions, and then clarifying that this degree of pressure is slightly tighter than the previous maintenance.


Passage number 352.
MR. PARTEE. It would be characterized as a little tighter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. It simply states a characterization of something, without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 353.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be very delicate in what words weuse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. The statement simply suggests being cautious or cautious in the choice of words, which does not imply contention or disagreement.


Passage number 354.
 "A somewhat more cautious provision of reserves" I think isabout--MR. AXILROD. It requires extreme delicacy this time sincethe level of borrowing unfortunately has been dropping as we havegotten slightly tighter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a need for caution and delicacy due to the decreasing level of borrowing.


Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have to explain the aberration inthe one week and say we approached it a bit more cautiously. That'senough. Now, what numbers do you want to put in here on M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about needing to explain an aberration and asks for input on numerical values.


Passage number 356.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without any context or further information.


Passage number 357.
 I had suggested--MR. BALLES. 9, 8-1/2 and 6-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply stating numbers suggested by someone without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't like to use the quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage because it is a personal preference statement that does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 359.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I had suggested 6-1/2 and 8-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that someone had suggested specific percentages - 6-1/2 and 8-1/2 percent.


Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we say last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply refers to the repetition of a statement made in a previous interaction.


Passage number 361.
-41-8/20/85MR. AXILROD. You had 7-1/2 percent last time, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a previous percentage (7-1/2 percent) without any conflicting views or contradictory statements.


Passage number 362.
And our present estimates are 8-1/2 percent for M2 and 6-1/2 percentfor M3, so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we said 7 to 8 percent for both ofthem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting different estimates for M2 and M3, and then suggests a potential range of 7 to 8 percent for both of them. There is no conflicting information or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 363.
 One is slightly lower and one is slightly higher but--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is fine with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that one thing is slightly lower and another is slightly higher, but the speaker is okay with that.


Passage number 364.
MR. MARTIN. Seems reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The statement "Seems reasonable" suggests agreement or acceptance of the previous statement.


Passage number 365.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Rates of around 7 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mentioned rates of around 7 to 8 percent are presented as a factual statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 366.
MR. PARTEE. Expecting to miss both of them. An average--SPEAKER(.). The average guesses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are discussing their expectations and guesses, but there is no indication of any disagreement.


Passage number 367.
MR. MARTIN. 8-1/2 percent and 6-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states two numbers, 8-1/2 percent and 6-1/2 percent.


Passage number 368.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" and doesn't provide any context or information about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 369.
 Well, I don't feel strongly about it but--MR. BALLES. That 8 percent sounds pretty high for M3, Mr.Chairman. That is above anything shown in the alternatives here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply expresses their opinion and skepticism about the 8 percent mentioned. They are not disagreeing or engaging in contention with anyone else.


Passage number 370.
MR. PARTEE. I'd rather pick 6-1/2 and 8-1/2 percent. I'dtake the point estimates. That happens to average to 7-1/2 percent; Idon't know that that means anything. Have we ever said that weaverage the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their preference for using the point estimates and mentioning the average without stating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 371.
MR. MARTIN. Geometrically or arithmetically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple statement of two possible options. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 372.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would have some preference, or more thana slight preference, for not changing the numbers if we don't have to.That is the only advantage of 7 to 8 percent, but I will not press thepoint. Would you rather say 7 to 8 percent or 8-1/2 and 6-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a preference for not changing the numbers if possible, suggesting that they may disagree with the idea of changing the numbers. Additionally, the statement "but I will not press the point" implies that there may be potential contention or disagreement on this topic.


Passage number 373.
MR. WALLICH. 8-1/2 percent would be good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich's statement suggests that an 8-1/2 percent rate would be favorable or satisfactory.


Passage number 374.
MR. MARTIN. 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage just provides a statement of the percentage (8-1/2 percent) without any clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll just be wrong on both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their resignation to the fact that they will be wrong on both aspects.


Passage number 376.
MR. PARTEE. With a point estimate you don't expect it to beexactly right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a fact about point estimates, without any conflicting opinions or statements.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 378.
 I didn't realize they did when you said--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You could have lucked out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their lack of knowledge or awareness.


Passage number 379.
MR. AXILROD. I should change my definition of success inprojecting, Mr. Chairman, because I always thought within a percentagepoint was success.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a personal statement by Mr. Axilrod about his own perspective on success in projecting.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So did I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 381.
MR. BLACK. Even with the period half done.-42-8/20/85SPEAKER(.). [Unintelligible] third quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a brief conversation between Mr. Black and an unidentified speaker. Without more context or information, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 382.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8-1/2 and 6-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states two percentages, 8-1/2 and 6-1/2 percent. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 383.
 "M1 growth isexpected to slow markedly--"MR. KEEHN. How about that word "markedly".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "markedly" implies a significant decrease in M1 growth, which may be debatable or subject to differing opinions.


Passage number 384.
MR. MARTIN. Yes. How about omitting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 385.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it has gone from 14 percent to 4 percent;that's quite a slowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The speaker is simply stating a fact about something that has occurred without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 386.
MR. KEEHN. Yes, but it is subject to judgment, and peoplewill interpret it one way that may not be appropriate. I'd eliminateit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Keehn states that while there is a point, people may interpret it inappropriately and suggests eliminating it. This implies a disagreement with the value or validity of the point.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we say "given relatively rapidgrowth in recent weeks." What number do you want to put in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question asking for clarification about a specific phrase, without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 388.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd want to put 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I'd want to put 8-1/2 percent" appears to be a personal preference or opinion, without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 389.
MR. PARTEE. 6 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is simply a statement of a percentage range without any conflicting ideas or opinions expressed.


Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Come on. You wanted to put in a precisenumber on the others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Come on. You wanted to put in a precise number on the others" simply implies that the person being addressed initially expressed a desire to provide or specify a specific number for something.


Passage number 391.
MR. BALLES. I'd suggest 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a suggestion without any opposing viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 392.
MR. GUFFEY. How about 7 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 393.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make the case for this 8-1/2percent. I don't feel that strongly about it, but the only reason I'mattracted to it is that I think it does lend a little to the point ofview that suggests we are not totally indifferent about being outsidethe tunnel, or whatever the heck we call it, for the second half ofthe year that we just adopted 6 weeks ago. That's the only thing thatleads me to that number as opposed to the 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 394.
 But I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You prefer 8-1/2 percent to the 8 to 9percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal preference for a specific percentage range (8-1/2 percent) over another range (8 to 9 percent).


Passage number 395.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, but I am somewhat agnostic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 396.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where does the sense of the meeting lie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This sentence is a question asking for a location or position, rather than expressing a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 397.
MR. MARTIN. That it matters less than it used to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. Instead, it simply states that something matters less than it used to without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 398.
MR. GUFFEY. If we use the 7 to 9 percent, it is centered on8 percent but it does give us some flexibility to go one way or theother without having to make any policy move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is simply offering a suggestion or proposal.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble that I see with that is the 7percent; it is realistically less than most people think it is goingto get to, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The author disagrees with the idea that the 7 percent is achievable or likely to be reached. They believe it is unrealistic and will not be attained.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
MR. BALLES. Well, it should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of "Well" suggests a potential disagreement or differing viewpoint.


Passage number 401.
-43-8/20/85MR. GUFFEY. But to use 7 to 9 percent, centering on 8percent, seems to me to provide flexibility that would be desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It simply presents the opinion of Mr. Guffey regarding the use of 7 to 9 percent, centering on 8 percent, as a flexible option.


Passage number 402.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We need a decline in September toget 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement that suggests a need for a decline in September to achieve a specific percentage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 403.
MR. MORRIS. Why do we say "relatively rapid growth". Thatsounds like it wasn't really very rapid growth at all--that it wassort of rapid growth. And it was a heck of a lot bigger than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris's response challenges the perception of "relatively rapid growth" by suggesting that it implies the growth was not actually very rapid. He further emphasizes that the growth was much larger than what is insinuated by the phrase.


Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, take out the "relatively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The phrase "Well, take out the 'relatively'" does not imply disagreement but rather suggests a modification or clarification of a previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 405.
"MR. MORRIS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. MORRIS. Yes" suggests that Mr. Morris disagrees with something that was previously stated or discussed.


Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "That's acceptable" does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply indicates agreement or approval.


Passage number 407.
MR. PARTEE. "Given the rapid growth in recent weeks" is whatwe say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement or observation made by Mr. Partee about the rapid growth in recent weeks.


Passage number 408.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What number do you want to put in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking for a number choice.


Passage number 409.
MR. MARTIN. 9 percent is the expectation, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact or seeking confirmation.


Passage number 410.
 Whydon't--MR. FORRESTAL. 9 percent is what I'd like to see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their desired percentage.


Passage number 411.
MR. BALLES. 9 percent is what I want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Balles wants 9 percent, without any conflicting opinions or opposition present.


Passage number 412.
MR. RICE. I'd prefer 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice expresses his preference for a specific percentage without any opposing views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 413.
MR. WALLICH. I'd like to stick in some way with the rangethat we set; maybe we can straddle it with 7 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their preference to stick to the range that has been set.


Passage number 414.
MR. PARTEE. Well, this is an expectation and not a policystatement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is stating that something is an expectation rather than a policy statement.


Passage number 415.
 Maybe--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In terms of a policy statement, we'daccept [unintelligible] depending upon what we do and given thisuncertainty. It sounds like the right thing is 8 to 9 percent, butI'm not sure. If we have a consensus for 8-1/2 percent, that's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not indicating any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and openness to different possibilities.


Passage number 416.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is fine.


Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage only provides a numerical value (8 to 9 percent) without any context or information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 418.
MR. MARTIN. No problems with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 419.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, on this next sentence it strikes methat we don't need that "although" part. It sounds awfully precise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 420.
MR. PARTEE. That's the second next sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage contains a simple statement made by Mr. Partee, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 421.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 422.
MR. MARTIN. I'd prefer "might" instead of "would" in thefirst sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the statement made by Mr. Martin. He is expressing a personal preference for using the word "might" instead of "would" in the first sentence. This is simply stating his preference and does not involve any disagreement or contention with anyone else's opinion.


Passage number 423.
-44-8/20/85MR. PARTEE. Since that's what we seem to have done, I thinkthat's what we ought to put in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they should put in what they seem to have done.


Passage number 424.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you want to put in. Well, we'llgo to the "woulds" and "mights." First of all, forget about theclause at the end; we'll take that up separately. Just on thisstandard phrase about somewhat greater or somewhat lesser restraint,the issue is: Do we want a sentence like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and discussing a topic without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 425.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 426.
MR. MARTIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply responds affirmatively to a statement or question.


Passage number 427.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the absence of any objection we willhave a sentence like this. Now we have to discuss whether to put in"mights" or "woulds." Is there some expression for "mights".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that a discussion is needed to determine whether to use "mights" or "woulds."


Passage number 428.
 What'sthe--MS. SEGER. It was a "might" and a "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage you provided does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a partial sentence or dialogue without enough context for definitive analysis.


Passage number 429.
"MR. KEEHN. It's not a strong preference, but I would prefer"would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Keen simply expresses a preference without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 430.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're just talking about the firstsentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the topic under discussion and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 431.
MR. RICE. On the first sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Rice.


Passage number 432.
MR. KEEHN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. Mr. Keehn's response does not indicate any conflict or opposition.


Passage number 433.
MR. MELZER. Didn't we have "would" last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asked by Mr. Melzer.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "I think we did" does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple declaration of opinion or belief without any conflicting views present.


Passage number 435.
MR. MELZER. If the thought is to lean a little firmer thistime, I would think we'd stay with "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. MELZER is expressing his belief or suggestion that they should stick with the previous approach.


Passage number 436.
"MR. PARTEE. But we didn't do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a single statement by Mr. Partee without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 437.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we did it slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This statement simply states that a task was completed, indicating a sense of accomplishment or satisfaction.


Passage number 438.
 On this basistoo I--MR. PARTEE. I guess so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 439.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not very substantial.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "it's not very substantial" is simply expressing that something is not substantial or significant. There is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 440.
MR. RICE. I'd say "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 441.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how many opt for "would".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking how many people choose to use the word "would."


Passage number 442.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I prefer "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement expresses a personal preference without contradicting or opposing any other viewpoint.


Passage number 443.
"MR. BERNARD. Six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only contains a person's name and the number six, which does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 444.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many are for "might". I suppose 5; Icount 4; somebody is not voting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Although there is some uncertainty about the exact number of votes for "might" (5 or 4), there is no explicit disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 445.
MR. BERNARD. There are 11 voting members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact - that there are 11 voting members. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 446.
-45-8/20/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Tentatively, we have "would," [not] Iguess by an enormous majority. Now, the next sentence. We had"might" last time.SPEAKER(.). I'd say it should be "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contentions or disagreements. It is a statement of uncertainty and speculation about the word "would" being used instead of "might" in a previous instance.


Passage number 447.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me propose that we put in a "would"here too but leave out the bottom part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a modification to the proposal, specifically adding the word "would" while omitting the bottom portion. The language used indicates a willingness to make a suggestion rather than engage in argument or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 448.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, the "although"--SPEAKER(.). I would support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "although" suggests that the speaker holds a contrasting or differing opinion from what was previously stated. Additionally, the phrase "I would support that" indicates that the speaker's perspective goes against the previous statement.


Passage number 449.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is the last part of that sentence off.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply questioning the accuracy of the last part of the sentence.


Passage number 450.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somebody suggested that in this nextsentence we move up "foreign exchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is simply stating that someone made a suggestion about moving up "foreign exchange markets" in the next sentence, without expressing any disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 451.
"MR. MARTIN. Yes. Given its importance today in all marketsand the vulnerability of the financial system, I think we should giveevidence that we are indeed more concerned about that sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 452.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How would you do it specifically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply asking for a specific explanation of how someone would do something. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 453.
 I don'tdisagree with the sentiment, but that's--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, if we really wanted to changeit, we could put the reference to the foreign exchange markets in the"somewhat greater restraint" sentence: "somewhat greater restraintwould be sought in the event of substantially higher growth of themonetary aggregates in the context of exchange rate developments" orsomething like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the sentiment, but suggesting a possible edit or modification to improve it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 454.
MR. MARTIN. If the Chairman had just made a presentation toCongress or a major address on that subject and given a signal, I'd befor putting it up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is expressing doubt or hesitancy in putting something up, while the Chairman is presumably advocating for it.


Passage number 455.
 But since that has not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not present any conflict or disagreement. It only provides a statement or observation.


Passage number 456.
 This is the kind of thing I had in mind: Idon't know whether we can make this any more substantial and I don'tknow whether--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about making something more substantial, but they do not express any disagreement with anyone or present conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 457.
 These other factors are really quite important:the business expansion, inflation, conditions in domestic creditmarkets and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's the problem with changing it.In substance, I don't know whether we should do it for the reasonsGovernor Martin suggested but in a short-term tactical sense itbelongs there. But these other things are very important and providethe general background.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Yes, that's the problem with changing it" indicates disagreement with the previous statement, suggesting that the speaker does not agree with the suggestion made by Governor Martin.


Passage number 458.
 I guess it would be--MR. MARTIN. Put it in after "strength of the businessexpansion" now, and then when you have made such a presentation moveit up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply suggests a suggestion or request to make a specific modification.


Passage number 459.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We may not be able to do it now, butI'll tell you: The more I think about it, it makes a heck of a lot of-46-8/20/85sense because it also allows us in that context to get back to thisdamn budget deficit question. That thing is just going out the windowon us and, ultimately, that's what is driving the whole conundrum.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's thoughts and opinions on a particular topic.


Passage number 460.
MR. PARTEE. Paul, I think we might say simply "the movementof foreign exchange rates" or something like that after "the businessexpansion." But then the last phrase ought to be revised to say"domestic and international credit markets." We don't want to dropout the international credit markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is suggesting a revision to clarify certain terms, but there is no argument or dispute present.


Passage number 461.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. "In either case such a change wouldbe considered in the context of appraisals of the strength of thebusiness expansion and--." What's the word: "conditions".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "conditions" does not indicate contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply refers to the factors and circumstances that are being taken into account when considering a change.


Passage number 462.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage or context provided, I cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage featuring "MR. PARTEE".


Passage number 463.
 I said "movements" but--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "Patterns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply correcting themselves and clarifying their use of the word "movements" to "patterns".


Passage number 464.
"MR. PARTEE. "Developments in foreign exchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing or conflicting viewpoints. It simply states that there have been developments in foreign exchange markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 465.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"developments in foreign exchangemarkets, progress against inflation and conditions in domestic andinternational credit markets."SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The use of the word "developments" indicates that there are ongoing changes or events happening in foreign exchange markets, progress against inflation, and credit markets. This suggests that there may be differing opinions or arguments regarding the impact or significance of these developments.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Changes in developments in foreignexchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contentions or disagreements. It is simply stating that there have been changes in developments in foreign exchange markets.


Passage number 467.
"MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I just want to point out that adifference between alternative II and alternative I was that the twosentences are reversed. At the last meeting the lesser restraintsentence was first and the greater restraint sentence was second. Inalternative II, I reversed them; I don't know how that will be read bythe market or how the Committee would feel about that. Also the words"somewhat greater restraint would be sought" in the previous directivewere "would be acceptable," but for better English language I changedthat because I used "acceptable" in another sense later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply explaining a change he made between two alternatives and noting how it may be perceived by the market and the Committee.


Passage number 468.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is this "acceptable".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification on the location of something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 469.
MR. AXILROD. Where it now says "somewhat greater restraintwould be sought in the event of..." last time it said "would beacceptable in the event of....
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement or contention in this passage because the language has changed from "would be acceptable" to "somewhat greater restraint would be sought." This indicates a shift in opinion or perspective, suggesting that there is some disagreement about the level of restraint that should be applied in the mentioned event.


Passage number 470.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we leave that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question seeking consensus or agreement on a decision.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 471.
MR. AXILROD. You're leaving the other out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the following passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is pointing out that someone is intentionally excluding or omitting information or people. This suggests disagreement or a difference in opinion on what should be included or considered.


Passage number 472.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Also take it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 473.
MR. AXILROD. I took it out because I had another"acceptable" in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement indicates a personal decision made by Mr. Axilrod and does not involve any conflicting opinions or contradicting ideas.


Passage number 474.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 475.
 [Unintelligible] acceptable and--MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The text is marked as unintelligible, so it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement present.


Passage number 476.
 I'm hung up on---47-8/20/85MR. PARTEE. Oh, we just took that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement or response to a question, indicating that something was removed or excluded.


Passage number 477.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. So you can put the"acceptable" back in. That's what I'm pointing out.SPEAKER(.). Yes, the "acceptable" we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod agrees with the speaker's suggestion to include the word "acceptable" again.


Passage number 478.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Axilrod agrees with the previous statement or statement made by someone else.


Passage number 479.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we put the "acceptable" back in.SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 480.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have any other comments orsuggestions on the whole package.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking for additional comments or suggestions, without any indication of a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 481.
MR. GUFFEY. Can you tell me what you've done with that lastsentence with respect to the foreign exchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply asks a question about what someone has done with a specific sentence regarding foreign exchange markets.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In either case such a change would beconsidered in the context of appraisals of the strength of thebusiness expansion, developments in foreign exchange markets, progressagainst inflation, and conditions in domestic and international creditmarkets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply lays out various factors that would be considered when evaluating a potential change.


Passage number 483.
"MR. FORRESTAL. And the "although" clause in the previoussentence is out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
Explanation: The statement is describing a specific change in wording, indicating that the "although" clause has been removed from the previous sentence. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 484.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Out. They are both "woulds" and"acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that suggest disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the words "woulds" and "acceptable."


Passage number 485.
" Well, we're going to vote unless somebody has a--MR. BLACK. It's 6 to 10 percent, I guess, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a percentage and addressing the chairman.


Passage number 486.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 10 percent at the bottom andborrowing of $425 million, which is about where we are now and withflexibility around there in either direction depending on the moneysupply and other circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about a percentage and borrowing amount, along with a statement about flexibility depending on certain factors.


Passage number 487.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


