Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 1, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 1, 1985, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanBallesBlackForrestalKeehnMartinParteeRiceSegerWallichMr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, 1/ Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Broaddus,1/ R. Davis,1/ Kohn,1/ Lindsey,1/ Prell,1/Scheld,1/ and Ms. Tschinkel,1/ Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered meeting after action to ratify foreign currency transactions.Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel,1/ Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,1/ Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low,1/ Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. T. Davis,1/ Lang,1/ Ms. Munnell,1/ and Mr. Rolnick,1/Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofKansas City, Philadelphia, Boston, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMessrs. Burger,1/ Pearce,1/ and Scadding,1/ Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, andSan Francisco, respectivelyMr. Sniderman,1/ Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ClevelandMs. Meulendyke,1/ Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New York1/ Entered meeting after action to ratify foreign currency transactions.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 1, 1985[Secretary's Note: This meeting began with an executivesession that was not recorded. Also not recorded were the Committee'sapproval of the minutes of the previous meeting and the foreigncurrency transactions undertaken over the intermeeting interval. Thereport by Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, was presentedduring the executive session and is included in the Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the participants of the meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 2.
]MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage indicates that there is a statement made by Mr. Sternlight, but it does not provide any details about the nature of the statement or any potential disagreement or contention. Without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 3.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They all got unwound in an orderly way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes that all the individuals got unwound in a methodical and organized manner.


Passage number 4.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Those extra loans were unwound, yes sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement in the passage is a response to a question and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments or questions. We need toratify the transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that comments or questions are welcome and emphasizing the need to ratify the transactions.


Passage number 6.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "without objection" indicates that there is no opposition or disagreement among the individuals involved.


Passage number 8.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is identified as "Mr. Kichline" but there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the statement.


Passage number 9.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the dollar today, roughly,compared with the second-quarter average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply asks for the current value of the dollar compared to a previous average.


Passage number 10.
MR. TRUMAN. Down about 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 11.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for potential additional questions or comments, but it does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 12.
MR. BALLES. I just wanted to make sure of what I heard, Jim.For the projection of the dollar, you assumed down 20 percent by theend of 1986 from where.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a speaker seeking clarification on what they heard.


Passage number 13.
MR. KICHLINE. The Q2-1985 average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions a statement or fact about the Q2-1985 average, without any conflicting views or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From which you've already had a 12 percentdecline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not presenting any conflicting viewpoints or expressing disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about a 12 percent decline that has already occurred.


Passage number 15.
MR. KICHLINE. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 16.
MR. PARTEE. So it's about the same rate of decline aspreviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the rate of decline. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 17.
MR. TRUMAN. From now on out. I think that really is anaccident.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about something being an accident.


Passage number 18.
MS. SEGER. What did you think of the NABE forecast of arecession late next year or early 1987, since they're having theirannual convention right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a question about the speaker's opinion of the NABE forecast without expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 19.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I guess it's somewhat fortunate that wedon't have to forecast into 1987 at the moment. It's rather cloudy, Ithink, in terms of trying to look into late '86 and '87. There arequestions about lots of things. What do you assume about policy andthe dollar. One of the things that is happening--and I can lay this10/1/85on Ted in the sense the dollar forecast is giving us some help--isthat as we go on into '86, if the dollar follows the path that we'veassumed, we ought to be getting some benefits from that domesticallyin terms of increased production. So, at this moment I wouldn'tnecessarily come up with a bearish forecast and assume that theeconomy comes to a grinding halt in late '86 and early '87.Certainly, our forecast as we have it now would not give one the sensethat we begin Q1 1987 and fall off a cliff; we have a sense of theeconomy growing in the 2-1/2 to 3 percent area pretty much throughoutthe period, but being helped by the foreign trade sector later on in1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their forecast for the economy and acknowledging potential uncertainties, such as policy and the dollar. They mention that if the dollar follows their assumed path, there could be benefits domestically. There is no explicit disagreement or contention among the ideas presented.


Passage number 20.
MR. BALLES. May I follow up on this dollar outlook questionbecause that's a very key one. If I understand your numberscorrectly, your expectation is that the dollar will be down another 8percent between now and the end of '86. It's already down 12 percentfrom the second quarter of '85.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of understanding and clarification.


Passage number 21.
MR. TRUMAN. Another way of looking at it, as Jim said, isthat this forecast is built on the assumption that in the 4th quarterof 1986 the dollar will be 5 percent lower than in the last forecast.And most of that downward adjustment occurred between the time of theAugust meeting and today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 22.
MR. KICHLINE. Previously, the assumption had been a verygradual decline throughout the period; this assumption is essentiallyfront-loaded in September so that we would anticipate a bigger impacton the economy in terms of exports, imports, and prices than we hadearlier because it doesn't occur very gradually throughout the wholeperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is presenting a statement made by Mr. Kichline. The statement is explaining a change in assumption about the decline, not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 23.
MR. BALLES. Thank you, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows Mr. Balles expressing gratitude.


Passage number 24.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No more questions or comments on thebusiness situation. If not, we'll turn to Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that no more questions or comments on the business situation are allowed and suggests moving on to Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 25.
MR. PARTEE. There aren't any comments on the businesssituation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a fact about there not being any comments on the business situation. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume that they're going to comelater.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement based on the speaker's assumption.


Passage number 27.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 28.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, who would like to comment. We've runout of staff; it's up to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the staff has run out and that it is now up to the Committee to comment.


Passage number 29.
MR. BALLES. I would like to ask for a little furtherclarification in Steve's view of these so-called portfolio shifts as apossible partial explanation of the surge in M1. Looking back to May,as we all know, we have seen absolute declines in some of these termdeposits like large-time deposits, term RPs, term Eurodollars, etc.You and your staff study this, Steve. To what extent is that asignificant factor in this surge in Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and asking about the significance of certain factors in the surge in M1.


Passage number 30.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we think it's largely behind the strengthof the NOW accounts over the past several months--that is, thestrength above what "normally" occurs. At the same time, of course,10/1/85we have had large increases in old M1A, the currency and demanddeposits component. It's conceivable that some of that money could beflowing into demand deposits, but I don't think much. Or it could beflowing in for a very few days as people make up their minds what todo with it. So I'd say it has been a strong element, but I can't puta percentage on it. I'd say it's not 80 or 90 percent dominant, butmaybe a little less than that. From June to September, for example,old M1A moved [up] around 8 percent while the present M1 grew 13.7percent. It's not as if it's all in the NOW accounts; a substantialpart is in currency and demand deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing an explanation and analysis of the strength of NOW accounts and the increase in old M1A.


Passage number 31.
MR. BALLES. Well, that's what I recall. In the May-to-August period, which is what I was looking at, the increase in demanddeposits was just about as big as the sum of the increase in NOWs andSuper NOWs. So, I'm a little confused as to whether the portfolioshift out of these term deposits was in fact directly connected withthe rise in old M1A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their observation and confusion about the connection between the increase in demand deposits and the shift out of term deposits.


Passage number 32.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, I doubt that it's very much in there. Icould conceive of some going into demand deposits for a while but notfor very long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod expresses doubt and provides his own opinion, but there is no direct disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 33.
MR. BALLES. Yes, that's about my view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Balles is merely stating that the view being discussed aligns with his own perspective. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 34.
MR. PARTEE. Why would you take money out of an interest-bearing deposit and put it in a demand deposit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states and asks about a financial decision.


Passage number 35.
 That's--MR. AXILROD. Yes. I would say that it's only conceivablefor a transitional period while one is making up one's mind what to dowith it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 36.
MR. PARTEE. Very short.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage only contains a statement or response by Mr. Partee, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 37.
MR. AXILROD. That's why it could affect the average for avery short while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a direct statement made by Mr. Axilrod, and there is no contention or disagreement presented in this statement.


Passage number 38.
MR. PARTEE. And currency has gone up quite a bit too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the currency has gone up quite a bit.


Passage number 39.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it has. It has its ups and downs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something (unspecified) has its ups and downs.


Passage number 40.
MR. PARTEE. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Party simply expresses his knowledge.


Passage number 41.
MR. AXILROD. But starting in May, we had growth rates inthree months that were 10 percent or more and in two months that were6-1/2 percent. It's on average a little faster, but I don't thinkit's extremely noticeable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents numerical data and the speaker's opinion that the growth rates are not extremely noticeable.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 42.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, one could make a case that we're seeingsome backsliding in the demand for money. If you think about theincreases in velocity over the last 30 years and the various reasonsfor that--higher rates, inflation, increased use of credit cards forcash--now we're finding less inflation and more of M1 bears interest.There could be some backsliding in a number of local markets. Creditcards aren't what they used to be; service charges are being appliedfrom the date of purchase rather than giving that grace period of amonth. It's nothing we can measure very precisely, but it seems to methat in the '80s there has been some backtracking in the very same10/1/85kinds of forces that led to an economizing of money in the '60s and'70s. And there just could be some backsliding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage as Mr. Boehne argues that there is some backsliding in the demand for money, while also acknowledging that it is difficult to measure precisely.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about the credit cardexplanation but I have a couple of charts in front of me depictingjust a very simple part of velocity, M1 velocity, with various lines.And it just stands out in these charts that--well, just how it looksdepends upon the lag--there has been a flatness or a downward tilt forfour years now. This chart shows a break in trend, not just thisyear, or not just in '83. It has been flat for four years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing their observation of the charts and stating that there has been a flatness or downward tilt in M1 velocity for four years.


Passage number 44.
MR. PARTEE. The same period that we've had a very rapidincrease in credit relative to GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the increase in credit relative to GNP.


Passage number 45.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further information. The statement "MR. AXILROD" alone does not provide enough context to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 The same period--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this began before that I think, butI don't know what the connection is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is sharing their thoughts and uncertainty about a certain topic but does not express any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 47.
MR. PARTEE. Did it. In 1982. I don't [know] either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is stating a fact about something they did in 1982. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 48.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be answered without the passage being provided.


Passage number 49.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to make two comments.One is that we have been seeing, really since the beginning of theyear, a divergence between the growth rate of M1 and the growth ratesof all of the broader aggregates. If you look at total liquid assets,debt, M3, and even M2, you'll see a deceleration in growth rates sinceearly in the year. M1 is the only one on the chart that we showaccelerating. I wonder if you would look back in earlier history,Steve, and find the periods where we had this kind of divergence inthe past. I don't think there were very many, actually. But giventhat divergence, what weight should we apply to the M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a comment and asking for information.


Passage number 50.
MR. AXILROD. That's the exercise we engaged in, actually.This was a three-quarter period of an acceleration--these areaccelerations not levels of growth rates--in M1 that has occurredthrough the third quarter of this year; it's an acceleration of 9percentage points, essentially, at an annual rate. At the same timethe nontransactions component of M2 has decelerated by 3 points. AndM2 itself measured over the same period [decelerated] by about twotenths; it certainly has not accelerated. Now, when we looked back,the other period of exception in some sense was back in the firstquarter of 1966. Then the nontransactions component dropped 1 percentand M2 went up 1 percent--small increases relative to M1, which hadgone up 4-1/2 percent. There were some other periods where there weresimilar drops in the nontransactions component and small increases inM2. In a couple of them money and nominal GNP went up together. Butby and large where M1 has been strong and nominal GNP has beencorrespondingly strong, M2 also has been relatively strong. And theonly thing I can make out of that is that we were getting shifts intoM1 and out of the nontransactions component of M2, which doesn'taffect M2 as a whole but does affect M1. And in that case, M2 mightbe given some weight because of the conflict of the two; and it wastending to say that nominal GNP isn't going to move quite as much.The simplistic formula would be that if M1 is strong and M2 is strong,the odds are better that nominal GNP is going to go up than if thereare conflicts between the two [aggregates].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is not presenting any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing different trends and observations in the M1 and M2 monetary aggregates and their relationship to nominal GNP.


Passage number 51.
 And I think that's--10/1/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You didn't look beyond M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion or thought without contradicting or arguing with anyone else.


Passage number 52.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I have a whole list of variables here,like the rate of change in commodity prices, the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod has a list of variables, without providing any further information about them or any conflicting views.


Passage number 53.
 None of themworked--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You didn't look at M3 and liquidity anddebt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that none of the mentioned approaches worked and suggests that the person did not consider M3, liquidity, and debt.


Passage number 54.
MR. AXILROD. I have, yes. I have the nontransactionscomponent of M3, but not M3 itself. And that doesn't do very much foryou. I have debt as a whole here. And that isn't consistent enough;it has scattered minuses and pluses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have the "nontransactions component of M3" but not the entire M3 itself, which is not useful for them. They also mention that the debt they have is not consistent, with both positive and negative elements.


Passage number 55.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanations: 

The passage does not provide any information or context about whether there is contention or disagreement. Therefore, it is impossible to determine if there is disagreement based solely on the information given.


Passage number 56.
MR. MORRIS. I have another point, Mr. Chairman. I'd like topropose that a presentation be made by the staff at some futuremeeting on this whole issue that Steve raised in his presentation ofwhat we're going to do if we're faced with a precipitous decline inthe dollar. To what extent do we let the pressure be borne by theexchange rate and to what extent do we let it be borne by interestrates. It seems to me it would be helpful, if we get to that point,to have had a thorough thrashing out of what all of the consequenceswould be. I could tell you that my own bias at the moment would be tohave a policy geared to letting the exchange rate take the pressure.But I'd like to be better educated on that subject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris is suggesting that a presentation be made by the staff on the topic of what to do in the case of a decline in the dollar. He also expresses his own preference for a policy geared towards letting the exchange rate take the pressure. However, there is no disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may need some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any statement or information that suggests contention or disagreement. It is incomplete and does not convey a clear message or point of view.


Passage number 58.
MR. AXILROD. We have some work in process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is work in process.


Passage number 59.
MR. PARTEE. Well, is it the exchange rate versus interestrates or is it interest rates versus prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply posing a question, without taking a side or expressing disagreement.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't you just review thislittle frightening exercise you did yesterday, Mr. Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a neutral statement asking Mr. Truman to review an exercise.


Passage number 61.
MR. TRUMAN. I have a paper here to look at. With muchhesitation, we have run estimates--with the help of models, rules ofthumbs, judgments--and looked at what would happen if we had a 40percent decline in the dollar over a very short period--18 months,roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a process of running estimates and analyzing potential outcomes.


Passage number 62.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That was 40 percent you said, Ted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 63.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, 40. [The specific number] doesn't matter;basically, it's a very large decline over a short period of time. Andthen we looked at where the economy would be three years later--another 18 months after this decline had happened. We looked at twoextreme assumptions: one was that you don't change money growth, or atleast what the models tell you money growth is; and the other was thatyou don't let interest rates change. In the first case the modelstend to tell you that the nominal GNP won't change at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explains two extreme assumptions and presents what the models tend to show in each case. There is no contradictory information or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 64.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions Chairman Volcker's role but does not provide any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 65.
 The first case meaning let interest ratesgo up but--10/1/85MR. TRUMAN. Let interest rates go up; take it on interestrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Let interest rates go up" is presented as a statement or suggestion, without any indication of disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 66.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's your extreme assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "That's your extreme assumption" is a statement made by one person expressing their opinion or disagreement with someone else's assumption. It does not indicate a clash of opposing views but rather one person challenging or discrediting another's assumption.


Passage number 67.
MR. TRUMAN. That's an extreme.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Truman is simply describing something as extreme, without any opposing viewpoint or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 68.
MR. PARTEE. Very extreme.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Based on the given passage alone, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Truman" without providing any further information or context, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 70.
 The level of real GNP, while it may go upinitially, comes back down as the interest rates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't go up beyond what it otherwisewould.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply explains that while the level of real GNP may increase initially, it eventually decreases due to the rise in interest rates. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 71.
MR. TRUMAN. Right. But the composition changes becausegross domestic purchases go down by about 5 percent. That is aboutenough to change--well, it gives you $140 billion on the currentaccount and essentially wipes out the current account deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 72.
 So,gross GNP is unchanged, gross domestic purchases go down by about 5percent, making--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From what they would otherwise have been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage provides a statement about the relationship between gross GNP and gross domestic purchases without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 73.
MR. TRUMAN. From what they would otherwise have been, yessir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker is simply affirming the statement made by someone else without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 74.
MR. PARTEE. And prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not have any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
MR. TRUMAN. And the price level goes up by 7 percent.SPEAKER(.). Seven.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing a statement or response to Mr. Truman's comment.


Passage number 76.
MR. PARTEE. Above what it would otherwise go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 77.
MR. TRUMAN. Above what it would have gone up. At the otherextreme, real GNP goes up by around 10 percent compared to what itotherwise would be. Gross domestic purchases, since you have asympathetic effect from the addition to net exports, go up above whatthey otherwise would be. Capacity utilization you might not believe:that goes up by 6 percentage points. The unemployment rate drops by asomewhat unbelievable 3 percentage points. The consumer price levelgoes up a total of 12 percentage points. Governor Partee commentedthat he didn't believe that number would be so small; I think I agreewith him. And because you have these sympathetic--or unsympathetic--income effects, you get half as much mileage on the current accountdeficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get involved with theparticular numbers, but what these exercises illustrate is that if youtake extreme--I hope extreme--assumptions and you're going to correctthat $150 billion current account deficit, you have a helluvarelocation from domestic consumption to the external sector. Youwould have what's going on in Latin America where they have had noincrease in domestic consumption while they are putting all [theirexpanding production] in exports. And unless events force some of itout of domestic consumption, you have a helluva inflationary impact10/1/85and capacity problems and employment goes up and unemployment goes waydown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their reluctance to provide specific numbers but is implying that extreme assumptions are needed to correct the current account deficit. This implies that there may be disagreement or different perspectives on the best approach to address the deficit.


Passage number 79.
MR. AXILROD. From another perspective, Mr. Chairman--andthis supplements Mr. Truman's data--we've been working on this also,partly using the quarterly model and partly using some judgment. Andwith the same assumption that we get the current account balanced, thequestion is whether interest rates go up and whether it reduces fixedinvestment and all that. But the model ended up with a very highpersonal saving rate in that process, which we judgmentally reducedover a four-year period. By the time it was all done we were endingup with a personal saving rate of very close to 8 percent which, asyou know, is very high historically. That sort of cast into doubt thepracticality of all this short of other measures, such as a weakeningeconomy, which themselves would bring the current account in balance.And that same exercise, to verify it in the sense of capacity, didrequire capacity utilization rates in manufacturing rising--dependingon [an assumption of potential] capacity growth on the order of 2-1/2to 3 percent--to the area of 85 to 87 percent. If you thought[potential growth] was 3-1/2 percent, it'd be a little lower thanthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing additional information and explaining their analysis using a model.


Passage number 80.
 But it certainly is on the order of 5 percentage points added--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In your little exercise where you kept theGNP where it otherwise would have been, Mr. Truman, what kind ofinterest rates did you get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement or inquiry about interest rates.


Passage number 81.
MR. TRUMAN. They go up initially, as Steve was commentingearlier, but then they come back down as they begin to bite orconstrain the economy. I think at the peak these exercises generated[rate increases of] something like 500 or 600 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is simply stating his opinion about the initial effects of the exercises on the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 82.
MR. PARTEE. You have to cut the domestic demand 5 percentagepoints. That's a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is suggesting the need to cut domestic demand by 5 percentage points, which implies a significant reduction. There may be potential disagreement or contention as the amount of the proposed cut could be considered excessive or difficult to achieve.


Passage number 83.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without discussing any specific actions or opinions that might indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 84.
 Well, I think--MR. BOEHNE. But on the other hand, why would you want to cutdemand all that much. Where we have a lot of excess capacity is inthe manufacturing sector and that's just exactly where you would havethe substitution with imports. So it would seem that while we'd haveto rearrange domestic consumption, reallocate it somewhat, we still dohave a lot of excess capacity concentrated just where we need itbecause it's largely manufactured goods that we are importing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: 

The statement "But on the other hand, why would you want to cut demand all that much" suggests a disagreement or contention with a previous argument or viewpoint. This indicates a difference in opinion or perspective.


Passage number 85.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you see more of that excesscapacity, I think, than I do. It's arbitrary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their viewpoint, stating that they believe there is more excess capacity than the other person does. The term "arbitrary" is used to express a subjective judgment rather than an argument or disagreement.


Passage number 86.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I could take you on a trip through partsof Pennsylvania where they claim they have a heck of a lot of excesscapacity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Boehne about the claim of excess capacity in parts of Pennsylvania.


Passage number 87.
 If they had the demand for some of these manufactured goodsthat they say are now [being imported] from abroad rather than beingproduced here--MR. PARTEE. Ed, if you give those people income they're notjust going to spend it on products, they're going to spend it onservices too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
MR. BOEHNE. I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or response rather than a debate or conflict.


Passage number 89.
10/1/85MR. PARTEE. And there is a macro effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a fact about a macro effect without expressing any opinion or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 90.
MR. BOEHNE. I understand that. My only point is that wedon't have to be anywhere near the extreme of this; we can besomewhere in the middle. And we might be able to be on the side ofthe middle that gives us a little more growth largely because of wherethis [capacity] is. We have areas in Pennsylvania where unemploymentis 10 to 12 percent. These are largely people who have been displacedby the imports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding and opinion about the middle ground approach to the issue being discussed.


Passage number 91.
MR. KEEHN. I raise the same question on the capacity. Forexample, the automobile industry domestically is operating about flatout currently. They are trying to speed up their lines and they areadding shifts. But fundamentally, the people I've talked to aresaying that never again will they add another dollar's worth ofcapacity on the domestic side. If there is any shift, they will beginto bring in more products from Mexico and Korea. They are not goingto add to their capacity. So, I think there are an awful lot ofindustries that have quietly--and some not so quietly--taken capacityoff the line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is conveying information about the automobile industry's current operation and their future plans regarding capacity. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 92.
 So, if we get a resurgence of demand for domesticoutput, the capacity would really--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would note that our trade deficit,largely in manufactured goods, is the equivalent of something like 16to 17 percent of manufacturing output.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact about the trade deficit without any conflicting opinions or positions.


Passage number 93.
MR. MORRIS. So I guess the only thing we can do is pray fora gradual adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the only thing they can do is pray for a gradual adjustment without any opposing viewpoints or conflict.


Passage number 94.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's probably right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 95.
MR. MORRIS. Either that or we're in trouble either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that they are in trouble regardless of whether the situation is one way or another.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're in trouble politically the waythings are now and I think it's unsustainable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses concern about the current political situation but does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement seems to be a personal opinion about the unsustainability of the current state of affairs.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
 That's a pretty gooddefinition of trouble in terms of the overall performance of theeconomy, employment--MR. STERN. That was based on a radical assumption about thedollar. I would like a little elaboration from Steve or from Ted asto how market participants have viewed the G-5 announcement so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is evident from Mr. Stern's statement that the previous definition was based on a radical assumption about the dollar, implying that he does not agree with it. He requests further elaboration to understand how market participants have perceived the G-5 announcement, indicating a difference in perspective or opinion.


Passage number 98.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I could add that one example we wereworking out would imply the dollar would go down, but I don't know byhow much. But suppose you said you're going to move to currentaccount balance over a four-year period--and this is relevant to whatMr. Boehne was mentioning in a lot of ways. Just say you're going todo that, but if you do it you've got to press. So, apart from whathappens to the dollar, you have to have over that period grossdomestic purchases--consumption plus investment plus governmentexpenditures--growing less than GNP. And there has not been a four-year period [like that] in the postwar period. There have been someperiods where it has grown less but not [for so long]. On oneestimate we've worked out, if you went to current account balance andGNP was growing 3 percent in real terms--yes, your potential may be alittle more because you had a little slack in unemployment--you wouldhave had to had gross domestic purchases growing 2 percent over thatfour-year period. So, it's 1 percentage point less year after year.10/1/85The public has to be willing to sacrifice output, in effect, toabroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's perspective and analysis.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not sacrifice output.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention sacrifice output or any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 100.
MR. AXILROD. I mean to sacrifice their consumption relativeto output.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their intention to sacrifice consumption in relation to output. There is no conflicting viewpoint or opposing argument presented.


Passage number 101.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which could most logically come by cuttingthe federal budget deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply discusses the idea of reducing the federal budget deficit.


Passage number 102.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. To make it difficult, we were assumingthat didn't happen. That's not the experience of the postwar period.It has been less than that, but not for so long. I don't think--andMr. Cross and Mr. Truman [may think differently]--that the market hasyet moved to the point where they think the dollar is going to drop 40percent. But that's the danger, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion on the market and the potential drop in the value of the dollar. They mention that others may have a different perspective, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 103.
MR. CROSS. I imagine it would be falling a lot sharper ifthe market thought that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any statements that involve contention or disagreement. It simply states the assumption or speculation of one person (Mr. Cross) about the market's reaction.


Passage number 104.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 105.
MR. BLACK. Could you supply us with a written statement ofthese simulations you ran so that we could take a look at them at amore leisurely pace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply requesting a written statement for further examination.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we have a little presentation atthe next meeting. I hope that's not too late. But I think theseissues are clearly at the heart of our problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting having a presentation at the next meeting and expressing their hope that it is not too late. They also believe that the issues discussed are central to the problem.


Passage number 107.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement indicated by the response of "Yes" from Mr. Partee in the passage.


Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a disequilibrium in the economy.How do we correct it. Frankly, how to correct it--to produce a nicesmooth correction--is not all within our power, I'm afraid. There arecertain extraneous forces that are going to foul us up. Well, I thinkwe better have a doughnut after this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It discusses a perceived issue of disequilibrium in the economy and acknowledges that finding a solution may not be entirely within their control due to "extraneous forces." The mention of having a doughnut after the conversation is unrelated and does not introduce any disagreement either.


Passage number 109.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think our discussion [about the exchangevalue of the dollar] needs further elaboration, because the problem isevident in what was said. The success of countries in the past ofpushing their own currencies down without creating problems isextremely limited. In fact, I don't know of any case where anycountry has done this and been happy about the end result. Just tosharpen the dilemmas a bit, the funds rate has been up the last coupleof days over the course of the [quarter-end] statement date.Ordinarily, we would think that [rise] would have a strengtheningeffect on the dollar; the dollar is weakening quite a lot today. Thelatest money supply figures are down rather significantly, so thepossibility of a minus in October is not remote, given the [September]average that we start with. These are very fragmentary data; I hateto even mention them on this unfortunate day, Tuesday, when we getthis fragmentary information. [The weakness] may loom larger tomorrowand remain. We do not have a weekly figure but a fragmentary10/1/85indication of a weekly figure. But September looks lower than wasprojected and October may be starting lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The author is providing their own analysis and observations.


Passage number 110.
MR. PARTEE. That's surprising. With September growth Ipresume at least 10 percent, I would think that the end of Septemberwould be higher than the average for September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses surprise at the information given but does not argue or offer an alternative viewpoint.


Passage number 111.
MR. AXILROD. We had projected about equal, given the ups anddowns in the month. The latest figure would suggest that the month-end is quite a lot lower; but that figure revises.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply discusses projected figures and revisions.


Passage number 112.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. September started higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that September started higher. There is no indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 113.
MR. AXILROD. It started quite high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about something that started quite high.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there hasn't been much discussion ofthe straightforward business scene or the inflationary scene oranything else while we, I think usefully, were preoccupied with thebasic [dollar] adjustment problem. I think we can proceed and goaround the table. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply describing the lack of discussion on specific topics and suggesting that they can now proceed with the discussion. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 115.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I held up my hand right before wegot into the discussion of these foreign exchange simulations and wewere trying to grapple with the idea of what accounts for the strengthof M1. Everybody has been searching for that, even those of us inRichmond who don't always take that [aggregate] completely at facevalue, as you may assume we do. I guess we reached the conclusionthat this had to spell trouble for us unless one of two things hashappened. One would be that there has been a downward shift in thelong-term trend of velocity--and I think there probably has beensomething of that as a result of financial innovation. But it seemsto me unlikely that this decline in velocity will be of such amagnitude that we can stand growth of anything like the 10 to 12percent we have had over the bulk of this year without running intoproblems. The second way in which it would not be inflationary wouldbe if these sharp drops in nominal rates have been accompanied by acorresponding decline in either inflationary expectations or the realinterest rate as a result of some autonomous weakening in some part ofaggregate demand. Actually, what little information we have oninflationary expectations suggests that there really hasn't been muchof this. One can't rule out these two possibilities at all, but onbalance it seems to me that these two explanations--if indeed they arethe only two, as we think they are--are insufficient to justify [M1]expansion of anything like what we have had. So, we need to dosomething to get back to more normal growth rates. It may be, as yousaid, that we are going to do that without any effort on our part.But I do think that it is imperative that we slow this down to someextent because we just cannot explain away that much growth, in ourjudgment. When we get to specific policy points, I would be glad tomake some later; but I sense that it's probably not the best time todo it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion and suggesting the need to slow down growth.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, time is passing, so if you want tobe more specific, you can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply suggesting that if one wants to provide more specific information, they have the option to do so.


Passage number 117.
MR. BLACK. Well, I would think that it is important that wego ahead and move the borrowed reserve target up some. This may proveto be totally unnecessary, but I would think something like $650 to-10-10/1/85$750 million would be appropriate. That might, of course, cause someincrease in the federal funds rate--to 8-1/2 percent or so. If[money] is still growing fast, I would be prepared to accept that. Ifit isn't, then I would want to back off from it. But I don't thinkthat we ought to be so over-zealous in our efforts to get the moneysupply back on target that we aim even at the top of the range that werevised at midyear. I think that clearly would be overkill in view ofthe rapid expansion we have had thus far. But something like this 8percent quarterly rate that is projected for the third quarter wouldseem to me to be reasonable in light of the kind of growth we hadbefore the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a target for the borrowed reserve, but there is no opposition or argument presented.


Passage number 118.
MR. PARTEE. The third quarter is pretty well determined.Are you talking about alternative C--5-1/2 percent for September toDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the third quarter being determined and inquiring about alternative C.


Passage number 119.
MR. BLACK. Well, I am talking about the quarterly rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 120.
MR. PARTEE. On the quarterly, it's that high from the 3rd tothe 4th quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 121.
MR. BLACK. The third quarter--if I don't have my figureswrong--would be about 8 percent. It's 8 point something or other--8.3 percent. I am just talking about the quarterly rate there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement presented by Mr. Black regarding the third quarter and a specific percentage.


Passage number 122.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These new numbers, if they stand up, willreduce September by about 2 percentage points or more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information. It simply states that the new numbers, if they are verified, will lead to a reduction in September by about 2 percentage points or more.


Passage number 123.
MR. BLACK. Of course with our procedures, we always have arisk that we are not going to get what we think because there's apretty loose connection between the rate of growth in any of theaggregates and the borrowed reserve target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact without any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply acknowledging the possibility of not achieving the desired outcome due to the loose connection between certain factors.


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can stipulate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions. It simply states that the speaker believes something can be agreed upon.


Passage number 125.
MR. BLACK. But I think we maybe ought to err a little on theside of tightness to make sure that we get some progress towarddecelerating M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Black is expressing his opinion, suggesting that it might be better to lean towards a tighter approach to ensure progress in decelerating M1. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 126.
 But I would not push it so terribly hard that we getinto--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing caution or hesitation about pushing something too hard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, looking at the general businesssituation, I have changed my forecast very little from the lastmeeting. I think we are beginning to see the kind of numbers we hopedfor and that we wanted to see. I feel more confident about theeconomic situation than I did a month ago, and I find that thatimpression is shared pretty much around my District by the businesspeople I talked with. There seems to be much less uncertainty aboutthe course of events. The people I talked to are seeing some forwardmomentum in the economy that they think is going to carry over intothe fourth quarter and, indeed, into the first half of 1986. Now,that view of the economy may be influenced a little by conditions inthe Southeast, which are relatively better I guess than in some otherparts of the country. While we have some weaknesses, particularly inexport-related areas such as textiles and so on, those weaknesses arebeing offset by strengths otherwise.-11-10/1/85On the aggregate picture, I would agree pretty much with theforecast of the Greenbook, although on the composition of thatforecast I would differ marginally. I would think that perhaps we aregoing to have a little less strength in housing than in the Greenbook,but otherwise I am generally in accord. I think consumer spending isa real question mark here. My staff is telling me that they expectconsumer spending to increase, especially in durables. I am not surethat that's a correct assessment, given the high debt level and thepersonal income situation that we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Forrestal agrees with the general forecast of the Greenbook but differs on the composition of that forecast, specifically regarding the strength of housing. Additionally, Mr. Forrestal expresses skepticism about the expectation of increased consumer spending, while his staff holds a different assessment.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And a very low saving rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about a low saving rate without any conflicting views or arguments presented.


Passage number 129.
MR. FORRESTAL. A very low saving rate as well. Theinflation picture looks pretty good. Everyone I have talked todoesn't see any price pressures at all. There are certainly no wagepressures in my area. Altogether, I think that the situation, whilenot dramatically great, is certainly better than it has been. And Ithink the outlook is reasonably favorable for the economy to grow atabout the trend rate of 2 to 3 percent for the year as a whole.As far as monetary policy is concerned, we have all of theseimbalances that we talked about considerably this morning and I don'tthink that there is very much we can do about those imbalances. So myfeeling, Mr. Chairman, is that we should stay pretty much where we arein terms of policy. The dollar, of course, is something that weobviously will want to watch very carefully. If there were extremechanges in the value of the dollar one way or the other, I think thatwe ought to move aggressively. But as I see the picture at themoment--given the economic growth, the declining dollar, and theabsence of inflation [pressures]--I would stay where we are. I guessthat means alternative B, although that perhaps suggests a slightuptick in market conditions. M1 is a lingering concern; I am nervousabout that. On the other hand, I wouldn't take any positive action totry to bring its growth down appreciably. I hope it will come down onits own accord in October. But particularly in light of what hashappened in the G-5 meetings, I don't think we ought to be doinganything to run interest rates up. In terms of the specifics, I wouldstay about where we are, maybe about $450 to $550 million in borrowingand that probably means a federal funds rate of 7-7/8 or 8 percent. Idon't think it makes a lot of difference which of those we come outwith. Just to complete the specifics: On the question of thevariants, I would like to use variant I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents their own observations and opinions without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in terms of the discussion, I thinkwe should leave that until the last because, on the face of it, that'snot substantive. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to leave a certain topic for last in a discussion as it is not substantive. Mr. Corrigan's opinion is not mentioned in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 131.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just a brief comment on the businesssituation: My own view is similar to Mr. Forrestal's in that I do drawmore encouragement from the collection of latest statistics--not thatthey lead to anything different than the staff forecast, but I thinkthat they raise the chances that that, or maybe a tad better, in factis what will happen. But I must say that in and around New York Cityanyway, the people associated with the very large multinationalcompanies [unintelligible], notwithstanding the recent businessstatistics, are still very distinctly on the bearish side of things.I am not quite sure whether that's just a further manifestation of theway in which those companies are being affected by the external side.-12-10/1/85There may be some of that, but I detect in the time frame of the pastsix weeks or so a higher level of concern in that community about theunderlying policy situation. There is even, as I said before, somewhispering to the effect that sooner or later that underlying policysituation is going to lead to more inflation--not that anybody sees itright now, but that there's a sense of inevitability about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that they draw encouragement from the latest statistics, while the people associated with multinational companies are still bearish and concerned about the underlying policy situation.


Passage number 132.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some of them may even want it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that some individuals may want something.


Passage number 133.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's true. But again, Ithink the combination of things, including realization of a budgetresolution and all of the rest, has given rise to a renewed sense ofcynicism if not outright hopelessness in terms of the budgetsituation. And in terms of monetary policy, there is a sense that theconstraints are growing--constraints in terms of financial fragility,of the M1 problem that everybody wants to pretend isn't there butcan't quite get themselves to pretend that it's not there, and morerecently a net feeling that this G-5 [agreement] works in thedirection, at least in the short run, of more of a constraint onpolicy. As I said, it's hard to judge that; but I think moreattention has been paid to the policy dilemma in that segment of thebusiness community in the recent past than I, at least, had detectedearlier. Now strangely enough, attitudes outside of that community ofthe Fortune 500, including even places like Buffalo and Rochester, aredistinctly better. I can't quite figure out why that's true, but wehave had a couple of meetings upstate recently and I was really struckby the very sharp difference in perceptions about the businesssituation, even in the Buffalo area. We havean auto worker, and he's dancing in the aisles. He isnot buying this notion that all of this [improvement in the] autosituation recently is just financing-related. He seems to think thatthey are really getting back into a groove. That's strange, but true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different perspectives and observations they have made, but there is no conflict or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 134.
MR. PARTEE. It certainly would be desirable for him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. All we can see is that Mr. Partee is expressing a statement or opinion, but we don't have any other information to determine if others agree or disagree with him.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have the vote protecting money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 136.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know if it has quiteprogressed to that point. It wasn't just either. I wasamazed at the attitude among a group of about 25 business people upthere two weeks ago. It floored me. I thought I was back inMinneapolis, Gary. Anyway, extracting from the vagaries of thebusiness situation, however one judges it, my own view on policy isthat we should stay where we are, which means alternative B prettymuch as sketched out in the Bluebook. In the immediate here-and-nowsituation, on top of all of vulnerabilities that have been there allalong, I must say that I personally think the major vulnerability is adownside break in the dollar in the near term. I am not predictingthat, but I think the risks are there. I am not sure what one doesabout it, but I would be prepared to tilt the thrust of policy in thecontext of alternative B in the direction of trying to mitigateagainst that vulnerability in any little way that we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their personal opinion and thoughts on policy and potential risks.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 138.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I note that much of the positivenews recently has to do with housing sales and the leading indicators.When you take autos out of consumer spending and analyze the [rise in-13-10/1/85the] leading indicators, which has been in the financial [components]up until the very last month, I am not sure that there has been such aturn in the leading indicators as to point to much more strength inthe period we are going through. I note and support the Fed staffrevising the growth downward in some of their projections at least.It seems to me that when the labor force resumes its growth, we wellcould have that two- or three-tenths improvement [in the unemploymentrate] disappear, as I think Jim hinted at. As the labor force resumesgrowth and we remain on a 2 percent [real GNP] growth line rather than2.7 or 3 percent or whatever, unemployment could well begin to creepup again, given the continued layoff news. It seems to me thatprotectionist tendencies are obvious in the Congress. The pricesituation already has been alluded to: wholesale prices, the CPI, andthe deflator are all looking reasonably good. Commodity pricesgenerally are down. OPEC and the Saudis are having their [annual]charade. When you look at the revised third-quarter data, you findthat CCC purchases are very important as are the purchases of autos byconsumers. I don't get a very secure feeling about the fourth quarteron that. I note in the staff projection that while the inventorybuildup, the restocking, is not the whole [explanation] for anotherquarter of 3 percent real growth, it is most of it. We have beendisappointed, if that's the word, in the inventory buildup in recentmonths; we previously were projecting inventory being a [plus] factorfor the third quarter. I would make the same comment about the[projection for] inventories for 1986. I think that we may be alittle too positive in that. I feel we are quite optimistic in ouranalysis of the trade balance and how quickly that is going to help usand how quickly import prices are going to change. We are talkingabout changes by the second quarter of next year. So, we well couldhave 2 percent real growth for the fourth quarter and for the firstand second quarters or perhaps for the whole year next year. Onceagain, that gets me to the problems of unemployment and protectionism.In terms of monetary policy, I would go along withalternative B, but given the way the markets have perceived our policyuntil very recently, the funds rate has been trading down below whatmight be expected. Add the borrowings and the excess reserve positionto the federal funds trading range and it looks as though the marketreally hasn't detected the slight movement toward more borrowing andslightly higher rates from the last FOMC [meeting]. Therefore, Iwould like to see us go back to $425 million as the starting borrowinglevel and to 7-1/2 to 7-3/4 percent on the federal funds rate, to giveourselves a little action space in interest rates, in case we do havethe dollar giving us even more of a problem than we have already. Ifwe have to kick the funds rate up 1/2 point, that keeps it closer to 8percent than to 8-1/2 percent. I'd give ourselves a little spacethere. So, I am for alternative B, previous FOMC meeting fashion, of$425 million and 7-1/2 to 7-3/4 percent on the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there are some concerns and reservations expressed, there is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their observations and opinions on various economic indicators and policy decisions, but there is no clear opposition or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 140.
MR. KEEHN. In a broad context, certainly, our outlook forthe economy would be very consistent with the forecast that Jim gaveearlier in the meeting. But as has been the case, we have had in theMidwest this terrible unevenness, and that certainly has continued.Some of the areas are doing very well. We've already commented aboutthe auto sector, but I've just been staggered by how effective theprice incentive has been. It is surely causing some imbalance in-14-10/1/85sales. Nonetheless, looking ahead to next year, the people I talkedto expect--and I think our forecast suggests--a very, very good autoyear of, say, 10.4 to 10.6 million in sales or something like that.So the high sales level this year isn't taking too much from that. Inretail sales, the people I talked with say that year-to-date sales arerunning 6 to 7 percent ahead of last year. That outlook looks prettygood. Looking ahead to Christmas, even though it's awfully early tosee that far ahead, I think they are looking for a 4 to 5 percentincrease, even though there is a shorter selling period. Commercialconstruction, particularly in Chicago, continues to be very, verystrong. I am afraid a lot of it is tax-oriented, but buildings aregoing up at a pretty rapid rate. On the bad side, there isagriculture. There is nothing new I can shed on that particularproblem other than to say that, as these harvests are beginning tocome in, the news is very very bad; I think we are going to see acontinued deterioration in that whole sector.On the inflation front, I really continue to be veryimpressed by how good the news looks. The people I talked with, eventhose who have businesses that are doing pretty well, are negotiatingcontracts with annual increases as low as 2 percent, with 3 to 3-1/2percent fairly typical for under-3-year contracts. They are gettingvery good changes in work rules and, therefore, have high confidencethat productivity will enable them to overcome even those modestincreases. And materials costs continue to be very, very tight; 1 or2 percent increases in materials costs are pretty typical; 3 to 4percent would be very much on the high side. So everybody I talked tois very optimistic, really, on the inflation front. All of that, ofcourse, is excluding our comments earlier this morning.Moving to monetary policy, it does seem to me that we are ina period when, because of the various circumstances, we have abuildup--both in terms of number and magnitude--of problems that areat the least very, very worrisome. Given that array of problems, Ithink frankly that we have to be very rate sensitive; I don't thinkthat we can afford to change the status quo too much. M1 is goingthrough an erratic period and we ought to recognize that it is veryerratic. Therefore, I would be in favor of maintaining the status quoin terms of the borrowing level and the fed funds rate and I thinkalternative B addresses that objective. I would suggest a borrowinglevel of, say, $500 million and a fed funds rate at the current levelwithout tolerating much of an increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various aspects of the economy and sharing their observations and opinions on each topic. They also express their preference for maintaining the current status quo in terms of borrowing level and fed funds rate.


Passage number 141.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 142.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, in the Fourth Federal ReserveDistrict business conditions remain sluggish. We have price weaknessacross a wide range of activities; wheat, aluminum, coal, and steelcome to mind on that front. Conditions are not noticeably improvingand they are not really getting worse either. A bright note in ourDistrict would come from the retail side; retailers are happy with thepace of sales and they are happy with the mood of consumers. I willbe very interested in assessing the reactions to the G-5 announcementin our District, since I think we are a hotbed of protectionistsentiment. I think that the G-5 announcement will be successful inblunting protectionist sentiment and that the efforts will bear fruitin a reasonable period of time. But there is an interesting twistthere in that just from the very people who have the most to gain from-15-10/1/85a falling dollar we hear the concern that if it's not accompanied byeither the spurring of growth abroad or the reigning in of ourdeficits that, in fact, it won't do them the good that they sodesperately need from it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states the current state of business conditions in the Fourth Federal Reserve District and expresses interest in assessing the reactions to the G-5 announcement. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope you encourage that discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a hope for the encouragement of discussion.


Passage number 144.
MS. HORN. Yes, indeed. But I do think there is a realunderstanding in the more sophisticated business public of thedangerous game [the G-5] are playing; and we see that time and timeagain in our District. Having said all that, I think that if we domanage to play this dangerous game successfully and don't have aprecipitous drop in the exchange rate, there is room in the short runfor optimism. We have really good news on the inflation front. Idon't see inflation starting from any other cause except an exchangerate decline or a real spurt in economic growth, and we may be seeinga little pickup in economic growth. So, in the short run I thinkthere is room for optimism. I add all of that together and say thatwe should stay about where we are on monetary policy. That would be$500 million of borrowing and the federal funds rate where it is-- upnudging the 8 percent level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is giving their analysis and opinion on the current state of economic affairs.


Passage number 145.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District, we areprobably a little more pessimistic, and certainly more pessimisticthan is traditional for us. I just completed a swing around theDistrict and found the following: in Houston, no optimism given theenergy and real estate situation; in San Antonio and in Austin, alittle more optimism; and in Midland Texas, where our El Paso BranchBoard met--and that covers eastern New Mexico--all of theuncertainties on energy prices have them quite worried. Si mentionedagriculture. I heard one report up in the Panhandle area of cowscoming out of the feed lot at a loss of $125 to $150 a head, so it'sgoing to take a lot of volume to make that up. In Dallas, I guessthere is probably a little more optimism, although I worry about it.I've talked about the commercial real estate situation to the pointwhere you all are tired of hearing about it. But the Chamber ofCommerce did a report a couple of weeks ago which said that there ismore vacant office space in Dallas, Texas than there is office spacein Philadelphia. And that has to be a big problem down the road.In a broader context, my own view is that there is a littleimprovement in the economy. I would pretty well agree with Jim'sforecast. On the policy side, I guess I have some sympathy for whatBob Black was saying; I would probably be somewhere between "B" and"C" myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker's observations and opinions about the economic situation in different areas and their own views. There is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 146.
MR. BALLES. In terms of the business situation, both aroundthe country and around the West, it appears to us that it's a touchbetter than the last time we met. I would say that the risk ofrecession--which I never judged to be very big in any event, but itwas a risk--if anything, has receded since the time of our lastmeeting. Having said that, there is nothing that has changedfundamentally in the fabric of the economy, certainly not in the West.We have this big contrast between things that are going well, likedefense and aerospace and most services, and weakness in the fields weall know about, such as agriculture, lumber, and many lines ofmanufacturing.10/1/85Translating that into policy, we like many others are puzzledby the behavior of M1. The bottom line is that we, at least, can'texplain it satisfactorily by any different hypothesis--that it's anincrease in the demand for money and a shift in the demand functionfor money upward, or simply money demand moving downward along a givendemand function as interest rates have come down. While you canexplain some of it possibly by portfolio shifts, that does not get thewhole answer either. That leaves me, net, a bit nervous about thecontinuing strength of M1 that we have seen and I hope that we canslow it down a little before it translates into some sort ofresurgence of inflationary expectations in the market. I don't knowhow long market participants and investors will go along, seeingvirtually an unprecedented surge in money, without beginning to wonderwhat lies down the road in a couple of years in terms of the inflationrate. So it is really a matter of the feedback and the impact that ishaving on investor expectations. So far it has been quiescent, but Iwouldn't bet on that continuing too long. Were it not for the G-5program, I would be between "B" and "C;" but given the G-5 program, Isuppose the better part of wisdom is to aim for something of an evenkeel right now. Thus, I favor alternative B but tilting a littletoward the tighter end of the specifications--going up to the maximumlevel of about $550 million on the borrowing range specified there andwanting to keep that federal funds rate up to about 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their observations and concerns about the business situation and the behavior of M1.


Passage number 147.
MR. WALLICH. In economic terms, very little seems to havechanged. Some non-economic factors have changed. As far as thesituation of the exchange market is concerned, I note your fears, Mr.Chairman, but my impression is that some people in the market say thatthis is just another of a series of interventions that isn't going toget anywhere. They are going to wait and see what happens. If wedon't follow it through, then they will just move the market back towhere it was before, and we will have a defeat instead of an elementof strength. That could be regarded as a reason why a softening ofrates would help to support the intervention. There are otherarguments on that side--the deteriorating LDC position, protectionism--but these are all very short-run developments, and what the movementof the dollar is likely to be doesn't seem to me to have muchimmediate influence. On the other side there are two factors that aremore longer term and that do seem of concern. One is the seemingmisbehavior of M1. I too make these calculations: Is it interest. Isit innovations. What can it be. Nothing seems to give an adequateexplanation except the explanation that the demand curve has shifted,which it has done several times before so one shouldn't preclude it.The second is an even longer-run development. If now the dollar doesgo down and over time we get an improvement in the current account andwe do not get an improvement in the budget, then we are building upinflationary pressures, including ultimately higher interest rates,which will be quite a negative [factor]. I think that is the mostlikely course of events: that we will find ourselves from meeting tomeeting hoping that the current account is improving and that it willbegin to improve and, meanwhile, nothing else major in the economywill have changed. I think that would be a very dangerousproposition. So unless we can get [relief] from that situation, Idon't think we should put additional stimulation into the economy.But the end of all this is that I would go with alternative B becauseI see rather strong forces on both sides, which I can't resolve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents different factors and considerations but does not take a definitive position or argue against any specific viewpoint.


Passage number 148.
-17-10/1/85MR. MELZER. At the last meeting I was in favor of leaningtoward somewhat greater restraint, which has since been realized. Andthe numbers we have gotten on the economy overall and what I amhearing in the District would tend to make one feel moderately[positive], anyway, about what is going on in the economy. On theother hand, I did not come here today with any strong feelings thatgreater restraint was necessarily called for. One of the reasons whyI think that is the moderation we have seen in the rate of growth ofmoney, particularly that which is expected looking forward. One thingthat gave me concern immediately after the G-5 accord was the reactionof the government yield curve, specifically the coupons, where we hada steepening of the yield curve of about 10 basis points. At thisjuncture I would say that is something I have taken note of but at thecurrent levels of those spreads it is not something that concerns meterribly. But I think that market, and probably to some extent theforeign exchange market as well, feels that the Fed is sitting herewith its hands tied and may not be able to respond to improvingnumbers on the real side and rapid money growth. Because of the G-5agreement and so forth, I don't think it would be particularly politicto consider greater restraint at this juncture; however, if thingsdon't unfold as we expect them to with respect to lower rates of M1growth and if we continue to get good numbers on the real side, Iwould certainly be leaning toward greater restraint in theintermeeting period.I have one or two anecdotal comments. First of all, amongretailers in the District there seems to be a feeling that car salesare definitely sapping the general strength of retail sales.Secondly, corroborating what Si said about inflationary expectations,I picked up the same [tenor] in a luncheon we had at the Bank: noincreased inflationary pressures on costs; no perceived ability toraise prices substantially; and, to the extent that there were wagepressures, strong feelings that those could be offset withproductivity gains.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and observations, without conflicting opinions or arguments from others.


Passage number 149.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make an observation on thisprice situation. The recent figures look pretty good and promise thatwe will have overestimated [the rate of inflation] for the fifthconsecutive year in our projections. But I don't think there is anydoubt that inflationary expectations in the longer-run sense in someanemic way are increasing. The survey evidence--what we have--saysthat. But I feel it in my bones too that fooling around with thedollar and questions about the dollar may restrict Federal Reservefreedom of action. It tends to go in that direction. It is not anabrupt or major thing, but I think it is quite clear--just when you goout and make speeches--that people are much more open about sayingthat than they would have been six months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's observations and thoughts on the current price situation and inflationary expectations. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or conflicting argument.


Passage number 150.
MR. STERN. With regard to the business situation, Icertainly recognize that one or two months don't make a trend, but Imust say that I am impressed by the latest statistics. I think theeconomy is clearly doing better, picking up some momentum, as probablywas expected by a lot of us. My own view is that we may do somewhatbetter than the Greenbook forecast, at least for the next severalquarters. That certainly would be welcomed, other things equal, in myjudgment. On the financial side, as several have mentioned, I can'tquite bring myself to dismiss M1 altogether. And in any event, itseems to me that growth in the other aggregates certainly has been-1810/1/85adequate and that liquidity in the economy is certainly ample. So, Iam not sure that we are getting terribly mixed signals from thecollection of statistics on that side. My major concern is that wemay have a monster on our hands in the foreign exchange markets--notimmediately, judging by the way things have been going, but I amconcerned about the potential weakness in the dollar and theinflationary implications of that. I certainly am struck, as I travelaround our District at least, by the fact that one of the origins ofthe problems that are evident in the District is the rapid inflationof the late '70s and early '80s; obviously, we still are suffering thehangover effects of all of that. And that is one of my principalconcerns, both at the moment and looking ahead, in terms of economicperformance and the thrust of policy.For the immediate period, as far as policy is concerned, I ama little concerned that if the dollar weakens more than would seem tobe appropriate or desirable, or if money growth turns out to be morerapid than we expect, we may not be in much of a position to respondto it. And what that implies to me is that, while I certainly canaccept the specifications of alternative B, I would like to make onemodification because of my concerns about both money growth and thedollar. And that is, I would make the borrowing range $500 to $600million, starting at $500 but leaving us a little more leeway on theup side in case what I judge to be some of the risks here materialize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and concerns, but there is no direct disagreement with any other person or position.


Passage number 151.
MR. BOEHNE. I don't think a lot has changed in the economy;I think it is a touch better in my District. The feeling is generallypositive, but I'd say that positive feeling is expressed inunenthusiastic words. I am struck by the disparity just in somethinglike the unemployment rate. There are a number of areas in myDistrict where you can find unemployment at 5 or 6 percent. You candrive 50 or 75 miles and it is 10 percent. That kind of difference isstriking. On the inflation side, I would agree with what has beensaid: I don't think there is a real problem. Wage settlementsgenerally have been good; however, I would point out that wages arerising, as they typically do, considerably faster in the servicesector than they are in the manufacturing sector. I have beensurprised at some of the increases that are planned in banking andinsurance for next year in our area and particularly by theprofessional and managerial pay increases. So, generally I agree; butthere are pockets in the service sector where we are seeing some largeincreases. I think the risk to the economy is largely from thefinancial side--the whole litany of things that we have talked aboutmany times before at this table. On monetary policy, I don't see thatwe have very much room for maneuvering given the cross-currents ofevents, and I would find alternative B generally to be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne is sharing his observations and opinions about the economy, but there is no mention of conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 152.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 153.
MR. PARTEE. I agree that the business outlook looks betterthan it did a couple months ago. I realize you can find difficultieswith all the statistics, but that is frequently true as you begin tosee some strengthening. You can say that there is an oddity here andan oddity there, or it is concentrated in this or that. But in factit is coming out quite uniformly on the stronger side. A comment wasmade about new car sales. Well, it seems to me that this endeavor isnot costing the auto companies all that much. The present value issomething under 10 percent. They have raised prices significantly, so-19-10/1/85they can very easily afford to continue to do the same thing orsomething similar with the '86 models. Their problem will be thatthey may run through a backlog of demand, not that they can't easilyafford the kinds of promotions that they have been giving in thisperiod. Also, I think technically the business situation looks betterbecause we have a quite moderate inventory level--in fact no inventoryaccumulation--and good final demands. I would expect that we will seeinventory accumulation and that will give us a stronger economy. Evenso, the staff forecast is for 3 percent growth in the fourth quarterand on the order of 2-1/2 to 3 percent in the first half of next year.Say it runs stronger than that by a percentage point; it's still notanything excessive. So I don't see that there is an upside risk ofexcessive growth in the near term, and I happen to agree with NABE,Martha: I think there will be a recession by this time next year. Sowe are talking about a fairly short-run outlook and I don't see anyreason to say that the performance of the economy looks to be suchthat we ought to be making financial conditions tighter than they noware by any significant amount--unless the dollar breaks very stronglyor something like that, which will change the nature of things.I note that not only has money been growing relative to GNPso that its trend looks different, but that is also true of debtrelative to GNP, which is up very sharply in the last 4 years from 1.4times GNP to 1.65 times GNP. It looks as if, for some reason that Ican't quite understand, it takes both more money and more credit tokeep the economy moving at all well. I think there are great pitfallsin this in the long run on the credit side; I worry about servicingthe debt. That may get to be a very great problem at some point inthe future. And on the money side I worry about having pumped allthis liquidity in, which we won't be able to neutralize if somethingshould touch off the desire to use it actively. But these are notquestions for today; they will become perhaps very big problems lateron but not for today. I think we ought to leave policy just where itis. I disagree with Pres. I don't think we ought to ease up anybecause I think that is something the market is looking for and wouldalso associate with the G-5 accord and would be really more confiningon us than not to do it. But I don't think we ought to tighten at alleither. So I guess that's alternative B, with $500 million onborrowings as the initial estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker agrees with the business outlook and does not express any disagreement or contention with any statements made in the passage.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am confused about the things you areworried about: an increase in money for four years and an increase ininvestment for four years. When does it become timely to do somethingabout it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 155.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think that you can do it, if theevidence is that we have to have [such growth] in order to keep theeconomy moving at all well. I think you just have to live with ituntil the crash.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Partee, merely expresses his opinion about the situation, suggesting that living with the growth until a crash occurs might be the only option. However, there is no conflicting viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Until the crash comes: a passive approach.Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that there is a passive approach to dealing with the crash that is coming. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 157.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I too think that the evidencesuggests that the economy is picking up a bit but I certainly don'tsense in the numbers any strong forward thrust. I think it isentirely compatible with the kind of modest growth that the staff isprojecting. In my area, I run into the same comments from business-20-10/1/85people that Karen did: they don't see things getting stronger; theydon't see them getting weaker. I think that reflects the fact that weare a capital goods producer essentially and the weakest part of theeconomy right now is the capital goods sector. New orders for capitalgoods are no higher than they were a year ago. But I think the uptickin the economy does suggest a no-change policy. I was concerned thatthis might conflict with the G-5 program in the sense that I thoughtthere was a possibility, anyway, that we would need somewhat lowerinterest rates to reinforce that declaration. But at least so far theevidence is that we don't; we are getting a response at current ratesand I am hopeful that a nice and orderly response will continue. So Iwould propose no change, alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the staff's projection of modest growth and suggests a no-change policy.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would agree withthose around table who suggest that an uptick in the national economyis probably in train--that the Greenbook forecast is very reasonable.That, however, is only from a national view. From a regional view, inthe Tenth District things have not gotten better; they have gottenworse. And the projections for the fall and winter, particularly inthe agricultural and energy areas, hold out no great hope. As amatter of fact, the financial strain simply rolls back into thefinancial institutions; the outlook for banks, savings and loans, andothers looks to be devastating. From strictly a national viewpoint; Iwould agree with those who say no change in policy. From a regionalviewpoint, I guess I would have to urge perhaps some relaxation ofinterest rate levels. I will just note that on the inflation front,much of the contribution to stable inflation in the short run is acontribution by food and energy. And that impacts my District ratherdramatically.There has been a good deal of talk about M1 and I wouldagree, in view of what I have just said, that we shouldn't pay verymuch attention to it in the very short run. Although I would hate togive it up as a part of policy, over the next intermeeting period andperhaps over the fourth quarter as a whole I don't see M1 as a majorplayer in policy decisions, unless other matters such as the dollarcome into play and we may want to use it. On the other hand, thedollar and the G-5 arrangement are a bit puzzling to me. That is tosay that there's been a great deal of talk here and I think you, Mr.Chairman, expressed the concern of a precipitous drop in the dollar.I think that is a real risk, obviously. But if you look at it inanother way the fundamentals haven't changed, as far as I can see. Asa result, it seems to me that the dollar has come down relative to theother currencies but I would expect that in the short run the traderswill test the United States, for example, and will try to push thedollar back up to see how far the United States really will go toparticipate in the G-5 agreement.So with that in mind, and with the background of the economy,particularly queuing off of my own region, I would prefer alternativeB. But I am troubled a little by the language describing alternativeB and that is that the staff would project a funds rate of 8 percentor a bit higher. I would object at this point, if it were up to me,to having a rate of 8 percent and pushing on up unless some of theseother exogenous forces, such as the dollar, come into play. As aresult, I would modify that and be someplace between "A" and "B" and-21-10/1/85start out with a borrowing level, say, of between $400 and $500million, centering on $450 million. I am hopeful that that would beenough latitude and flexibility, if the dollar did start to drop, thatthere wouldn't be a [conference] call and the policy prescriptionchanged as a result of that call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey disagrees with the national view that there should be no change in policy and suggests some relaxation of interest rate levels from a regional viewpoint. He also expresses skepticism about the G-5 arrangement and expresses concern about pushing the funds rate up to 8 percent.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The question is incomplete, therefore it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 161.
MS. SEGER. Many of my points have already been made, but Iwould just like to emphasize that I believe the risks are on the downside. The consumer spending numbers that look very robust and retailsales that look good are being supported by very generous use ofcredit cards and other kinds of credit. I picked up some numbers fromthe treasurer of one of the captive auto finance companies and theterms of auto credit really did something to me: 45 percent of theirAugust contracts were for 60-month loans. Almost half of thecontracts were for five years, which means that they needed thatincentive plus a very low rate of 7.7 percent to get a monthly paymentthat was low enough to drag these people in off the streets. I don'tread that as a terribly, terribly strong demand situation. Also, Siand I may talk to different people in the auto industry, but I haven'tfound anybody out there who doesn't think that this temporary burst ofsales is going to be reversed, that in fact they are borrowing fromthe future, and that later in October we will see a very big andsignificant drop in sales as they pay the price for moving these '85models out very rapidly. So I think we are going to see somedistortion in the numbers here for a while that will make it verydifficult to get a handle on what is really going on. But I thinkthat there isn't as much strength basically as one might conclude.Secondly, on the housing matter, as the standards of the mortgagelenders and of the mortgage insurers are tightened, I think we aregoing to see that show up eventually in [a drop in] new housingstarts. I admit it hasn't happened yet, but I think it will and,therefore, starts may come in a little below what the staff is nowestimating. On plant and equipment spending, here again I think moreand more companies are having profit problems, and that does feed backinto their capital spending decisions and doesn't make them verypositive about it. So, I think there may be some downside risk there.On the inflation front, like most of the others here, I thinkthe numbers look pretty good. I also would like to emphasize thatthere are sectors of the economy where there is actual deflation,which doesn't seem to get mentioned much. Also, I certainly wouldread the M1 numbers, but I would be much more concerned with what'sgoing on with M1 if M2 and M3 also were going off the top of thechart, which they aren't--particularly M3. Having just met with theDecatur Chamber of Commerce yesterday and the National Association ofManufacturers, you would need to give me a bullet-proof vest if Isuggested any policy change that would lead to higher interest ratesor a tightening, because both of those groups are very sensitive tothe financial side of the economy. They are tying that to their ownproblems. So I am torn between supporting "B" with a tilt toward "A"or just going straight to "A." I would be very, very concerned aboutany uptick in interest rates at this point for the reasons Imentioned--the impact on agriculture, the other areas that have bigdebt problems, and furthermore the possibility that that wouldundermine the recent G-5 agreement. So I guess I am somewhere between-22-10/1/85"A" and "B" with the borrowing down to the level we were talking aboutat the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

The speaker, Ms. Seger, expresses disagreement and contention in the passage. She challenges the notion that consumer spending is strong, citing the use of credit cards and loans as a means of support. She also disagrees with the idea that the temporary burst in sales will continue, predicting a drop in sales in the future. Additionally, she disagrees with the staff's estimation of new housing starts and expresses concern about profit problems affecting capital spending decisions. Overall, Ms. Seger presents a more cautious and skeptical stance compared to others in the discussion.


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "Governor Rice" without providing any additional context or details.


Passage number 163.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have no new observations tomake that have not already been made around the table. I, too, seethe economy picking up. I think that the staff forecast is right, andI particularly agree with it for the short term--that is, for thecurrent quarter and the fourth quarter I think we'll get growth in thearea of 3 percent. Given this outlook and given the other noneconomicdevelopments that Governor Wallich referred to, I agree with thosearound the table who say that we really don't have much policy scope,or very much room for maneuver from a policy point of view. Wecertainly would not, or at least I would not, want to do anything thatwould reduce the chances of reaching a moderate 3 percent rate ofgrowth. And while I would have preferred to have seen in this periodafter the last FOMC meeting a funds rate somewhat higher than it didin fact average and certainly less money growth, I don't think thatthere is anything we can do now either to tighten or to ease policy; Ithink that we are in a very narrow range for policy decisions. So, Ithink this calls for maintaining the existing degree of reservepressure and that would be alternative B with borrowing around $500million and the funds rate around 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the staff forecast and with the idea that there is limited policy scope. They also agree with maintaining the existing degree of reserve pressure.


Passage number 164.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what I can add to allthat discussion since every contingency and every threat has beenmentioned by somebody. There are a lot of contingencies. In thebroadest sense, we are constrained by circumstances. I wouldn't putall that much emphasis on the G-5 matter; we're constrained by morefundamental contingencies on either side. But I wouldn't interpretthat too strictly in the short run. I don't know what is going tohappen in a number of dimensions. A lot of people talk about theeconomy being a little stronger in tone. I think that's probablyright, but against the background of the money supply figures inparticular--Governor Partee said he could imagine [real GNP growth]going to 4 percent--I could imagine it going to a lot more than 4percent under a certain set of circumstances. All you need is a kickin those inventories and a downward movement in the trade balance atthe same time and you could get quite a little kick. I'm not sure Iwould predict that, but I don't think it's out of the bounds ofpossibility. And that makes those money supply figures look more inaccordance with historical experience, and everybody has expresseduneasiness about what that means.I do think that everybody--well, not quite everybody--butit's clear where the center of gravity lies. I don't disagree withthat at all. I think the most likely risk we face--or the one I worryabout the most, let me put it that way--is that the dollar may declinetoo far too fast and create inflationary expectations and eventuallyinflation. If it does pass some point of undermining confidence, it'sgoing to be very hard to manage and it's going to produce higherinterest rates. That's the real threat of a sudden drop in thedollar: decidedly higher interest rates as well as inflation.Worrying about 1/8 or 1/4 point on interest rates now will pale insignificance compared to the kind of direction Mr. Truman was alludingto if those kinds of conditions ever arose. That would really throw alot of things off course, beginning with the debt situation and-23-10/1/85recession and possibly agriculture; you name it. That's the onethreat that gives me nightmares as I look ahead. For that reason, Ithink it's counterproductive to give any signals that we are easing atthe moment. It would just create additional risks of that happening.I'm not talking about a month from now or something. If the moneysupply gets weaker and the economic news is weak--if we had a clearbasis for easing--we should ease. I don't think we have that clearbasis right now. I would also say that if we had a clear basis fortightening, we should tighten. If that arises it's going to arise, Isuspect, more from the dollar side. But if we continued to get bigincreases in M1 combined with a real strengthening in the economy, Idon't think we would have much choice, whatever the G-5 says. Thereare no commitments made there. But for the moment, I think we are inthe area of what is loosely called "B."I would also suggest that a certain amount of unusualmaneuvering room is needed in the short run, within a narrow range,because I think a lot does depend on almost day-to-day psychology inthe exchange markets. We can lean a little toward the easier side ifthe dollar is strong and we're having a great test on the up side, andwe can lean on the other side if the dollar decline appears to bebuilding up momentum there. At the moment that's where the momentumis, if it has any momentum. That could change any day, I wellrecognize. But I would come out about where most people are in termsof something like a $500 million borrowing level as a center ofgravity, but I'd be prepared to go moderately above that orpotentially moderately below that in day-to-day or week-to-weektactics, depending particularly upon the dollar; but as the weeks goby it also would depend upon the money supply and the economy. We arenow in a period where I think within a limit--I don't know whether I'dcall it $425 to $575 million or $400 to $600 million, or something inthat area--we could use a little maneuverability. And I think that isconsistent with a federal funds rate somewhere around 8 percent or abit higher or lower; I'm thinking about 8 percent or a shade below 8percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. The speaker is discussing various contingencies and expressing their own thoughts and concerns about the economy, but there is no direct disagreement with others.


Passage number 165.
MR. PARTEE. The aggregates would play a relatively smallrole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, relatively small. I don't know ifit's any smaller in some sense than they have been playing. I am alittle influenced at the moment, inevitably, by the fact that the oddson a slowing in the aggregates look a little better to me now thanthey might have a week or two ago. We had a big decline last week andlittle change this week. There may be a sizable decline in thefollowing week: three weeks in a row of decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their uncertainty and personal perspective on the topic, without contradicting or arguing against any other viewpoint.


Passage number 167.
 I think it's so highthat I wouldn't respond immediately by easing; I would be moreinclined--MR. PARTEE. If you happen to get a negative month, say, thatwouldn't cause an easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any conflicting or contradictory statements. It simply states the speaker's opinion about a high situation and their inclination towards not responding immediately by easing.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It certainly would be a factor in sayingwe would be less eager to tighten if other things are pointing in thatdirection. It's simple if everything is pointing in the samedirection. If the dollar were rebounding, with M1 softer and theeconomy looking rather weak, it's easy--ease. The problem arises whenthese signals are not all in the same direction in a specific period.-24-10/1/85On the contrary, if the dollar were softening, with M1 continuing highand the business picture looking better, tighten. That's too easywhen all of them are moving that consistently. I think that's whatthe directive ought to say, whatever the particular form: that if allthese things--or the weight of them--are moving in one direction orthe other, we would ease or tighten. It's perfectly reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different scenarios and stating their opinion on when to ease or tighten monetary policy based on different indicators. They are not contradicting themselves or arguing against anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 169.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 170.
 And you are implying a symmetrical view here,essentially, or a little on the tightening side because--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I see it as symmetrical in ananalytic sense. My gut feeling is that it continues to--. Well, theone thing I really worry about is the dollar getting out of hand onthe down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own view and concern about the dollar, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 171.
 It's--MR. RICE. So you would be guided more by what happens in theforeign exchange market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the speaker would be guided more by what happens in the foreign exchange market.


Passage number 172.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am talking about very short-runtactics. At this moment you get the impression that we're a "captive"as some people put it, and we have to ease to get the dollar down.The dollar has come down quite a lot. I am very sensitive to thepsychology going the other way, based upon all we have experiencedhere and abroad as to what happens sometimes when the market gets toexpecting ease. Maybe everybody is ready. We will have a great teston the up side. I would much rather have a test on the up side and doa lot of intervening and maybe ease a bit, than I would a test on thedown side. The upside test is much more manageable than the downsidetest. There is no catastrophe if the dollar gets a little strongerthan it has been and we have to do a lot of intervening and we evenhave to ease a little. I don't see any lasting damage from thatscenario, except that politically it undercuts the anti-protectionism[position] but I don't know how much weight to put on that in terms ofsensitivity to day-to-day developments. It's a question of what andwhere. When I look at the broad strategy down the road--inflation,and all the rest--I am more worried, though I don't know which is moreprobable, about the risks we run from a deteriorating dollar if it gotout of hand than the others. I'm not worried about the current levelbut I don't know how much longer [unintelligible]. I would say withall the hoopla this thing gets that there is a lot of sensitivity tothis point. I see it was in the papers that there was some insistencein the G-5 meeting that they redo the language of the statement to getthe word "orderly" or the wording "orderly decline or orderly rise" inthere. That was a Latin American inspiration; they among others weresensitive to this point. Nobody pays any attention to it, but itreflects that concern that this could get out of hand. I'm not sayinganything different here about the [borrowing] numbers than anybodyelse was saying. But I am suggesting some tolerance of some day-to-day, week-to-week maneuvering, influenced by the dollar but against abackground of these other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different perspectives and possible scenarios related to the value of the dollar, but there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 173.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's fine with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement indicates agreement, as the speaker expresses that they are okay with something.


Passage number 174.
MR. PARTEE. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the speaker explicitly states agreement.


Passage number 175.
MR. GUFFEY. You have no problems with the funds ratebeginning to trade at 8 percent or a little higher in view of the most-25-10/1/85recent background of something less than that--that is, coming out ofthis meeting and seeing it trade at 8 to 8-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question and asks for clarification or confirmation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not particularly during a period when thedollar is weak. I would if the dollar were surging up; I would notunder today's conditions in the market. If we were having a greattest on the up side, we would not choose those days for making anytightening move. If anything, we would resolve our doubts in theother direction, if that's the direction we think we are going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a disagreement or contention between two viewpoints. One viewpoint suggests that tightening moves should not be made during a period when the dollar is weak, while the other viewpoint suggests that doubts should be resolved in the opposite direction.


Passage number 177.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, since funds haven't traded above 8 percentin recent times, moving above 8 percent may provide a message ofsorts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation that funds have not traded above 8 percent in recent times and speculating that if they were to do so, it may provide some sort of message.


Passage number 178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not saying we aim above 8percent. I would accept something like, say, $500 million, which isthe figure most people picked one way or another as the center ofgravity. And that's where we would aim as a kind of starting point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as the speaker is simply expressing their opinion and stating a potential starting point for a desired figure.


Passage number 179.
MR. PARTEE. And that ought to be about 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 180.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be 8 percent or a little below, Iwould guess. We don't know; we often get caught in just implementingpolicy during the week that things do not turn out the way we expectedbecause of a bad projection or for some other reason. How frozen areyou to pushing toward $500 million if it is above $500 million and themarket is already easing or vice versa. I don't think this is aperiod when we want to give these day-to-day signals that may becontrary to our basic intention, in an effort to get a lower or ahigher [borrowed] reserve figure because that is mechanically what weare supposed to be hitting. I guess what I am saying is that this isan operating technique. The basic point remains. We meet fairlysoon, of course, for our next meeting. But if everything or the greatweight of evidence was in one direction or another, these directivesalways call for changing the center of gravity either in an easing ora tightening direction. I say an easing or a tightening direction,but my own suspicion is that I wouldn't expect either, outside of thatrange I talked about. Given how high the money supply already is,given that the dollar is moving lower, given a little better feelingabout the economy, I would be prepared to tighten if all those thingscame down in that direction. Well, I don't think we'd do anythingdrastic in the next 5 weeks but we could lean more consistently towardthe $600 million than less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own analysis and opinion on the situation.


Passage number 181.
MR. PARTEE. It is just five weeks before the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 182.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So I am told by the Secretary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply relaying information provided by the Secretary without expressing any personal opinion or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
MR. BERNARD. Yes, this is the shortest interval of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "this is the shortest interval of the year."


Passage number 184.
MR. PARTEE. Good. Good timing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses satisfaction with the timing of something.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, we could always have aconsultation in between, and I would presume we would if we were goingto make a really big change. It's hard for me to conceive of--Ishouldn't be so flat-footed. I should say I would be surprised if wewanted to go below $400 million or above $600 million as the center ofgravity, as opposed to in a particular week in the next five weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is expressing a personal opinion or speculation about a potential situation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 186.
-26-10/1/85MR. BALLES. There is going to be quite a bit of difference,Mr. Chairman, between the lower end and the upper end of that range interms of the tone of the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there will be a difference in the "tone of the markets" between the lower end and the upper end of a certain range.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. We went from $400 to $500million with no change in the tone of the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the change in market value without any contrasting views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 188.
MR. BALLES. It's a pretty wide range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles simply states that the range is wide, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If Mr. Corrigan's banks have computerproblems, or at least alleged computer problems, they borrow more fora week than we do with all our open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a comparison between two different situations.


Passage number 190.
MS. SEGER. Maybe we can sabotage computers. That would beworse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Seger, simply suggests a potential action of sabotaging computers.


Passage number 191.
MR. BOEHNE. They have enough potential on their own; wedon't need to help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's opinion that the subject has enough potential without any additional assistance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that connection, I'll make an ad hoccomment--not about computer problems in particular. This happensmostly with a handful of very large banks: They waltz in at 5:30 on aWednesday afternoon when the funds rate has been 7-1/2 or 7-3/4percent all day and it gets to 9 percent at 5:30 on Wednesdayafternoon and they say very conveniently "Whoops, we're in overdraftand we want to borrow from you." I think they ought to be told to goshove it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses dissatisfaction with the behavior of large banks and suggests that they should be told off.


Passage number 193.
MR. BLACK. Certainly couldn't be more descriptive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that something is descriptive.


Passage number 194.
MS. SEGER. They are just profit-maximizers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply states that "They are just profit-maximizers," which is a general statement about a group without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 195.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will modify that comment; I'd tell themthe next time they can go shove it. But, we have this question of thedirective. What we are talking about in terms of the numbers in thedirective is alternative B. I think we are saying "maintain." Thereis this question we need to deal with about whether we say that weexpect M1 to exceed the range for the year. Obviously, that seemshighly probable although less certain this minute. I don't think it'sabsolutely certain--highly probable but not absolutely certain--if weget a big decline in October. I think some are in favor of changingthat if we are [positive]; maybe we should face up to that if we are.It raises the question of whether we should say so publicly. Ihaven't any very convenient occasion to do that right now; I wouldhate to go out and make a special announcement just on this. If wedo, it lends itself directly to the interpretation that we picked thisparticular time to ease policy because of the exchange marketsituation, which I think would be unfortunate. I don't think we wantto give that impression. So we're caught in a dilemma. We may facethis as a fact, but it's a bit awkward. We may have a probableoccurrence, but is it that much more apparent this month instead oflast month, let's say. that we are compelled to make an announcement.It's almost bound to be misinterpreted, simply because it will beinterpreted in the light of this exchange market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses a dilemma and the potential misinterpretation of making an announcement in relation to the exchange market.


Passage number 196.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage without the passage itself being provided.


Passage number 197.
 I think we could hold this for five weeks, Paul,by which time we will know whether October--10/1/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is certainly true, and that wouldtake care of this announcement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting holding something for five weeks, and the other person agrees with the suggestion.


Passage number 198.
MR. BALLES. I for one would agree that this would be a badtime to make an announcement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Balles is expressing agreement with the idea that making an announcement at the current time would not be favorable.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's leave this out then. But ifwe are even more convinced 5 weeks from now, then we ought to decideit. Now, I'm not sure I looked at all these variants that closely,but the main theme is what: not sticking M1 in the same sentence withthe others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting leaving something out and expressing uncertainty about their thoroughness in examining different variants.


Passage number 200.
MR. MARTIN. I think variant II is a little more direct.It's a considerably more direct expression of what we actually havebeen doing, Paul, and I think it commends itself because it is direct.And it starts off with the aggregates; it doesn't leave them out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin is simply expressing his preference for variant II and explaining why he believes it is more direct.


Passage number 201.
MR. BLACK. I think it's a more accurate description of whatwe have been doing, but the old one gave the aggregates more primacyand I'd hate to see that lost. But I sure agree with you that it'smore [descriptive of] what we've been doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement and concern about potential loss.


Passage number 202.
MR. WALLICH. I like the first variant. Whether [or not]it's what we have been doing, I think it points to what we should bedoing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 203.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It merely mentions Mr. Partee without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 204.
 I think variant II is so much more honest thatwe ought to--MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 205.
 Yes, we ought to take a chance and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me have a short recess for 15 secondsto understand what the difference is between these variants. Thefirst sentence is the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The first sentence expresses a suggestion or opinion, and the second sentence is simply requesting a brief pause to gather information. There is no clash of ideas or opposing viewpoints present.


Passage number 206.
MR. AXILROD. The first sentence is meant to be the same,yes. There may be typos; that's different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating that there may be typos in the sentence, but the intended meaning remains the same.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess there is no difference betweenthem, but shouldn't it say the degree of pressure on reserve positions"sought in recent weeks".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. There is no statement or indication of conflicting opinions or viewpoints. The phrase in question is a suggestion or clarification about the language used, rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 208.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the statement "MR. AXILROD." This is simply a declaration or introduction of someone's name.


Passage number 209.
 Well, I assumed--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Didn't we have this small change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is assuming something and then asking a question to confirm if they had previously gone through a similar change.


Passage number 210.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I assumed we hit the $500 million. Inthe past we have used "sought" when we didn't get what we were aimingfor. But whichever way, it doesn't matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their assumption and discussing their past use of a word. They acknowledge that it doesn't ultimately matter which specific word is used in this instance.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just see where the changesare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about wanting to review the changes.


Passage number 212.
 "This action is expected to be consistent with--"MR. AXILROD. The next two sentences may be expresseddifferently, but they are meant to be the same in that there is an M2and M3 sentence and an M1 sentence. The difference comes after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 213.
10/1/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have no differences between themin the first three sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first three sentences simply state a fact without any conflicting viewpoints or contradicting statements.


Passage number 214.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. The difference is that the"somewhat greater or somewhat lesser restraint," instead of beingconfined only to the monetary aggregates and viewed in the context ofeverything else, pertains to the monetary aggregates and everythingelse all the same. And there is a little change in the last sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing a clarification on the difference between two concepts, without expressing any disagreement with them.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're combining in one sentence what wesaid in three sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply describes the act of condensing information from three sentences into one sentence without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 216.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply acknowledges that the preceding statement is correct.


Passage number 217.
MR. BLACK. I think people would read that second variant assaying that we are targeting nominal GNP, which is what I'm afraidwe're doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. Black is an expression of his fear or concern about the approach being taken, but it does not suggest any opposing viewpoint or conflict with others.


Passage number 218.
 I wouldn't want to be accused of dishonesty, since Chucksaid this is more honest, but--MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] the exchange rate too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It only mentions the speaker's concern about being accused of dishonesty and references a comment made by Chuck. There is no contrasting or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 219.
MR. BOEHNE. The aggregates are listed first in the sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the aggregates are listed first in the sentence. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 220.
MR. BLACK. Yes, but they sure are downgraded from where theywere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Black is a simple affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think one can exaggerate thedifference between these two variants. The fact is that the secondone is somewhat less cumbersome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion but is not arguing against or contradicting another viewpoint.


Passage number 222.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage you are referring to, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide the relevant passage?


Passage number 223.
 That's what markets do when we change--MR. AXILROD. I took the words "monetary objectives andrelated reserve paths" out of the last sentence and substituted"reserve conditions" since that's what the Manager is operating on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a substitution made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 224.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It says you're going for them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 225.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it seems to me either of theseversions ought to say "sought in recent weeks" in sentence number onesince we did change it, however modestly, during the last period. Andwe're talking about "maintain" I think. What are we putting in herein either version.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is discussing a specific edit that needs to be made in either version, but there is no conflicting viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 226.
 What do we say--MR. PARTEE. 6-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage is a statement or a question asked by someone called Mr. Partee. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "6 to 7 percent" is a straightforward numerical figure and does not indicate any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 228.
 Is that--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That's fine" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It suggests agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 229.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Annual rates of "about 6 to 7 percent" or"6 to 7 percent". With 6 to 7 percent, does anybody want an "about"or "around" in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both "about 6 to 7 percent" and "6 to 7 percent" convey the same range of annual rates. The use of the word "about" or "around" would not significantly alter the meaning.


Passage number 230.
MR. MARTIN. Use "about." in case we get lucky."About 6 to 7 percent" for both of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement by Mr. Martin regarding the percentage mentioned.


Passage number 231.
-29-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name and position of Chairman Volcker. There is no indication of any disagreement or contentious matter.


Passage number 232.
,10/1/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "M1 growth is expected to slow--."Heavens, I don't know whether it is going to slow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is uncertain or does not have the information about whether M1 growth is going to slow or not.


Passage number 234.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 235.
 No, it's expected to slow and then--MR. MARTIN. 6-1/2 percent in "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The quoted text "No, it's expected to slow and then--MR. MARTIN. 6-1/2 percent in 'B" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It seems to be a continuation of a statement or a conversation.


Passage number 236.
"MR. KEEHN. Do we really want to say a marked slowing of M1growth is expected.SPEAKER(.). Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. KEEHN is questioning if a marked slowing of M1 growth is expected, and the speaker responds affirmatively, saying "Sure."


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It leaves it plenty open there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 238.
MR. BOEHNE. That's variant II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's variant II" is a simple response that does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 239.
MR. FORRESTAL. That's variant II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply mentions "variant II" without providing further context or expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 240.
MR. PARTEE. It's certainly "marked" compared to where it hasbeen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee about something being marked in comparison to its previous state.


Passage number 241.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual content of the passage itself. Please provide the specific passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 242.
 Down 11 or 12--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My version doesn't say anything aboutmarked.SPEAKER(.). I think it's in variant II.SPEAKER(.). I thought you wanted variant II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speakers are discussing different versions or variants of something, but there is no disagreement present.


Passage number 243.
MR. MARTIN. In variant II, it's the sixth line from the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement stated in the passage. The passage only mentions the specific line in variant II, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention about that line.


Passage number 244.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. He's on variant I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'm sorry. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing an apology for something without showing any signs of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 246.
MR. KEEHN. Couldn't we say something like "It's entirelypossible that M1 growth might slow".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "It's entirely possible that M1 growth might slow" is presented as a suggestion or possibility, rather than a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 247.
MR. BOEHNE. But then again it may not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing uncertainty rather than contradicting or arguing with another person or viewpoint.


Passage number 248.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the given information.


Passage number 249.
 On the one hand, we hope so but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, I guess we really are expecting amarked decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It expresses a hopeful expectation of a marked decline without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 250.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is no passage provided to analyze and determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 251.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context regarding Mr. Partee that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 252.
 Even 11--MR. BLACK. Even I think it will be a marked decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do we want to say here: 6 to 7percent or something. Everything is 6 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the specific percentage but acknowledges that it falls within the range of 6 to 7 percent.


Passage number 254.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It will be all right or all wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "It will be all right or all wrong" does not express any contention or disagreement. It presents a binary outcome, indicating that something will either be completely right or completely wrong without suggesting any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 255.
-30-10/1/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We took out this sentence. What do peoplethink about that. "Slower growth would be appropriate--"SPEAKER(.). "Would be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence being taken out is simply stating a fact and there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 256.
"VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "Acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 257.
"MR. PARTEE(.). It would be acceptable to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 258.
MR. RICE. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with the statement made by someone named Mr. Rice.


Passage number 259.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to put it back in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "You want to put it back in." It is a simple statement expressing a desire to put something back in, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposition.


Passage number 260.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It applies to Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, just M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 262.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I kind of like that, if the word"acceptable" were put in place of "appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as the statement is expressing a personal preference. The speaker is stating their own opinion by saying they "kind of like" something, suggesting that they have a positive opinion about it. The suggested replacement of "appropriate" with "acceptable" is a minor change that does not introduce any contradiction or disagreement.


Passage number 263.
"MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions someone's name.


Passage number 264.
 We meant that to apply to both variants; thatwas the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would have a semicolon or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "We meant that to apply to both variants" indicates that the speaker intended a statement to apply to both options or situations, without any conflicting viewpoints or disagreements being mentioned. The mention of a semicolon or something could suggest a need for further punctuation clarification, but it does not introduce any contention or disagreement in itself.


Passage number 265.
Let me ask you the question: I wouldn't say "even"--MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree that they wouldn't use the word "even" in response to a question.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any further information or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 267.
 So it's "slower growth over the next threemonths would be acceptable"--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "slower growth over the next three months would be acceptable" suggests that there may be some disagreement or differing opinions about what is an acceptable pace of growth. Some individuals or groups may argue for faster growth, while others may believe that slower growth is acceptable.


Passage number 268.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"in the context of satisfactory economicperformance." Do you want that phrase "given the recent rapid growth"in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "in the context of satisfactory economic performance" does not suggest any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 269.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I like it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a personal preference and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not hearing any dissents on that, sothat phrase goes in either version. Now, we have "somewhat greater orlesser reserve restraint would be acceptable" with a number ofalternatives here. Who prefers variant II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 271.
MR. MARTIN. It's more direct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin simply states that something is more direct.


Passage number 272.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only two people, Governors Martin andSeger. Add Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that there are only two people mentioned, Governors Martin and Seger. Adding Governor Partee does not introduce any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 273.
MR. PARTEE. Well, "somewhat greater or lesser reserverestraint" is in both of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a statement, not an argument or a discussion. It simply describes that the phrase "somewhat greater or lesser reserverestraint" is present in both texts without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just skipping from that tosimply who wants to combine three sentences into one sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply talking about combining sentences and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 275.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm indifferent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "I'm indifferent" indicates a lack of preference or attachment, thus there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn, did you have your hand up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question that does not involve any form of dispute.


Passage number 277.
-31-10/1/85MR. KEEHN. No, I'm having a very difficult time determiningthe differences between these two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Keehn expressing his difficulty in determining the differences between two things. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll rephrase it. I would declare thereis no difference in substance, as near as I can see. But the changeis considered by some, and I think it's probably true, more accurateand a better [representation of] what we're actually doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their perspective and acknowledging that others may have a different opinion.


Passage number 279.
MR. MARTIN. It's certainly more economical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Martin regarding the economy of something.


Passage number 280.
MR. KEEHN. I think that might be fine. But I really do havea bit of a problem with this phrase, "marked slowing of M1 growth" invariant II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 281.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "That's out." The phrase simply indicates that something is not in accordance with the rules or expectations.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no. It's in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage. The phrase "No, no" indicates a consistent or emphatic affirmation or agreement, not disagreement or contention.


Passage number 283.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, that's right. Yes, that is in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging and confirming what has been said before.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why are you troubled with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question.


Passage number 285.
MR. KEEHN. I suppose what you're saying is that even if itgoes from 20 percent to 15 percent, 5 percent is a significant amount.But that, I think, has a kind of improper implication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It seems to be a statement made by Mr. Keen acknowledging a potential significance of a 5 percent change. There is no indication of a conflicting viewpoint or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 286.
 I just thinkit would be better if we were a bit vaguer on that, say, "It'sentirely possible that Ml"--MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, one reason for taking variant I isthat the Fed watchers are going to be looking for the slightest cluethat we're somehow stuck or are precluded from tightening up or evenare on an easier money kick. For the very reason that you didn't wantto change the announced ranges for the second half of the year, Iwould argue against moving away from that traditional language, eventhough there may be a more accurate [description] of what we're doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests being vaguer in the language used, while Mr. Balles argues against moving away from the traditional language.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's a fair consideration.I'm not sure they can read too much into this except less emphasis onthe aggregates. What do you have besides the [unintelligible] variantII. I'm not hung up on this because we've gone too many months inwhich there has been the proviso that [unintelligible] has beenoperative since 1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and uncertainty about the topic being discussed, but there is no clear opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 288.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But if we have that sentence thatsays "a marked slowing in M1 growth to a 6 percent annual rate isanticipated" with the clause that says "somewhat more of a slowdownwould be acceptable," technically that finesses not having to announceabandoning the ranges here either because it leaves open thatpossibility. So I think that we need both the sentence and thesemicolon phrase or else we're really cheating on not saying anythingabout the paragraph that we already agreed [not to consider] untilfive weeks from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I asked how many preferred variantII. Maybe a lot of people are neutral here. How many have a distinctpreference for variant I. [Secretary's note: Messrs. Balles andBlack.] About as many votes as for variant II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the results of a vote, without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 290.
 How many---32-10/1/85MR. BLACK. How many people don't give a whit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for a numerical answer.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's another way. How many people don'tcare. That's a majority.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It simply states that there is another way (without specifying what way it is referring to), and that many people do not care about something (without specifying what they don't care about). It does not present any arguments or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 292.
MR. BOEHNE. The Chairman's choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements indicating disagreement or contention. It simply mentions "Mr. Boehne" and "the Chairman's choice," without giving further information.


Passage number 293.
MR. BLACK. I think John Balles has a good point on themarket's reaction to any change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 294.
 Partly I think it's a good pointbecause I tried to make that same point earlier and--MR. PARTEE. You were the two who held up your hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any form of disagreement or contention. It simply states that the person making the statement agrees with a previously made point.


Passage number 295.
MR. MARTIN. I think it's better to say to the market whatthey already know we're doing rather than hang on to what[unintelligible] short-run picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is expressing his opinion about a strategy and there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that at this point it doesn'tmake any difference to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a personal statement expressing a lack of concern or indifference, so there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 297.
 I guess I'm with all those who stuck uptheir hands in the middle, but I-MR. RICE. Let's have a variant III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be a statement expressing the speaker's opinion or preference.


Passage number 298.
MR. MARTIN. Credibility is something of believability. Whynot say what is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply defining credibility as believability and suggesting to use that term instead.


Passage number 299.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 300.
 This is subject to theinterpretation of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need one of those fancy electronicgadgets that people can squeeze so they can measure the intensity offeelings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement about needing a gadget to measure the intensity of feelings is a suggestion or idea, but it does not express any disagreement or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 301.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Long term, we've advanced frompragmatic monetarism to full-blown eclecticism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply describing a progression or evolution in economic theory from one approach (pragmatic monetarism) to another (full-blown eclecticism).


Passage number 302.
MR. BLACK. Maybe we can weight the votes by the intensity ofthe feeling and come up with an algebraic average of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No (or N/A). 

The passage is a statement made by Mr. Black suggesting a possible solution or idea for consideration. It does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I'm trying to do. Whofeels intensely about this. [Turning to Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is expressing their intention and seeking validation or support from Mr.


Passage number 304.
 Black] You're going tovote against this, anyway, so--MR. BLACK. Well, Mr. Chairman, this is an argument I don'twant to win, obviously, because if I'm right we have done the wrongthing. My objective is to do the right thing. So I hope I'm wrong.Usually I don't hope I'm wrong on arguments, but I do on this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Black, is expressing his own personal opinion and hope that he is wrong about his argument. There are no other perspectives or opposing viewpoints presented in this passage.


Passage number 305.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, okay. Just let me get an expression--I realize it's no big deal--[of preferences]. How many would havesome preference for I. One, two, three, four. [Secretary's note:Messrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal and Rice.] How many would have somepreference for II. Four. [Secretary's note: Messrs. Keehn, Martin,Partee and Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply gathering preferences from different individuals.


Passage number 306.
]MR. PARTEE. You get to decide it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is stating a fact, that the person being addressed gets to make a decision.


Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I should read it more carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that the speaker may need to spend more time reading something carefully.


Passage number 308.
-3310/1/85MR. PARTEE. He acts this way when the Board splits onsomething.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 309.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I've observed it myself once ortwice, Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has observed something themselves.


Passage number 310.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions "Mr. Black," without providing any further context or indication of conflict.


Passage number 311.
 Run it by Joe Coyne and let him tell you how thenews media would or could react, and I guess--MR. COYNE. I don't think they'll see any difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion about the media's reaction.


Passage number 312.
MR. BLACK. Well, hush. That's the wrong answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Well, hush. That's the wrong answer" shows a response of disagreement or dissatisfaction, indicating there is contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 313.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But you have to understand that thestaff spent all day Thursday and Friday making these variants lookdifferent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the staff worked on Friday and Thursday to make the variants look different, without indicating any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


Passage number 314.
MR. MARTIN. Until we've made them look the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is stating that something needs to be done before achieving a desired outcome, without expressing any disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any comment about thissubject, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely asks for Mr. Axilrod's comment on a certain subject.


Passage number 316.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, a technical reading of thefirst variant says that the Committee will tighten or ease dependingon what happens in the aggregates and they'll assess that in thecontext of the other things. The only slight substantive difference Ican see is that a technical reading of the second variant says youcould tighten or ease even if the aggregates were on track, dependingon what happens to other things. I think that's what the Committeepretty much has been doing recently and this was just a sentence thatattempted to say that. You have to stretch your reading of the firstvariant a bit to have that in, but of course it encompasses it. Theonly other difference was that in the last sentence it says "pursuitof the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the periodbefore the next meeting is likely to be associated with a fundsrate..." and I short-circuited that to just "reserve conditions"because the monetary objectives were cast in with other things--forobvious reasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is analyzing the differences between two variants and offering their interpretation of those differences. They do not argue or present conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just thought of adding three wordshere that make them maybe exactly the same, but more condensed. Leaveit variant II, but after the first comma--after "depending on thebehavior of the aggregates" add "taking account of" before "appraisalsof the strength in business expansion, developments in foreignexchange markets," etc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative way to phrase a sentence by condensing it.


Passage number 318.
MR. BALLES. That would be better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles suggests that something would be better, but there is no opposition or contradiction present.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that strike anybody as animprovement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for a response or opinion on a particular topic.


Passage number 320.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Sure. Yes, I think it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 321.
MR. RICE. Right; that takes care of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement indicating agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Let's just do it that way.Add these words "taking account of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests adding certain words.


Passage number 323.
" Does that make it---34-10/1/85MR. PARTEE. That does make it very much like the firstvariant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement describing a similarity between two things.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And then for the federal funds rate Iguess we're sticking with 6 to 10 percent, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking for confirmation or agreement on maintaining the federal funds rate at 6 to 10 percent.


Passage number 325.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But you have that phrase in therethat says that "slower growth of M1 is acceptable".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that "slower growth of M1 is acceptable." It does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. What we have is take out the word"existing" and say "maintain the degree of pressure on reservepositions sought in recent weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply suggesting a modification or clarification of the wording without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 327.
"VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any form of disagreement or contention. It simply starts with the word "Right" without providing any contradictory or conflicting statements.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "This action is expected to be consistentwith growth in M2 and M3 over the period from September to December atannual rates of 6 to 7 percent. A marked slowing in M1 growth to a 6to 7 percent annual rate is also anticipated; slower growth over thenext three months would be acceptable"--not appropriate, butacceptable--"in the context of satisfactory economic performance,given recent very rapid growth in M1. Somewhat greater or lesserreserve restraint...." That's right, we didn't discuss that. Do wejust leave in the somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraintrespectively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their expectations and opinions regarding the growth rates of M2, M3, and M1. The mention of "somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraint" does not elicit any disagreement or contention, as it is merely stating a possibility without taking a specific stance.


Passage number 329.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the following passage because there is a disagreement of opinions or ideas being expressed.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, take out the parenthetic phrase andcontinue: "Somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable depending on behavior of the aggregates, taking account ofappraisals of the strength of the business expansion, developments inforeign exchange markets" and so forth. Then "The Chairman may callfor consultation if it appears that reserve conditions...are likely tobe associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a rangeof 6 to 10 percent." Now, I take it that's a common denominator. Wehave this little discretion of day-to-day or week-to-week operationalflexibility around $500 million influenced--not solely--but influencedby exchange market problems in the context of these otherdevelopments. And certainly, if we were really aiming in a semi-permanent way as high as $600 million or as low as $400 million--asopposed to a weekly decision to go to one of those numbers--we wouldjust have a consultation. Understood. I guess we can vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the decision-making process and the factors that influence it.


Passage number 331.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Bernard.


Passage number 332.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black NoPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich Yes-35-10/1/85 -36-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you. I guess we're finished.We meet again in five weeks. Lunch is over in the other building.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


