Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 16-17, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, December 16, 1985, at 3:30 p.m. and continuingon Tuesday, December 17, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanBlackForrestalKeehnMartinParteeRiceSegerMr. Guffey,1/ Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell, Scheld,Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ At this meeting, Mr. Guffey voted as alternate for Mr. Balles.Mr. Roberts,1/ Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,1/ Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Griffith, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of San FranciscoMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, Rosenblum,Scadding, and Thieke, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland,Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, San Francisco,and New York, respectivelyMessrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Boston and Minneapolis, respectively1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of meeting held onNovember 4-5, 1985.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 16-17, 1985[Secretary's Note: The minutes of the previous meeting wereapproved without objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the attendees of the meeting without providing any indication of disagreement or contention among them.


Passage number 2.
]MR. CROSS. Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the statement in the appendix.


Passage number 3.
MS. HORN. Sam, when you get [foreign currency] proceeds fromintervention, in what form are they held.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked.


Passage number 4.
MR. CROSS. Well, we invest them in a series of differentkinds of investments aimed at getting a market rate of interest andkeeping them very liquid. We try to keep them liquid, if possible, sothey will be usable. We have some in--a whole series of different instruments in differentcountries, depending on what is available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes the investment strategy of keeping funds liquid and investing in various types of investments. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much do you have in governmentsecurities now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking for the amount of government securities one currently has.


Passage number 6.
MR. CROSS. We have some in government securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have some investments in government securities.


Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Passage: "How much should we invest in renewable energy sources?"

Answer: Yes

Explanation: The question of how much to invest in renewable energy sources can be a subject of contention or disagreement. Different individuals or groups may have differing opinions on the amount of investment that should be allocated to renewable energy.


Passage number 8.
MR. CROSS. A modest amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contradictory or argumentative statements. It is a statement about an amount without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 9.
MR. TRUMAN. $1-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement giving a specific amount of money. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 10.
MR. CROSS. Well, not so modest. We have $1-1/2 billion outof the total of $12 billion of Treasury and Federal Reserve holdings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the amount of Treasury and Federal Reserve holdings.


Passage number 11.
MR. PARTEE. Are they mostly deposits, Sam.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 12.
MR. CROSS. A lot are in one form oranother.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that many things exist in one form or another without providing any further details or contradicting information.


Passage number 13.
 There are some in BIS deposits and some inMS. HORN. Basically, you don't get so much of a currencyrelative to the size of the market that you have to go away frompublicly issued debt or government debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there are different types of deposits in BIS and MS. It does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 14.
MR. CROSS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage only mentions "Mr. Cross" without providing any details or context, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 15.
 We have a lot in I am notsure I understand your--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement of uncertainty or confusion.


Passage number 16.
 We, in fact,MR. CROSS. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker merely begins their statement confirming that what they are about to say is accurate.


Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know to what extent we are inpublic markets at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about their involvement in public markets.


Passage number 18.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, most of these countries do not have thekind of short-term instruments that are available in the UnitedStates--Treasury bills that you can invest in--except for Switzerland,which has a small amount. Neither Germany nor Japan has a Treasury12/16-17/85bill market in the sense of a short-term government paper market suchas we are used to in the United States. As a consequence, wethe deposit facility of the BIS, which essentiallygoes into the Euro-market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts about the availability of short-term instruments in different countries.


Passage number 19.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be worthwhile, just to see whatyou are doing with our money, for you to send out a little memorandum.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion or recommendation to send out a memorandum for transparency purposes.


Passage number 20.
MR. CROSS. I would be happy to submit a memorandum showingwhere all of these assets are but, as Mr. Truman said,we do have them in short-term investments; the aim is to get amarket rate and to keep them very liquid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Cross is expressing agreement and understanding with Mr. Truman's statement about the assets being in short-term investments to maintain liquidity and earn a market rate.


Passage number 21.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without context.


Passage number 22.
MR. BOEHNE. I would like to change the focus toward policyreactions and interest rates in other countries. Suppose that U.S.interest rates dropped further--that there was an easing in U.S.monetary policy. Would that likely show up as a weaker dollar orwould you think that the Japanese and West Germans might be inclinedto let interest rates ease in their own countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a hypothetical question about the possible impact of a change in U.S. interest rates on the dollar and the monetary policy of Japan and West Germany.


Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage must be provided in order to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 24.
MR. BOEHNE. Or both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not presenting any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that there are both positive and negative aspects of technology without promoting one over the other or engaging in any argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 26.
MR. PARTEE. How much of each.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be observed through the interruption by Mr. Johnson, followed by Mr. Partee's response. Their exchange suggests an opposing view or conflicting opinion regarding the topic being discussed.


Passage number 27.
MR. KEEHN. Sam, related to that, what kind of [mood do] themarkets have regarding the fundamentals, excluding intervention.Before, we had worried very much about a precipitous decline in thevalue of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the market's mood regarding fundamentals.


Passage number 28.
 In certain circumstances, is there still apervasive feeling about that or do circumstances--MR. CROSS. I think at the present time the attitude isgenerally more that there has been a substantial decline in the dollarand that the central banks are reasonably satisfied with the range inwhich the dollar is now trading. So, there is not the same kind offear that it might tumble very, very rapidly as there was some weeksago. But obviously, it's still a possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about the current attitude towards the decline of the dollar and the satisfaction of central banks with its trading range. The speaker also acknowledges that although there is not the same level of fear as before, the possibility of a rapid decline still exists.


Passage number 29.
MR. KEEHN. Well, excluding the policy changes or activitieson our part, such as intervention--the issues Ed was talking about--isthere any sentiment out there that we could see a stabilization and arise in the value of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is any sentiment or belief that the value of the dollar could stabilize and rise.


Passage number 30.
MR. CROSS. Well, there are certainly some people who thinkthat after a time the authorities will either lose interest or notcontinue this operation and that fundamentally the dollar has somestrength to it. So, there are some [views] on both sides. Of theamount of investments that we have, $1.7 billion are in governmentsecurities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply mentioning different opinions or views on the topic.


Passage number 31.
12/16-17/85MR. BOEHNE. I think what you have just said is that foreignconsiderations are at least somewhat less of a constraint now thanthey were several weeks ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 32.
MR. CROSS. Well, I think what I said was that with the dollardeclining at that time, there was quite naturally concern that thatwould continue or that [the pace] would increase and it would fallvery, very rapidly. Now, there is certainly some possibility of afurther fall, depending on a whole lot of things. But the fact thatthe dollar [has been trading in] these ranges for some period of timehas given a little more breathing space--a little more feeling thatmaybe it has stabilized, since it has tended to be a little morestable around these levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their thoughts and opinions about the stability of the dollar.


Passage number 33.
MR. MORRIS. At the last meeting you expected that the marketwould test the resolve of the central banks. Do you think thatattitude has passed. Do you think the danger of a rising dollar isbehind us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked to gather the opinion of the person being addressed.


Passage number 34.
MR. CROSS. Well, I am not sure whether it was the lastmeeting or the one before that. But certainly I don't think we had asbig a test on the up side as we might have expected in thosecircumstances. There was a test during that period around the middlepart of October; and the response of the central banks was ratherforceful but it was not a massive operation nor really major pressure.We spent amounts that were certainly a lot larger than we had beenspending, but it was not a massive operation. Since September 22, allthe G-10 countries together have spent around $13-$14 billion. Duringthe February-March operation intervention was around $10 billion orso. But this is not all [dollar related].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts and observations.


Passage number 35.
 There have been somepressures within the EMS and a substantial amount of interventionrelating to EMS pressures, particularly against the Italian lira andsome of the other European currencies which might be expected todevalue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is stating a fact that there have been pressures within the EMS and intervention relating to those pressures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is another way of looking atit, too, just in terms of institutional sources of demand for dollars.A lot of that demand has come from Japan, of course, and in Japanthere are two sets of institutional factors that tend to cut the otherway. One is that most of the pension funds [and] insurance companieshave a 10 percent limit on the percent of their portfolio that can bein any non-yen currency, and almost without exception they arecrowding up against the 10 ten percent. Now, that won't keep themfrom buying dollars completely, but it means that they can only buydollars prospectively to the extent that their overall asset basegrows. Secondly--and I think this is particularly relevant in thecase of Japan--according to the reports that we get, through much ofthe second and third quarters Japanese corporations, of course, werespinning off a tremendous amount of excess cash and were making veryshort-term dollar investments in very large quantities. And thereports that we get have begun to suggest that, partly because of thechanged economic situation, that very large supply of short-termdemand for dollar-denominated assets may not be there prospectively inanything like [the way] it was retrospectively. I don't know how allthat fits in, but it is one of the factors that tend to work on theother side of the equation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are two sets of institutional factors in Japan that tend to cut against the demand for dollars. One factor is the 10 percent limit on non-yen investments by pension funds and insurance companies, which limits their ability to buy dollars. The other factor is the decreased supply of short-term demand for dollar-denominated assets by Japanese corporations. These factors are presented as working against the previous high demand for dollars, suggesting a potential decrease in future demand.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 37.
12/16-17/85MR. MELZER. I would say, just as a general comment--I am notclosely in touch with the psychology of that market--that the factthat there might be a perception that we have reached target levelsand that we have achieved some kind of stability actually couldincrease the vulnerability to a precipitous decline because those thatwere short dollars and riding it down very likely have covered those[short positions]. So that takes a bit out of the market. Now, Idon't know whether that is the case, Sam--whether you feel positionsare pretty well squared off--but if those short positions are out ofthe market, there could be a chance for a more precipitous decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Melzer, suggests that the perception of reaching target levels and achieving stability could actually increase the vulnerability to a decline in the market. However, he acknowledges that he is not closely in touch with the psychology of that market and asks for Sam's input on whether positions are squared off. This suggests a difference of opinion or uncertainty about the potential for a decline.


Passage number 38.
MR. CROSS. That certainly is possible. It is also argued,at least by the Japanese, that there may be some heavier investmentdemand--that some are waiting to make sure that they get the bottom[price] for the dollar and are going to be coming back in to push itthe other way. So, there are the cross currents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It presents two possibilities or arguments without taking a definitive stance or emphasizing any disagreement between parties.


Passage number 39.
MR. MARTIN. Let me ask a naive follow-up question. Let ussuppose that these negative factors that Jerry and Tom are talkingabout do come to center stage. What direction would that enormouscapital outflow take then. What are their alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a follow-up question and seeking information about the potential consequences of the situation being discussed.


Passage number 40.
MR. CROSS. You mean if they do not invest in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Cross is a simple inquiry about the consequences of not investing in the dollar.


Passage number 41.
MR. MARTIN. If they want to switch away from dollarinvestments very substantially, where do they go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a question about where to invest if someone wants to switch away from dollar investments.


Passage number 42.
MR. CROSS. Partly it is not a matter of switching away fromdollar investments; it is whether one comes into the dollarinvestments with or without cover. One can still be investing inthese dollar investments and covering, and that would offset much ofthis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Cross regarding different approaches to dollar investments.


Passage number 43.
MR. BLACK. Would that be possible in the case you weretalking about, Jerry, where they are limited. As long as they arecovered, are they okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 44.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Either way, it doesn't take all thatmuch of a shift in terms of the very short run. I think part of whatis going on here is people putting a great deal of emphasis on thesepsychological threshold levels of 200 yen and 2.50 marks. If it movesaway from those on the up side, I think people are prepared to dosomething about it. If it moves away on the down side, that is prettyhard to deal with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is discussing people's reactions to changes in exchange rates and their psychological threshold levels of 200 yen and 2.50 marks. It does not present any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 45.
MR. BLACK. I was just thinking about these institutionalpensions having a 10 percent limit on their dollar [assets].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents Mr. Black's thoughts about institutional pensions having a 10 percent limit on their dollar assets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 46.
 But ifthat is covered, that limit is not--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the limit does apply even ifit is covered. Doesn't it, Sam.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker believes that the limit does apply even if it is covered, while Sam may have a different perspective or belief on the matter.


Passage number 47.
MR. CROSS. I think it is 10 percent of the [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states, "I think it is 10 percent of the [unintelligible]."


Passage number 48.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without knowing the specific details of the passage, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 49.
MR. CROSS. It is certainly true that for now they have beenconvinced that the central banks are serious and they see some12/16-17/85resistance on the up side, whereas there are still statements in oneform or another which can be read by the market as suggesting thatmaybe some further downward move is expected and desired by some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply highlights that while some believe the central banks are serious and resistance is being seen on the up side, there are still statements that can be interpreted as suggesting the possibility of a further downward move.


Passage number 50.
 SoI would say--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will make a profound statement: If theyreally have some assurance that it's not going to go up, it will godown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 51.
MR. CROSS. That is profound and sums it up. I think thatconcern about how long is the staying power is a longer-termconsideration, but for now they're reasonably confident that therewill be resistance on the up side but not on the down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement and confidence in the expectation of resistance on the up side but not on the down side.


Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Having explored our uncertainties in thatarea, we will ratify the few transactions since the last meeting.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first speaker acknowledges that they have explored uncertainties in a certain area, and then suggests that they ratify the few transactions since the last meeting. The second speaker simply seconds the motion, indicating agreement.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Let's turn to domesticopen market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is agreement or consensus among the individuals involved.


Passage number 54.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that Mr. Sternlight made a statement, without indicating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 55.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not clear what passage is being referred to, so a determination of contention or disagreement cannot be made.


Passage number 56.
MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, is the Treasury back on schedule nowwith its auctions or do they have some backlog still.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks for information about the Treasury's auction schedule and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 57.
MR. STERNLIGHT. They are just about caught up now. Theywere backed up and had to follow the passage of the debt ceiling billwith an immediate same-day auction of 3- and 6-month bills, and theyalready had announced some of that month-end batch of coupon issues--the 2- and 4-year issues. Those will be coming along, I think, laterthis week and next week and that puts them pretty much back onschedule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an update on the progress and schedule of certain financial events.


Passage number 58.
MR. FORRESTAL. Also, you mentioned Texaco and their beingclosed out of the commercial paper market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
 Are they picking that upthrough bank lines or--MR. STERNLIGHT. For the moment they are paying off paper.They have bank lines that they really do not consider will hold giventhe material changes that have occurred in the company's prospectivefortunes. And they have alternative plans for achieving the liquidityto continue meeting their paper maturities which [involve]that they are just in the process ofdeveloping, we understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of phrases such as "they really do not consider will hold" and "alternative plans" suggests that there is some disagreement or uncertainty about the company's ability to pay off its debts through bank lines.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Other questions. A question occurred tome as you were talking: Would you judge that we are engaged activelyin monetizing the Treasury's deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the occurrence of a thought/question.


Passage number 61.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We do our usual thing: increase our holdingsto offset currency in circulation and rising required reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is simply describing a routine action they take, without any indication of conflicting opinions or opposing positions.


Passage number 62.
12/16-17/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would anybody like to ratify our usualthing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage consists only of a date and a question, which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 63.
MR. PARTEE. The answer, for the record, is: No, we are notmonetizing the Federal debt. I move to ratify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is no contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact that they are not monetizing the Federal debt. The following sentence about moving to ratify does not introduce any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 64.
MR. RICE. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states "MR. RICE. Second" without any additional information or context, so there is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Now we'll turn to Mr.Axilrod, who will introduce Mr. Lindsey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is no disagreement or contention. It implies that everyone present is in agreement with proceeding to the next topic, in this case, Mr. Axilrod introducing Mr. Lindsey.


Passage number 66.
MR. AXILROD. Thank you. To provide background to theCommittee's discussion of the role the monetary aggregates might playin policy formulation, Mr. Lindsey will summarize the analysis of theaggregates and their characteristics contained in the recentlydistributed staff paper of which he was the chief author. I will thenbriefly outline the possible implications for the usefulness of theaggregates in policy implementation next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that Mr. Lindsey will summarize the analysis of the aggregates and their characteristics contained in the staff paper, and then Mr. Axilrod will outline the possible implications for the usefulness of the aggregates in policy implementation next year. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 67.
MR. LINDSEY. I will be referring to the package of chartsentitled "Materials for Staff Presentation to the FOMC". [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that the speaker will be referring to a package of charts titled "Materials for Staff Presentation to the FOMC."


Passage number 68.
]MR. AXILROD. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation:
The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information. It appears to be a direct quotation or statement, without any indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 69.
 Chairman--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think maybe we ought to stop you now andask for any questions we might have of a quasi-technical sort. I havea question. Maybe I'm wrong, but when I look at this velocity changethat you're projecting for this year [unintelligible] focus on GNP forthe first part of '86. When is the last time we had such a change inthe velocity of M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The Chairman is simply asking a question and expressing uncertainty about the velocity change.


Passage number 70.
MR. LINDSEY. Well, in 1982 velocity of M1 fell 5.6 percent.This year it's falling at 5-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the percentage decline in the velocity of M1 in 1982 and the current year.


Passage number 71.
 That was an unprecedenteddecline in 1982 and there wasn't anything--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Literally unprecedented. Go back to the1930s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply highlights a decline in a certain year without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 72.
MR. LINDSEY. Well, that was a fair statement. I wasthinking post-war period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. Mr. Lindsey states that the statement made was fair, indicating agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that decline was all that big in '82and surprised us, that quarterly model didn't come in very far off inthat period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a decline in 1982 and states that a quarterly model accurately predicted it.


Passage number 74.
MR. LINDSEY. Well, the quarterly model has an interestelasticity that rises as market rates rise. And market rates startedout in 1981 at pretty high levels. So the quarterly model, as ratescame down, picked up a good bit of that increase [in M1]. You arecorrect. That's less the case in 1985 when rates started out at lowerlevels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and explanation of a pattern based on market rates.


Passage number 75.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at that quarterly model, itlooks like '81 was way down but '82 and '83 not so much. Presumably,in '81 it was the transition to NOWs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 76.
12/16-17/85MR. LINDSEY. That's right; nationwide NOWs were introducedat the first of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states a fact about nationwide NOWs being introduced at the beginning of the year. There is no statement of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 77.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 78.
]MR. MORRIS. My recollection is that we were very surprisedat the strength of M1 in '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Morris about his recollection. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 79.
 I don't--MR. AXILROD. Well, we were surprised at how low interestrates got. If we had known in advance that that was going to happen,we would have been less surprised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their surprise at how low the interest rates got and acknowledging that if they had known in advance, they would have been less surprised.


Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] centered around[unintelligible]. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The information is unclear and seems to be missing certain words.


Passage number 81.
MR. PARTEE. I was just going to refer to chart 2 here too,Dave, which is the lagged relationship. It certainly doesn't lookvery good. Indeed, it looks to me as if these last four quarters havebeen just about as bad as it can get if one assumes that the onlyreason we follow M1 is for its predictive relationship to GNP. Didyou try other kinds of lags and more complicated lags or anything likethat in your effort to make sense of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's interpretation of the data on chart 2.


Passage number 82.
MR. LINDSEY. We did, in several respects. I plottedvelocity relationships for 1-quarter lags as well, but I also plottedmoving averages for money growth and for GNP growth--say, 2-quartermoving averages--and then tried different lags on that. I had a wholeset of charts there. Averaging growth over two quarters, it turns outthat the connection between M1 and GNP is best with a 1-quarter lagover the '80s, though it isn't great. But it's better than the otheralternatives we tried. In a sense that relationship was reflected inthe chart I showed you with the 2-quarter lag in M1's velocity; thatgives it a chance to pick up [the relationship], in effect, over thetwo-quarter period. The leading relationships in the '80s, which I amnot at all sure are as systematic as the monetarists would have usbelieve, show up best for M1 and less so for M2. I think part of thereason for a leading relationship there is because when interest rateschange, the demand for money gets affected sooner than does spending.So, when interest rates change--which some might argue is what reallyis driving the process--money growth adjusts first and GNP growthadjusts subsequently. And it looks as though there's a leadingrelationship from M1 to GNP even though in some sense the fundamentalcause, some would argue, could be the change in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting different findings and discussing possible reasons for the observed relationship between M1 and GNP.


Passage number 83.
MR. PARTEE. Interest rates, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply affirms the relevance of interest rates.


Passage number 84.
MR. MORRIS. More than some, I would imagine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Morris's assumption about the quantity of something.


Passage number 85.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual text.


Passage number 86.
MR. MARTIN. When you weight the components of M1 by sometransactions measure or in some more esoteric and wonderful way andyou use a 1-quarter or 2-quarter lag, how is the predictability ofvelocity of this--whatever you call it--weighted aggregate measure.How does that track. Is it any better or any more predictable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question to gather information or clarification about the predictability of velocity for a certain weighted aggregate measure.


Passage number 87.
MR. LINDSEY. We have been doing some work on two differentkinds of weighted aggregates: the divisia aggregates originated by12/16-17/85Bill Barnett; and more recently, a Fisher weighted index that ineffect uses the turnover rates to weight the various components of M1,or in fact, all transactions deposits. So with a very low weight,MMDAs which are checkable and money funds which are checkable areincluded. If you examine that measure's growth in recent yearsrelative to M1 and M1A it cuts the difference almost in half. Maybethe best way to summarize the results is that since both M1A and M1suffer problems over this period, it's also true that this new measuresuffers some problems as well. We have done work on this. I'd beglad to send some of it along in more detail.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a summary of different weighted aggregates and their performance in recent years. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 88.
MR. PARTEE. You're multiplying through by the velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states what Mr. Partee is doing.


Passage number 89.
MR. LINDSEY. In effect, the growth rates of the variouscomponents are weighted by their share of expenditure in GNP; that isthe precise way it's done. And that, in turn, is related to theirdebits divided by their stock or by their turnover. You have to makesome adjustments to take out financial transactions and currencyexchange transactions to get to the GNP transactions that you need.But that's the basic idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation of how growth rates of various components are calculated and adjusted to derive the needed GNP transactions. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 90.
MR. AXILROD. Thank you. Well, we have been examining thesevarious weighted measures--Barnett's measures, Paul Spindt's measures,and this one that Dave just mentioned that is in effect velocityweighted rather carefully. And we are trying to think of ways wemight be able to get even more academic input into the process,although some of this material has already been published in theacademic press, and a rather large literature is developing. It has acertain appeal as a way of at least supplementing the unweightedmeasures of the aggregates because there are various ways of takingvarying degrees of liquidity or moneyness into account. One thing tokeep in mind--and these are the early days--is that it doesn't reallytend to solve economic problems. That is, it might help in the waythings look. If, for example, there is going to be a big shift out ofmarket instruments or some lesser kind of money-type deposit intoother deposits, that shift is going to appear in more rapid moneygrowth relative to what the Committee said or what it expected. In anunweighted average, growth will be even more rapid growth; in aweighted average, it will be a little less rapid. But the economicproblem in interpreting the deviation will still be there. You're notgoing to change the necessity of interpreting the aggregates [byusing] a weighted average. Instead of the difference being between 6and 10 percent when there is a shift, it might be a difference between6 and 7 percent. So [the explanation] will seem easier, but in effectthe economic issues are the same: Should you offset the 7 percent.Should you offset the 10 percent. But, there is something to be saidfor the weighting--in my view in any event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different measures and methods for analyzing economic data, specifically the aggregates. They mention the potential benefits and limitations of using weighted measures instead of unweighted measures, but there is no disagreement or contentious debate presented in the passage.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if there are no more particularquestions, you can proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if there are no more specific questions, the conversation can move forward.


Passage number 92.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, I fear the conclusions thatI have will be gravely anticlimactic. I believe one of the clearestconclusions from Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the conclusions that Mr. Axilrod is about to present may be underwhelming.


Passage number 93.
 Lindsey's analysis is that the aggregates arestill in a state of flux--MR. MARTIN. Yes, I'd say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Lindsey and Mr. Martin seem to agree on the analysis that the aggregates are still in a state of flux.


Passage number 94.
12/16-17/85MR. AXILROD. --in the sense that there has not been enoughtime to get a reasonably certain handle on the impact of pastderegulation and on the behavior of depository institutions and theircustomers under varying economic and financial circumstances. And, ofcourse, there will be an additional and final deregulatory step earlynext year that will provide even more flexibility and choice for banksand depositors. Thus, it is very difficult to suggest at this timethat more weight should be given to the aggregates as a whole inpolicy implementation next year than was given this year. On theother hand, I would tend to argue that we do not have compellingevidence that even less weight should be placed on the aggregates as awhole. We do, I think, have some evidence that under currentcircumstances the weight on the aggregates should be redistributed insome degree among them--or at least that M1 should be judged in lightof what's happening to M2 and M3. While uncertainties abound, it doesseem to me that we're in the process of moving toward an M2 with aninterest responsiveness that is low relative to M1, as Mr. Lindsey haspointed out. That in itself would tend to argue for giving thebroader aggregate a bit more weight than it has had in the past,particularly in periods when market interest rates may be changingsubstantially. In those circumstances, there could be large effectsfrom interest rate changes on the demand for narrow money, given thesizable amount of savings funds now in that aggregate that shiftreadily between M1 and other components of M2.I certainly do not mean to suggest either ignoring M1 orquickly reacting to small changes or large potentially short-livedchanges in M2 relative to path. M1 cannot be ignored because it does,of all the aggregates, contain the highest proportion of transactionbalances and to that degree is sensitive to future GNP. I think thatwas borne out in Mr. Lindsey's analysis of the difference between theconcurrent velocity and the lagged velocity, which is smoother thanthe concurrent. M2 cannot be relied on completely because it containslarge elements of savings that in turn depend on attitudes towardwealth and other factors affecting the propensity to save. Therelationship between M2 and GNP thus is not all that tight orpredictable either, as compared with M1. Perhaps I'm reallysuggesting no more than what the Committee has been doing implicitly,under one interpretation at least, over the past year. Over thatperiod the relative moderation in M2 growth--at least its moderationrelative to path--as well as in M3 can be viewed as having been asignificant, but not necessarily decisive, counterforce to thestrength of M1 in the implementation of policy. In that sense, policyresponds more to the aggregates when all are relatively strong or allare relatively weak than when any single one goes off course. If itis right that M1 is in process of becoming subject to significantlymore interest sensitivity than M2, at least at around current marketrate levels, then it may be desirable for the Committee to consideradopting a 1986 range for M1 that is wider than for M2. The tentativeranges currently have the same width; a wider M1 range would allow forlarger swings in M1 in response to potential interest rate changesover the year. It would also be consistent with our view thatforthcoming deregulatory changes, apart from their long-run structuralimpact, would affect M1--either up or down--mainly depending on bankstrategies with respect to NOW, savings, and money market depositaccounts, if indeed they have any significant effect at all. Whateverthe numerical specifications of the ranges, though, and whatever theweight of the aggregates relative to each other, it's hard to see that12/16-17/85the Committee can implement policy next year with any less judgmentalinterpretation than in recent years. Uncertainties about theaggregates are inherent, given the rather long period over which banksand depositors adapt their behavior to a deregulated environment andgiven the perhaps longer period it may take before the newregularities in their behavior can be detected and relied on withconfidence for policy purposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the challenges and uncertainties of implementing policy based on the aggregates and different monetary measures. They are presenting their opinions and making suggestions, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument.


Passage number 95.
MR. MARTIN. Steve, first of all, I want to express what Ithink is the consensus around the table--don't smile--that you andyour associates have done a commendable job in laying out theexperience and in doing a certain amount of statistical analysis andbeing forthcoming with regard to the difficulties of using themonetary aggregates at this time. The message I take from this isthat we're talking about various components of the several aggregatesin terms of varying degrees of moneyness--varying degrees of savingscharacteristics versus transactions characteristics. And thatsuggests to me that the work that you've already begun to do, and thatyou said you have considerable academic comments and literature on--namely, some kind of weighting of the components of the aggregates--would have the merit of continuing our ability to communicate what weknow and can surmise about the behavior of these various balances. Itseems to me that if you have in train a set of presentations thatyou've done work on, which you've alluded to, that would be a logicalfollow-up to a good piece of work on the existing aggregates tocommunicate with us what you know and are finding out about weightedaggregates. I wouldn't have made this little comment a year or maybeeven six months ago or maybe not before I read the work that you'vedone here. But it seems to me that this presentation argues foranother presentation which would inform us about the weighting thatyou alluded to on a transactional basis and on a turnover basis of thecomponents. If we are to communicate our findings with the Congressand with the public, it seems to me that (a) we have a duty tocommunicate once this group is comfortable with some weighting of thecomponents and the production of such an aggregate; and (b) that itcould give us--admitting all of the drawbacks that Steve has alludedto--some kind of an aggregate in addition to the ones we have orperhaps in replacement of M1 down the road. So, I'm encouraged bywhat you've done. I strongly support your hint that we could haveother presentations with regard to weighting. And I think atransaction weighted component aggregate M1 might be easier tocommunicate than one weighted by some more intriguing interest-differential [unintelligible], from what little I understand about[the divisia] approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for the work that has been done and suggests the idea of weighted aggregates as a way to improve communication.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
MR. AXILROD. We will do this work and, of course, present itas it develops, Governor Martin. I would like to stress that the workis really quite experimental in the sense that the statistical basisfor the weighting is not that strong. We have done surveys in theResearch Division to develop data and, while it's as good as we thinkwe can make it under present knowledge, the statistical basis is notthat strong. Secondly, I would like to stress that, at least in myown view--and it's probably important to get more input from others inthe profession--I don't think it solves the policy problem. It mayhave certain presentational advantages but I don't think it solves thepolicy problem of whether or to what degree the aggregates are a goodguide to [the Committee]. That, I think, is not solved by this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement about the effectiveness of the presented work in solving the policy problem. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, states that in his view, the work does not solve the policy problem, while noting the need for more input from others in the profession. This reflects a level of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
-10-12/16-17/85MR. PARTEE. I would just attack one thing: I must say thatI'm bothered about this business of making a shift from turnover tosomething related to GNP because of the fact that we have so manydebits related not to GNP but to financial transactions. And it seemsto me that that's an unsolvable problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is bothered by the idea of shifting from turnover to something related to GNP because they believe it doesn't account for debits related to financial transactions. They see this as an unsolvable problem.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 98.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's among the issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Axilrod acknowledges that there is an issue without stating his agreement or disagreement with it. Therefore, there is a mention of contention or disagreement but not a clear stance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
MR. PARTEE. I rather prefer the interest rate differentialapproach. It would measure the degree of liquidity, you might say, inthe mind's eye of the public in looking at the various aspects--Isuppose partly because you wouldn't have that difficulty. It would bea straight reading of the interest rate differentials and the weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Partee is expressing a preference for the interest rate differential approach. This suggests a disagreement or contention with another approach or viewpoint. However, without further context, the exact nature of the disagreement or who Mr. Partee may be disagreeing with is not clear.


Passage number 100.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A straight reading of the interest ratedifferential between a demand deposit and a market rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that a straight reading of the interest rate differential between a demand deposit and a market rate is being discussed. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement presented.


Passage number 101.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that index has a problem, GovernorPartee. That's why I really would stress again the experimental[nature] of both of these. The way that was initially measured--andone has to try to deal with it--when interest rates got to 17 percentthe degree of moneyness in the RP became less than when they were at 5percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. Both Mr. Axilrod and Governor Partee recognize that the index has a problem and they agree on the experimental nature of the measurement. They also acknowledge the impact of interest rates on the degree of moneyness in the RP.


Passage number 102.
MR. PARTEE. I see your point, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee acknowledges that he understands and agrees with the point being made by the other person. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 103.
MR. AXILROD. And that seems counterintuitive. So that was abig difficulty in that particular measure. So, both these measureshave certain statistical properties in them that are difficult, aswell as the fact that the analysis of the economics is just barelybeginning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining the challenges associated with certain measures.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it would hurt any--Istarted to say just for the heck of it, but it may be a little morethan just for the heck of it--to show what some of these weightedmeasures look like at the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
MR. AXILROD. We will do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Axilrod is simply stating that they will do something. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 106.
MR. BOEHNE. I think Pres is onto something and I agree withwhat he said. I think there is a broader point to be made here.Substantively, I think what you said is that the aggregates areprobably no worse, but they are certainly no better--and from ananalytical point of view I think that is right--than they were a yearago or six months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne agrees with the statement made by Pres.


Passage number 107.
 Maybe they are a little worse, but--MR. PARTEE. They have been terrible indicators for the pastyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement or alignment with the idea that the indicators have been poor.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
MR. BOEHNE. But I think they are worse in another way, asidefrom the analytical, and that is from the communications aspect of[policy]. M1 was very useful at one time to help us rationalize anddefend what needed to be done several years ago. But it has fallenfrom grace on a pretty wide scale. And while I think there areadvantages to hanging on to the hope that it could somehow berehabilitated, it seems to me that it has been wounded so badly thatit would be very difficult for a considerable period in the future tobase any hard medicine on something like M1. Therefore, it seems to-11-12/16-17/85me that it goes beyond the analytical problems that we have with M1.It just would be very difficult from a public relations and apolitical point of view ever to base--no, ever is too long--in theforeseeable future to base any kind of bitter pill on something likeM1. We ought to continue the work and I think the suggestions thatPres made are worth pursuing. But I think we are dealing withsomething that is much bigger than just analytical work. Generally, Ifind that whereas a year ago people still asked about M1, it is noteven asked about very much anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, believes that M1, a certain policy, has fallen from grace and is no longer useful from a communications aspect. He argues that it would be difficult to base any hard medicine on M1 in the foreseeable future, both analytically and from a public relations and political point of view. However, he also suggests that the suggestions made by Pres are worth pursuing. This disagreement stems from differing opinions on the effectiveness and viability of using M1 as a basis for decision-making.


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Its burial may be a bit premature; itdepends upon what happens to the economy over the next few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is suggesting that the fate of something being buried is uncertain and dependent on future economic conditions.


Passage number 110.
MR. BOEHNE. I think it is on a sick bed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Boehne about something being on a sick bed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would agree with that. We'll seewhether it has had a partial recovery; I'm not sure it will return tofull health. We would have to have one heck of an increase in theeconomy in the next 3 to 6 months, which is contrary to theprojections we have before us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is a disagreement or contention. The first sentence indicates agreement, while the subsequent sentences express doubt and skepticism about the possibility of a full recovery.


Passage number 112.
MR. MARTIN. 12 percent nominal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 113.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black can defend it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 114.
MR. BLACK. No, I'm going to admit, Mr. Chairman, that it hasbeen rather sick; I guess in retrospect I should have recognized thatit was sick sooner than I did. But I don't think that's the keyissue. I think you just put your finger on the key issue: What it isgoing to do from now on. We have been through a very unusual period.We have had a sharp decline in inflation and inflationaryexpectations; we have had extensive deregulation in the depositorymarkets; and we may have had a decline in real interest rates. Thiscertainly has done something to change it for the time being but itmay be the case that in the future it will resume some of its formercharacteristics. It may be that it will proceed at a lower rate ofsecular growth. For example, if we have had an element of savingsintroduced into the NOW accounts and other checkable deposits, as Iassume we have, and if this has brought about some improvement in cashmanagement policies, as I think it has, then that may mean that all weare really going to have after we are through this period--which islargely behind us, I think--is a slower rate of growth in velocity ona secular basis. And if that is the case, then that can be aspredictable as it has been in the past. The paper certainly impliesthat just because it's slower, it doesn't mean that it is worthless.The truth of the matter is, of course, no one knows for sure what itis going to do. So that suggests that we ought at least to weigh withcaution the idea of throwing it out completely, because for longperiods of time in the past it has been a rather useful thing to lookat. I agree with Pres that a divisia index makes sense conceptually;I have always felt that that made more sense than anything else sinceobviously M1 is not the only thing that has some characteristic ofmoney. There are a lot of things that do. And if we could somehow oranother get the right weighted average, conceptually, that to me isthe kind of thing that we want. Because if we don't target somethingof that sort, then all we have left is interest rates and thatinvolves a necessity of saying what the appropriate level of interestrates is. That is very difficult for anybody to do and there is-12-12/16-17/85nothing in theory or in empirical studies that suggests what theappropriate level ought to be. But when we get to these divisiaindexes I guess there is going to be a problem of data availabilityand also probably a problem of control of these--although I am hopefulthat we can move in that general direction because that's what all myinstincts tell me is really the best way for us to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions on the issue at hand.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a few other guidelines that onecould have other than interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement. It simply suggests that there are additional guidelines one could consider besides interest rates.


Passage number 116.
MR. BLACK. Well, they would be very akin to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Black, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 117.
 You couldhave free reserves, you could have borrowed reserves, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting different possibilities of reserves without expressing disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 118.
 Exchange rates, prices--MR. BLACK. Well, but to achieve a given price level, youhave to have some way of moving the economy one way or another; Ithink that ought to be our goal ultimately, but you have to have ahandle to move it in the right direction. The exchange rate certainlywould be one; I probably should not have not oversimplified to thatextent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges a potential oversight in oversimplifying the role of exchange rates, but does not express disagreement with the idea.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not quite sure that I followed all ofthis complex analysis delivered to us orally. Looking at theseinterest rates, it's clear that super NOW rates are more sluggish thanTreasury bill rates. But before we had super NOWs and all of these[deposit] rates were zero or when we had ceiling rates, movements inmarket rates were sharper relative to the transactions rates.Therefore, one would have thought velocity would now be steadierrelative to history rather than less steady.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 120.
MR. MORRIS. The difference, Paul, is that the old M1 wastransactions balances; it's because people had a strong incentive tominimize the amount they held in non-interest bearing form. Theincentive, if not completely gone, is seriously impaired. Therefore,if there are savings balances in those accounts, they are going to bemuch more sensitive to changes in interest rate differentials thanpure transactions balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is explaining a difference between the old M1 and the current situation. He presents a viewpoint and explains the incentive for minimizing non-interest bearing balances in the past. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 121.
MR. AXILROD. One other way of looking at it, Mr. Chairman,is that a lot of these NOW accounts are simply, in effect, the oldsavings accounts re-designated. And all of this volatility that weare observing as interest rates go up and down, would have occurredonly in M2 and not at all in M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

The speaker suggests that NOW accounts are essentially the same as old savings accounts, and argues that the volatility in interest rates would have only occurred in M2 (a broader measure of money supply) and not M1 (a narrower measure). This viewpoint may differ from others who believe that NOW accounts are distinct from old savings accounts and that the volatility in interest rates affects both M1 and M2.


Passage number 122.
 So it is simply transferring--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That raises the question of whether M2used to be more volatile.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact and poses a question for further consideration.


Passage number 123.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that was the disintermediation time. Ihaven't checked back, but my impression is yes. In the last two yearsM2 has been reasonably stable while M1 has been quite volatile. Istopped myself short of saying directly [that the Committee might wantto] put a little more weight on M2. I thought I was implying it veryindirectly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a personal impression and opinion.


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
-13-12/16-17/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There are a couple of straws in thewind, but not much more. One thing that I think is true that bears onall of this is that today even compared, say, to 1980, the public atlarge is much more sensitive to interest rates and relative interestrates in managing their financial asset portfolios. That's just ahunch, but it does look that way to me. The second thing that may betrue is that in terms of general liquidity characteristics offinancial assets held by the public that are not bank-issued--in otherwords institutionalized savings such as thrift-plan type savings,pensions, IRAs and so on--a good deal more of the nonbank-relatedfinancial asset holdings of the public may be perceived by the publicto be less liquid than bank-issued financial assets. Again, I don'tknow this to be true, but my hunch is that it is. And if both ofthose things are true, that also may help to explain why the public,including the business sector, does seem to be on the one hand moreaggressive in shifting among classes of bank-issued financial assets,while at the same time increasing their holdings of nonbank-issuedfinancial assets. The problem with that, if it is true, is that itbrings into sharp focus in my mind the point that Dave mentioned interms of what it implies about the interest sensitivity even of M2 butespecially of M1. If you argue that M2 in some sense is less interestsensitive and, therefore, is a better "indicator" than it used to beor even better than M1 is, but you also accept the point that Davemade that it really isn't the quantity that matters, it's the pricethat matters, then it seems to me that you can get yourself into areal box, if it turns out that M2 is less sensitive but yet theeconomy itself is in some sense more sensitive. That to me makes thisquestion of what you look at more difficult in one sense but maybeeasier in another sense. That's because if the public is moresensitive and if there is anything at all to this question ofliquidity of bank-related instruments versus nonbank instruments, it'sanother reason to believe that money growth relative to GNP is goingto be permanently higher than it was in the past and velocity growthis going to be smaller at least than it was in the past.The other point that has been made about drawing someconsolation from the fact that the broad aggregates, M2 and M3, lookmore respectable and can help us interpret, or at least roll with M1in this recent period, I am not very sure about. For example, in thecase of M3, I cannot help but think that M3 is as weak as it has beenat least in part because of the way banks are financing things thesedays. They are issuing standbys and all these other off-balance-sheetinstruments. Somebody else is doing the financing and the bank itselfno longer has to issue the large CD until something goes wrong and theborrower comes to the bank to execute a standby. I think if you makeany allowance for the tremendous explosion of off-balance-sheetcontingent financing by the banks, as opposed to the traditional bankfinancing of business credit through issuance of large CDs, one atleast has to question whether in fact M3 is telling us the same thingsit used to tell us insofar as that broad measure of bank liabilitiesis concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention and disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents their own hunches and perspectives but acknowledges that they do not have solid evidence to support their claims. They also raise questions and doubts about the validity and accuracy of certain measures and indicators.


Passage number 126.
MR. PARTEE. If you compare [it with] credit growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the idea of comparing credit growth with something else, without expressing any disagreement or contention towards it.


Passage number 127.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it reinforces the view thatcredit growth is telling us something other than that the number isbig. I think it is telling us that the growth of credit is not some-14-12/16-17/85kind of statistical aberration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an opinion or interpretation of the information.


Passage number 128.
 This widening out of the spreadbetween both--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is it telling us about the economicoutlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "This widening out of the spread between both" simply presents information without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 129.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What it tells me is that we probablyare putting a lot of bad debt on the economy. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement does not involve any disagreement or contention. It is simply expressing the speaker's belief about the presence of bad debt in the economy.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the debt is so high, and that is whatwe should be looking at, does that say that the economy is going tobegin expanding after two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It expresses a hypothetical condition and raises a question about the relationship between high debt and future economic expansion.


Passage number 131.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't see any burst in theeconomy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage since it is a simple statement expressing the lack of a particular observation or phenomenon.


Passage number 132.
 What worries me is that if the economy doesn't expand--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then it seems to me that credit isn'ttelling you anything in the way you look at these monetary aggregatesas telling you something about the future of the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses concern about the economy not expanding and questions whether credit is a reliable indicator in predicting the future of the economy. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 133.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is telling you that inthe course of a not spectacular economy you are seeing a furtherdeterioration of balance sheets in the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing an interpretation or analysis of the situation.


Passage number 134.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's different; it's not a leadingindicator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact without expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 135.
MR. PARTEE. The point though, Paul, is that M3 doesn't tellus anything either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is disagreeing with Paul by stating that M3 does not provide any useful information.


Passage number 136.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a simple factual question is: Whatwould a new aggregate--M3 plus commercial paper--look like.. Thatmust pick up most of the off-balance-sheet financing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple factual question that does not involve conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 137.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, it doesn't. Not anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No, it doesn't" is a straightforward denial or negation without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. The addition of "Not anymore" reinforces this by implying that there might have been previous contention or disagreement in the past, but it no longer exists. However, in the given passage, there is no explicit indication of the previous disagreement, making it a simple response without contention.


Passage number 138.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How else--Euromarket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Euromarket" without providing any additional content or context that could potentially create disagreement or contention.


Passage number 139.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For example, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statement or idea that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply starts with the phrase "For example," which indicates the intention to provide an illustration or demonstration of something.


Passage number 140.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Lindsey has some data on L, which is M3plus commercial paper plus Treasury bills.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about Mr. Lindsey having data on L, which is M3 plus commercial paper plus Treasury bills.


Passage number 141.
MR. LINDSEY. We ran the L measure through a St. Louis-typeso-called reduced-form equation that uses current and lagged quarterlygrowth rates along with a fiscal variable to predict the currentgrowth in GNP. If you look at 1985, the error there in predicting GNPwas 3.3 percentage points; it predicted faster GNP than actuallytranspired. If you look in the paper at the results for some of theother aggregates, though, that [result] is better. For example, M1'serror was 7.9 percentage points. Interestingly enough, though, debtdid almost as badly as M1 in 1985. It missed by 7 percentage pointson the growth rate of GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting and analyzing the results of a prediction model.


Passage number 142.
MR. MORRIS. Since 1982, M3 and L have had a betterperformance than the other aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is presented as a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 143.
-15-12/16-17/85MR. AXILROD. Anything that grew less than M1 is going tohave had a better performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact and does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that anything that grew less than M1 had a better performance.


Passage number 144.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is another point one can makeabout M2. If you take small time deposits out of M2 and put them inM3 on the grounds that they do not have overnight liquidity, and youtake the remaining institutional money funds out of M3 and put them inM2, then M2 grows by 14 percent rather than 7 percent. That's theidea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply presenting an idea or point of view about the classification of different types of deposits and how it affects the growth rate of M2 and M3.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 145.
MR. PARTEE. They were in the zero growth area; you put inall that has been growing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: The passage presents a disagreement between Mr. Partee, who argues that all growth has been included, and another person who holds a different opinion or perspective on the matter.


Passage number 146.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Which is the point I was trying tomake: If you look at these things all these different ways, you canmake at least a plausible case that the "moderate" growth of M2 and M3maybe isn't so moderate in its own way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is explaining a viewpoint that suggests it is possible to make a plausible case that the "moderate" growth of M2 and M3 may not be moderate in its own way when looked at from different perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe. If you take that line, why are allthese aggregates rising so much faster than the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a question that implies a potential disagreement or controversy over the reason for the significant increase in the aggregates compared to the overall economic growth. The use of the word "maybe" indicates uncertainty, suggesting that there might be differing opinions or theories regarding the cause of the observed trend.


Passage number 148.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That was the thrust of my first setof comments. I said they were straws in the wind. But it gets tothis point about whether there is a difference--in addition to what weknow about inflation having come down and all the other things--thatwould traditionally point to velocity growth being slower. Giventhat, is there any plausibility to the argument that financial assetsissued by banks and held by households are now perceived to be thatmuch more liquid than financial assets not issued by banks. In thecurrent circumstances that would mean that the public would want tohold more of those relative to the less liquid nonbank issuedfinancial assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and raising questions for consideration, without expressing any disagreement with others.


Passage number 149.
MR. MARTIN. I think that argues for a further study of theturnover of components of each of the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states Mr. Martin's opinion about a further study of the turnover of components. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention among others.


Passage number 150.
 I will broaden mycomment here as--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] got a lot of Treasurysecurities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is not presenting conflicting viewpoints or opposing ideas, it is simply stating a fact.


Passage number 151.
MR. AXILROD. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as there are no conflicting statements or opposing opinions presented.


Passage number 152.
 Chairman, a slightly impressionisticanswer--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That doesn't really help because alot are held by pension funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a neutral observation about the lack of helpfulness in a previous answer, followed by a fact about the ownership of a large number of the mentioned items.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
 Plenty of cash deposits as far as thehouseholds are concerned--MR. MORRIS. I think the answer is in the opposite directionof your assumption. We have been looking at total financial assets asa percentage of GNP and that ratio has declined from the 1960s andreached a bottom around 1978; it has been rising since then, althoughit's still below the level of the 1960s. But the percentage offinancial assets comprised by checkable deposits and currency is lowernow than it was in 1978, 1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with the assumption made by someone else and presents an opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 154.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's because of the stock market,though, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification or agreement regarding the role of the stock market in a certain situation.


Passage number 155.
-16-12/16-17/85MR. MORRIS. Yes, but the percentage of total financialassets held in deposit form has not been rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about the percentage of total financial assets held in deposit form.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're including stock at market value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a factual statement about including stock at its market value. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 157.
MR. MORRIS. It has been shrinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "It has been shrinking" is a simple statement of fact without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 158.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. At market value. But it's not justthe holding of the stock too. The point I am trying to get at is thatthe way that the public holds stock I would guess that much more ofthe household sector's holdings of stock equity is now through thingslike savings plan and pension plans. They are institutionalized asopposed to John Doe calling up his broker and saying that he wants tobuy 50 shares of whatever. I assume that must be true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply speculating and expressing their assumptions about the way the public holds stock in the household sector.


Passage number 159.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage since it only mentions "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or statement to indicate conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 160.
 Well, all I know is that we should havestarted this discussion some months ago because at the next meeting wehave a law which says that we have to set forth some monetary andcredit aggregates and we have to decide which ones to set forth and--MR. PARTEE. And what kind of a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about when a discussion should have taken place and what needs to be decided in the next meeting.


Passage number 161.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What kind of a range. I think JimKichline has the answer to all of these things because he put in an M1consistent with the business outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the individual named "JimKichline" has an answer or solution related to a certain range or topic.


Passage number 162.
MR. MORRIS. That's why we have such a low growth rate fornext year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 163.
MR. AXILROD. Could I, Mr. Chairman, offer one hypothesis toyour question of why the velocity of everything has declined, which ithas. Velocity of M3, debt, and liquid assets all declined in theperiod since the early '80s. One thing you could think of is that ina deflationary period, financial assets become more "valuable" thanphysical assets, whereas in an inflationary period it's vice versa.And in addition to the outstanding amounts of financial assets goingup, of course, you are evaluating stock at a [spurious] rate, so interms of market values those prices are going up. Although it is animpressionistic view, it strikes me that there is something to that.There is just no hurry at the moment to dispose of paper and to getinto physical tangible assets that are going to go up in value like ahouse or plant and equipment. That will eventually come. It explainsall the velocities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering a hypothesis to explain the decline in velocity of various assets and is discussing their perceived value in different economic periods. The speaker acknowledges that their view is impressionistic but suggests that there may be truth to their explanation. There is no indication of disagreement or contradiction in the passage.


Passage number 164.
MR. PARTEE. What did you mean by that comment that it "willeventually come".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only presents a question and does not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements.


Passage number 165.
MR. AXILROD. Well, when the interest rates go down and thestock prices go up to a point where it is cheaper to build the plantand equipment than it is to buy it, then it seems to me that we oughtto begin getting the normal expansion. I didn't mean inflation; Imeant a normal expansion in plant and equipment. It seems to me thatyou have to get that kind of "equilibrium.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting that when interest rates go down and stock prices go up, it would be a good time for a normal expansion in plant and equipment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 166.
" At the moment it seems tome much cheaper to buy a piece of plant and equipment--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you're right, I think you would have toget very low levels of plant and equipment and housing expendituresand I am not sure that they have been all that low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention regarding the cost-effectiveness of buying a piece of plant and equipment. The speaker expresses doubt about whether the costs have been as low as claimed.


Passage number 167.
-17-12/16-17/85MR. AXILROD. We do have a decent economy, but probably ifwhat I said is right it's implying at some point [unintelligible] asprices go up to a point where it becomes economic, given the low levelof inflation, to invest in physical assets--assuming inflation isn'tgoing to revive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the potential economic implications of certain factors.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. You already made yourcomments. [Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply acknowledges that Mr. Morris has already shared his comments.


Passage number 169.
]MR. BOEHNE. As for the issue of 1986, it seems to me that wedon't want ranges any narrower or any lower than we have had thisyear. And the ranges should be couched in the same way as was done in1985: that we have to look at M1 in terms of M2 and M3 and those haveto be evaluated against movements in velocity and the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the desired ranges for a certain issue.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have been assuming that. If weare not going to assume that, we better do a lot of work in a hurry.Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their assumption and suggesting that if that assumption is not agreed upon, then there is a need for urgent action.


Passage number 171.
MS. SEGER. I just wanted to ask Steve a question about thelikely moves by financial institution managers once the deregulationis completed. Would there be any chance at all that they would try toradically simplify their deposit structures. It has gotten prettyexpensive to keep all of these different permutations and combinationsof accounts. As I was sitting here listening to your explanation ofsome of these other changes, it occurred to me that there might besome rationale for simplification. I am old enough to remember whenthey had checking accounts and savings accounts and time accounts,period--not 17 varieties of other things. I just wondered if theremight be some move in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and sharing their own thoughts and observations.


Passage number 172.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we have tried to get a handle on that bysurveys of what they intend to do and I think the results are ratherdiverse. There may be simplification; I wouldn't doubt that therewould be some. But there seems to be a view that they are still goingto try to pay relatively low rates to smaller accounts and then movemore to market rates with larger accounts, which was the basis of someof our analysis. Maybe some will begin tying them to demand deposits.That has happened a lot more slowly than we would have expected someyears ago, but maybe now this will develop more. Perhaps Dave couldadd a little more to that; I don't have any sense of it beyond that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing different views or possibilities regarding the payment of rates to different types of accounts.


Passage number 173.
MR. LINDSEY. There is a little of that reported in the NewYork District--of tying demand accounts for households to savings andother accounts, such as MMDAs, so that minimum balance requirementsare satisfied by the MMDAs and deposits in demand accounts can beminimized. I am not sure if that is simpler exactly, but it is a kindof change involving these different accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a reported practice in the New York District regarding tying demand accounts for households to savings and other accounts. The speaker expresses uncertainty about whether this practice is simpler, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
MR. PARTEE. It would be an effort to capture a larger shareof the business of the transactor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The word "effort" suggests that there may be some opposition or competition in trying to capture a larger share of the business.


Passage number 175.
MR. AXILROD. I have a vague feeling that a certain amount ofcomplexity will tend to make people feel that they can maximize theirprofits a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a personal opinion without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 177.
-18-12/16-17/85MR. STERN. Well, we did some of the same kind of work thatDave and Steve have reported on, with some different techniques. Butnot surprisingly, we came to about the same conclusion since theunderlying data are the same. From the point of view of the targets--and this is a way of reiterating what has already been suggested--thatsuggests that given what appears to be a secular change in M1velocity, we are going to need a higher M1 target for 1986; andbecause of the breakdown in the relationship with GNP it appears weare going to want a wider range at the same time. I would only addthat maybe some serious thought should be given to giving somewhatgreater weight to M2 in this configuration of aggregates--not becauseit is without problems, but just because at least for 1986 it looks asif we can avoid some of the problems created by shifts between M2 andM1 if we simply look at the broader aggregate and give it somewhatgreater weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply summarizing the conclusions reached by different individuals based on the same data and making a suggestion for adjusting the targets and ranges.


Passage number 178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be answered without the passage. Please provide the passage in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 179.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would think with regard to M1that both this study and our own experience in 1982 and 1983 and 1985,coming so close together and being so much a function of the changinginstruments, suggest that there is a learning curve that financialinstitution managers are going through as they learn how to pricethese things and be more au courant with the market. We don't know ifwe are trying to share our ignorance among ourselves. We don't knowhow consumers are learning to react, although Jerry had some verycogent things to say with regard to attitudes toward these variousinstruments. All that adds up to me to relegating M1 to a monitoringor information variable, without setting a range. I am hopeful that,as the Chairman has indicated, we would have a chance to review thework that has been done on various weighted M1 components or perhapsM2 components. We could have a justification for M1 being put on theshelf temporarily in that we are making a substantial effort toprovide new data in the form of a weighted M1 or weighted M1s while itis on the shelf--that we are devoting resources to producing a betterM1, if you will, just as we went from M1-A and M1-B and shift-adjustedM1 to today's M1 as basic underlying characteristics of theinstruments changed. They have changed and the behavior of both theofferor and the user is changing. It seems to me that we could couple[a statement] that we don't have a target for M1 with [an indication]that we are producing new data--a new M1, if you will.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing Mr. Martin's view on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 180.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the interest of nomenclature, whenwe had M1 on a so-called monitoring status before, we had a range,didn't we.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on a previous situation.


Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understood you correctly, you said wedidn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is incomplete.


Passage number 182.
MR. MARTIN. I said I would propose that we not have a rangethis time. I admit that, yes, we had a range before. But we didn'thave as much uncertainty then as we have [now].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, acknowledges that they had a range before and admits that there is more uncertainty now. However, there is no opposing viewpoint presented or conflicting argument.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not talking about substance. When wecalled it monitoring before we had a range. You are going beyond thatand don't even have a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are not discussing substance and pointing out that the current situation differs from previous monitoring practices that had a defined range.


Passage number 184.
-19-12/16-17/85MR. MARTIN. This time, yes sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 185.
MR. BOEHNE. Legally, do we have to have a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement from Mr. Boehne asking about a legal requirement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not for M1; legally we have to have someranges. I think there might be a certain amount of disappointment--though maybe not so much after our recent experience. But a couple ofyears ago we wouldn't have gotten by without having an M1 range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or at least potential disappointment regarding the need to have M1 ranges. The statement "I think there might be a certain amount of disappointment" indicates differing opinions or expectations about the necessity of these ranges.


Passage number 187.
MR. PARTEE. I think the range ought to be 2 to 12 percentand [unintelligible] if it's any good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply expressing his opinion about the range he believes is appropriate without any conflicting opinions or argument present.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I remember a comparable experience in thepast when we said it was premature to have ranges for the followingyear; I guess we said that for all of the ranges, didn't we.[Congress] kicked that back to us in about 2 seconds [and told us] thelaw says we have to have a range. Mr. Griffith.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about past experiences and actions taken by Congress.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
MR. GRIFFITH. Mr. Chairman, I am going to pick up onGovernor Seger's comments about simplification and maybe somemechanical problems that will make M1 worse. I think the reason thatbanks have not simplified is very simple: For the most part, mostbanks have little or no internal cost controls and don't know what [adeposit] costs them. I know for the West Coast [banks] I can saythat. They have zero idea what it costs them to run a savingsaccount. Those that have looked at it recently have come up withstaggering numbers: I am talking about a hundred dollars a year to runa 5-1/2 percent savings account. If you take that number on a $5000deposit and you went up to 5-1/2 percent on an MMDA rate, up to 5-1/2percent you would be better off; it would be cheaper to offer a higherrate of interest and get rid of the overhead cost to run a savingsaccount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Griffith, is suggesting that banks have not simplified because they have little internal cost controls and do not know the cost of running a savings account. He argues that if banks were aware of the high cost, they would offer higher interest rates and eliminate the overhead cost. This implies that there is a disagreement between Mr. Griffith and the banks he is referring to, as he believes they are not properly managing their costs.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that imply that it is cheaper to runan MMDA.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states a possible implication but does not provide any argument or contrasting opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 191.
MR. GRIFFITH. It's cheaper to run any type of account than apassbook savings account by virtue of some of the anomalies--forexample, sending out quarterly statements, the mailing costs, and thefact that some still require passbooks, etc. Yes, you can achievesome real economies of scale as far as trying to get one account thatwill enable you to have trailing balances. I'm saying 2 or 3 thingsfor information. All I am suggesting is that the reason we haven'tseen simplification is not because it won't occur, but when it doesoccur it will further complicate M1. It's simply because bankshaven't figured out how much it costs them. But probably moreimportant than that: In the 1980s banks, particularly the large banks-- [unintelligible] the East Coast banks, the large money center banksin the West--have not had the earnings necessary to spend the dollars,the millions of dollars, for automation redesign. So I am just sayingthat I think this is going to occur and it's going to furthercomplicate M1.The only other comment I have has to do with the staff paper,which we in San Francisco enjoyed reading and thought was well donealso. We take one exception, and we may be totally wrong, but wouldjust point it out for Committee consideration. The staff here saysthat they believe that the large debit risk overdraft program will-20-12/16-17/85have little or no impact upon M1. That's on page 18 of the staffreport. We have trouble with that. If you look at the total dollaramount of daylight overdrafts that are currently in existence, I inparticular have trouble with a statement that it is not going to alterpayments. Our analysis would indicate in our own District--in anyevent, the first four or five banks that we have looked at who arepretty good performers from the staff point of view--that overdraftsare really caused by international payments. Jerry could probablyspeak to this better than I, but the overdrafts are not caused byfunding needs; they are primarily caused by the participation in CHIPSand things like that. And we say, yes, it will affect things ineither one or two ways. Either somehow there will be fewer paymentsmade per day or some alteration in the payments scheme of things or--what we think is much more likely and what we are hearing from ourbanks--there will be a real push, frankly, by the commercial banks toget their depositor to pony up overnight liquid dollars to hold downthese payments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Griffith, disagrees with the staff's statement that the large debit risk overdraft program will have little or no impact on M1. He argues that the total dollar amount of daylight overdrafts currently in existence indicates that the program will alter payments. He also suggests that there may be either fewer payments made per day or a push by commercial banks to get depositors to hold more overnight liquid dollars to mitigate the impact of the program.


Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you saying that as it stands today oras we press on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is asking for clarification or confirmation about whether something is being referred to in its current state or as it continues in the future.


Passage number 193.
MR. GRIFFITH. As it stands today, I believe there will besome impact; as we press harder, and I am assuming pressing harder issometime in later 1986, I think it is going to be significant. Butalso I think we have to take into consideration that as yet we have noformal data for those banks that will come in with, let's say, selfassessments of not anyone being unsatisfactory and therefore are givenzero caps. From the data we have there is going to be a considerablenumber of those across the country. You are talking about asignificant degree of either a slower payment system or causingcorporate customers to pony up the liquid dollars. I know it's earlyand we don't have the data; it's just intuitive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and acknowledging that there is no formal data to support their claims. They are discussing the potential impact of pressing harder in later 1986 and acknowledging that there could be a slower payment system or a need for corporate customers to have more liquid dollars.


Passage number 194.
 And I am notknocking the staff report; I'm saying this as just a warning signal--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've wondered about that too. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not express any form of disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply expressing a concern or question they have, without challenging or opposing the staff report or anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 195.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I think that Pres' suggestion abouta limited range for M1 has considerable merit. I think M1 is a veryimportant number, as you know, and because of its transactionscomponent may become very important to us again in the future, eitherin its current form or perhaps in a new form. But the transactionscomponent makes it, I think, very special. And in one sense it seemsto me that we discredit it by setting a range for it that we not onlydo not intend to bring it within but that we don't even think it willcome in within. So I think we should consider the idea of not settinga range for M1 since the jury is really out on a lot of these matters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Horn, is expressing an opinion and suggesting that the idea of not setting a range for M1 should be considered. She does not mention any opposing viewpoints or engage in any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 197.
MR. FORRESTAL. I am not really quite sure why I feel thisway, Mr. Chairman, but I have a completely different point of viewfrom the one that has just been expressed and that Press Martinexpressed. I think it is really premature to give up on M1. Irealize that monitoring is not really giving up on it and that M1 is asick patient, to be sure; but I am not sure that it is ready to die.I think we ought to give it a little more time. Some of theseportfolio shifts to which we are attributing the difficulty of M1 mayslow down. According to the staff, and I have to agree with them, weapparently are not going to see the effects of further deregulation.-21-12/16-17/85So, I think we ought to give it a little more time, and I would liketo see us continue with a range for M1. But because of thedifficulties that we have had with it, I think that the range needs tobe wider than we traditionally have had. So for 1986 I would like awider range perhaps at about the level that it is. The other thingthat troubles me a little about putting M1 on a monitoring range isthat I am not sure the markets are going to interpret that in theright way. I think they might very well feel that this is our way ofabandoning further efforts against inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage because Mr. Forrestal has a different point of view from the one expressed by Press Martin and believes it is premature to give up on M1.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is going to be a little hard toreally abandon M1 just in terms of the law. It doesn't mention M1 butit talks about monetary ranges and nothing is more monetary in thepublic mind than M1. I think that we can deemphasize it--I'm justtalking in terms of the law--all we want. Actually not presenting itis going to raise a little ruckus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the difficulty of abandoning M1 in terms of the law and speculating that not presenting it may cause some controversy. However, there is no indication of differing perspectives or conflicting viewpoints in the passage.


Passage number 199.
MR. RICE. I think we have to prepare the Congress and thepublic for that; we can't do it suddenly this time. If we think weare moving in that direction we need at least six months' preparation,and probably a little longer than that. The last time we set targetswe seemed to [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting the need for preparation before implementing certain actions.


Passage number 200.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we ever set a target wedidn't think we were going to meet. [We thought] M1 was going to slowdown from this great burst in July; we didn't say it with greatconfidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's doubt about meeting a target and their lack of confidence in predicting the future performance of M1.


Passage number 201.
MR. MARTIN. It says it again right here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement is a simple repetition of information. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage.


Passage number 202.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
MR. KEEHN. Given the results of M1 this year, I certainlythink abandoning the range would have some appeal. But other than thelegal aspect, it seems to me that there are public perception aspectsthat would be difficult. By saying that we are not going to establisha range and that we have a lot of work going on to try and get abetter understanding of what has been going on gives me the impressionthat we have a bunch of engineers in the back room busily crankingaway and at some early point we'll come up with an ideal model thatmight work. It might indeed work, but we would have to have aconsiderable period of time to feel comfortable with that. Clearly,in my mind, we're going through a period of considerable uncertainty.But given that, I would be inclined to use ranges as broad aspossible, perhaps at least as broad as this year or maybe wider andcertainly not narrower. I'd just put in the testimony a lot ofjudgmental comments as to how we are going to end up in those rangesas the year evolves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Keehn, expresses concerns and uncertainty about abandoning the range and suggests using broader ranges instead.


Passage number 204.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 205.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we are talkingin terms of widening these ranges much more than they would have to bewidened under any set of reasonable circumstances. For example, if weshould say that 4 percent real growth next year is a reasonabletarget--and I think we would all be very pleased with that--if M1[velocity] should resume its historical rate, 3 percent being thenormal rate, then a 4 percent rate of growth in M1 would be enough.-22-12/16-17/85In the past if we had no trend in velocity at all, if it was zero,then 7 percent growth in the money supply would be enough to financethat 7 percent rise in nominal GNP. So 4 to 7 percent would encompassa pretty broad range there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is arguing that the ranges being discussed for widening are broader than necessary under reasonable circumstances, while others may have a different opinion on what constitutes a reasonable range.


Passage number 206.
MR. PARTEE. But velocity can drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 207.
MR. BLACK. Well, I was going to say: In the case you cited,Chuck, where you talked about 12 percent, that would imply an 8percent drop in velocity--which might happen for a year--to give you a4 percent rate of GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement and explanation given by Mr. Black.


Passage number 208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or a 5 percent drop off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage mentioned a 5 percent drop off, but no conflicting perspectives or opposing views are presented. It is a straightforward statement without any contention.


Passage number 209.
MR. PARTEE. I got [the 12] by adding 5 + 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply states how he arrived at the sum of 12 by adding 5 and 7.


Passage number 210.
MR. BLACK. If you had a 2 percent--well, there's no userunning through all this arithmetic. But 4 to 7 percent with zeropercent [velocity growth], which seems about as low as you couldpossibly have it, is what I meant to say a while ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black about a specific percentage range.


Passage number 211.
MR. MORRIS. How can we assume that zero has to be the floor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Morris questioning the assumption that zero must be the floor.


Passage number 212.
MR. BLACK. I am not saying that it has to be; I am justsaying that it seems like a reasonable floor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that something seems like a reasonable floor, without contradicting or challenging any other point.


Passage number 213.
 You can certainly gobeyond that, but to go to 12 percent as Chuck suggested awhile ago,facetiously I think, implies an 8 percent drop if you have to--MR. MORRIS. You could argue that the norm for M1 velocity isgoing to be negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It includes a hypothetical scenario presented by Chuck and the statement that the norm for M1 velocity is going to be negative, but it does not include any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 214.
MR. BLACK. It could be, but I don't know what the reason forthat would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is an example of uncertainty or lack of knowledge but not of any disagreement between multiple parties.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 215.
MR. MARTIN. Bob, the trouble I have with that is that themonetary policy assumption in the Greenbook carries a 125 to 150 basispoint decline in interest rates next year. That means you're throwingin another big variable, the same big variable again--a big drop ininterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Martin, expresses disagreement with the assumption of a 125 to 150 basis point decline in interest rates next year, stating that it introduces another significant and uncertain factor to consider.


Passage number 216.
MR. PARTEE. NOW accounts could get pretty popular.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that NOW accounts could become popular.


Passage number 217.
MR. BLACK. It's anybody's guess as to what those rates aregoing to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a neutral and speculative observation about future rates, so there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 218.
MR. MARTIN. All I'm saying is that that is one of ourassumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin is simply stating that one of their assumptions is being mentioned.


Passage number 219.
MR. BLACK. Pres, they are also talking about a much lowerrate of growth in real GNP than the 4 percent I said might bereasonable. I am just saying that you can get 4 percent real growthwith comparatively little M1 unless it really is misbehaving, which itmay be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing his opinion about the possibility of achieving a 4 percent real growth in GNP with little M1, acknowledging that it may not be behaving as expected.


Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a problem here. When I listen tothis conversation we have a law that says "monetary and creditaggregates." The only credit aggregate that we have is as far off asM1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a problem they have encountered while listening to a conversation.


Passage number 221.
-23-12/16-17/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the problem I have. I thinkone can make a case that all of these aggregates are way off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own personal opinion and frustration with the accuracy of certain aggregates or calculations.


Passage number 222.
MR. PARTEE. That is the thing, Paul. The public seems tobuy the concept that credit growth could be as much as 12 percent ayear. I think that we have had around 12 percent, the top end of therange, for each year at a time when obviously nominal GNP has beenmuch less than 12 percent. And infinitely extended that would mean aninfinite debt burden. But nobody seems to comment about that rapidgrowth in credit; they seem to accept that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own observation and interpretation of the public's acceptance of the rapid growth in credit.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nobody knows what to do about it. Theimplication is to tighten up, but nobody wants to tighten up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Nobody knows what to do about it" is a general observation, while "The implication is to tighten up, but nobody wants to tighten up" simply expresses a potential contradiction in people's desires or actions. However, there is no explicit argument or clash of perspectives presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 224.
MS. SEGER. Mr. Annunzio said to cut up your credit cards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "Mr. Annunzio said to cut up your credit cards" indicates that there is disagreement or contention because someone is suggesting to take an action (cutting up credit cards) that may go against the beliefs or preferences of others.


Passage number 225.
MR. PARTEE. Should have done it a year ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses a personal opinion without mentioning any opposing views or disagreement.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It still intrigues me that the previousincident we had of debt rising so fast relative to GNP was in 1928-29.I've been assuming that we would have targets of more or less thetraditional type with a lot of [explanatory] language, maybe put M1 ona monitoring basis the way we did before, with a target. That isclearly within the scope of what we can do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating the author's intrigue and assumptions about the previous incident of debt rising relative to GNP.


Passage number 227.
 The same thing is truefor credit; that could be a monitoring--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd use them all. We've got to playone against the other. I think if we scrap one or two of them wewould really have a problem. At least if we keep the traditionalframework, with perhaps a variation on a definition of a monitoringrange, I think we are in a better position. If we scrap one or two ofthem, I think we could get into a terrible box.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a viewpoint on the importance of using multiple forms of credit monitoring and the potential consequences of not doing so.


Passage number 228.
MR. BLACK. At a minimum, we can use these sometimes tojustify what we want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no explicit disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that sometimes we can use certain things to justify our actions.


Passage number 229.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's what I have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts or ideas without conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 230.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, you mentioned that no one wantedto tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the chairman mentioned something without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 231.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I meant the general public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses the author's intention to refer to the general public.


Passage number 232.
MR. BOYKIN. I think that is true. But the thought strikesme--you referred to 1928-29--and I just wondered if we're notrationalizing ourselves into an even more difficult situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. Mr. Boykin is expressing a thought that is prompted by the previous statement, seeking clarification or further discussion.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may be. That's the problem. Ex post,after 1928-29 [it's clear] that the Federal Reserve should have beentighter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage is expressing a statement or opinion about the Federal Reserve's actions in 1928-29.


Passage number 234.
MR. BOYKIN. The practical problem in terms of ranges and soforth is what several others, including Gary Stern, have said. To doa complete change to me would throw even more uncertainty into a veryuncertain environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply referring to the practical problem that several others, including Gary Stern, have pointed out. The use of phrases like "what several others have said" and "to me" indicates that the speaker is acknowledging and agreeing with their perspective. They are expressing their concern about making a complete change in an already uncertain environment, which suggests their agreement on the matter.


Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just by instinct, I don't think we areprepared to throw out much of this without at least a very careful-24-12/16-17/85consideration of replacing [what we throw out] with something else.Outside these ranges we could say, well, we're going to stabilizeexchange rates or move interest rates or commodity prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly reflects the author's instinctual opinion and emphasizes the need for careful consideration before making any changes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
MR. BOYKIN. At midyear we tried to make some adjustment inrecognition of what has actually happened--rebasing, widening theranges. It is true that the behavior of M1 has not improved, but itseems to me that keeping the M1 range--downgrading it through words ormonitoring it or whatever you want to call it--and widening the rangesome would be the only prudent thing to do right now, until some ofthis other work could be done and we know a lot more than we do [now].I don't think I could say with any assurance that things might notreturn over the next six or eight months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin suggests widening the range of M1, while also acknowledging that its behavior has not improved. This implies a difference of opinion on how to address the situation.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am tempted to ask--it is so late in theafternoon I won't press for an answer--what you may want if you havetargets and you can't have monetary and credit aggregates in the sensein which it is called for by law. What would you use a year ahead,midyear, 18 months ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply posing a question and expressing curiosity. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 238.
MR. MARTIN. M2 and M3 and monitor M1 and nonfinancial debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage seems to list different entities or variables (M2, M3, monitor M1, and nonfinancial debt) without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 239.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm throwing out those things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is getting rid of certain items.


Passage number 240.
MR. MARTIN. Oh, I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 241.
MS. SEGER. There was a conference just held that wouldsuggest the price of gold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. SEGER is simply mentioning a conference or event that took place.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you prepared to suggest that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 243.
MS. SEGER. No, I didn't say that. I just said that therewas a conference just held that would suggest the price of gold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that a conference was held that suggests the price of gold.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are those who would say that; it isa small but hardy band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about a certain group of people, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 245.
MR. PARTEE. Commodity price people are close to the goldpeople.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage as it simply states that commodity price people are close to the goldpeople. It is a statement of observation or fact rather than a conflicting opinion.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Take a basket of commodity prices;stabilize the general accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence states a concept of stabilizing commodity prices, which does not imply any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 247.
MR. MARTIN. Talk about missing [a target].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply a statement made by Mr. Martin to initiate a conversation about something that is missing.


Passage number 248.
MR. BLACK. If you choose prices, you still have to have somemechanism that you play around with to do that. You have to have sometool or handle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply stating a fact or making an observation about the necessity of having a mechanism or tool to manipulate prices.


Passage number 249.
MR. MARTIN. Interest rates or exchange rates. What otheralternative do we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin simply poses a question and expresses the desire for alternative options.


Passage number 250.
MR. BLACK. That or some aggregate. Exchange rates, interestrates or aggregates, or some combination. I think that is exhaustive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their belief that the options mentioned (exchange rates, interest rates, aggregates, or some combination) encompass all the possibilities.


Passage number 251.
MS. SEGER. What would happen if we were to publish themonetary aggregates less often.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 252.
-25-12/16-17/85MR. BLACK. We'd be accused of withholding usefulinformation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that if someone were to accuse them of withholding useful information, it would be a potential consequence.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 253.
MR. RICE. The more you ask us to focus on this, the moreapparent it becomes that we should be hesitant about moving away fromthe aggregates too quickly. The alternatives seem unsatisfactory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The statement suggests that there is hesitation and dissatisfaction with the alternatives, indicating a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't hear anybody arguing. It'spractically impossible in the time that we have--without creating arevolution--to move away from some combination of these aggregates, asbad as they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 255.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It seems to me that what we reallyneed to do in the short run is to lean a little further in GovernorPartee's direction of nominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses an opinion on leaning towards Governor Partee's direction of nominal GNP.


Passage number 256.
MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, the same complaint can be madeof nominal GNP that Bob made about prices. How do you get there. Itused to be that you could get nominal GNP by changing interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a point about the calculation of nominal GNP.


Passage number 257.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am just saying that in the contextof having aggregates in more or less traditional form you just makemore general noises about looking through the aggregates at the GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about making general noises about looking through the aggregates at the GNP.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You may be promising more than you candeliver.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that one may be making promises that they are unable to fulfill.


Passage number 259.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm just grasping for straws.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the person is desperately searching for a solution or answer, indicating frustration or desperation, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You may put the straw on the camel's back,if you keep grasping.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possibility or outcome based on a condition.


Passage number 261.
MR. PARTEE. How about a range for GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply introduces the topic of GNP without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not hearing great inspiration. Ithink we ought to adjourn for the day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting that the meeting should be adjourned for the day.


Passage number 263.
[Meeting recessed]-26-12/16-17/85December 17, 1985--Morning SessionMR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply providing information about a meeting being recessed and providing a statement from Mr. Kichline.


Passage number 264.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you repeat or amplify what you saidabout energy prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention anything about energy prices.


Passage number 265.
MR. KICHLINE. They have risen in the last couple of months,but for all of 1986 we are forecasting essentially flat energy prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the rise in energy prices in the last couple of months but forecasts flat energy prices for the entire year of 1986. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not assuming a big decline in oilprices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact that the assumption being discussed does not include a big decline in oil prices. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 267.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I was referring to energy prices morebroadly. We have a decline of about $2 in the imported value of oil.But there are also service fuels, natural gas, electricity, gasoline,home heating fuel, etc. For the whole ball of wax, we essentiallyhave flat or a couple of tenths higher in 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating facts about energy prices.


Passage number 268.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a neutral statement or query.


Passage number 269.
MS. HORN. Jim, if one is looking at the net export sectorfor a kick upward in the economy next year and is worried that thatmight not happen until the second half, let's say, what morespecifically are the outlooks for some of the economies abroad--thedeveloped countries. We're beginning to hear some good news on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking about the outlooks for some economies abroad and mentioning that there is some good news.


Passage number 270.
MR. KICHLINE. Why don't I let Ted answer that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Mr. Kichline is simply suggesting that Ted should answer a specific question.


Passage number 271.
MR. TRUMAN. Contrary to the good news you hear, our outlookfor the industrial countries as a group in 1986 is that [growth] willbe on average the same as it has been this year. Western Europe maybe a bit stronger; I assume the stories you particularly are referringto have come out of Germany on this score. But Japan is expected tobe substantially weaker, and we ship much more to Japan than we do toGermany. So, on balance, we're looking for something in the 2-1/2 to3 percent growth, fourth quarter over fourth quarter, for thesecountries, which is about what we think they had in 1985. It is, asthis year, somewhat faster than the growth in the United States. Andin that sense, it is redressing the balance of the previous threeyears when we were growing faster than they were. But we don't thinkwe're getting any substantial additional stimulus from that source.Our forecast for the German economy itself is at the upper end of therange of the forecasts that one finds coming out of Germany--3 percentyear over year and 2-1/2 percent fourth quarter over fourth quarter. Ithink it's the other way around, [2-1/2] percent year over year and 3percent fourth quarter over fourth quarter. That is basically at theupper end of the range of the German official and private forecasts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their outlook for economic growth in various countries.


Passage number 272.
MR. MELZER. What about the tax bill, Jim. If that werepassed, what impact do you think that would have. And have you takenanything into account for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker asks a question about the potential impact of a tax bill and whether it has been considered.


Passage number 273.
MR. KICHLINE. We haven't taken anything explicit intoaccount. The way it stands now is that if it were passed, it clearlywould raise the cost of capital with respect to the business sector--especially for equipment, given that all the proposals get rid of theinvestment tax credit and change depreciation schedules as well as-27-12/16-17/85corporate income taxes. It's less clear that it would have as largean effect on nonresidential structures. But for the equipment side wethink it would be a negative. One of the problems we have is that,given the uncertainty over what's going on in tax reform, a case canbe made that in some areas businesses are just holding off andwaiting. So it may be having somewhat of a depressing effect now inbusiness planning. And it's unclear whether we're going to getanother slug when something really comes along. In financial markets,clearly, one of the areas where tax reform is having a role is in themunicipal market where we're having this surge of offerings that maybe cut off if tax reform is passed. But we think the major effect asit now stands would be in the business sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and observations about the potential effects of tax reform on the business sector.


Passage number 274.
MR. MARTIN. Jim, what's your impression of the George Gilderargument that the lower top bracket rates in one or another version ofthe tax revision would actually stimulate the entrepreneurs--theproprietorships, the smaller firms, the Silicon valley types and theBoston railroad people and what not. [He argues] that all the fuss inthe Halls of Congress is coming from General Electric and people likethat and that actually this might have a positive effect on businessfixed investment coming from a different source.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating Mr. Martin asking Jim for his impression on George Gilder's argument about lower top bracket rates stimulating entrepreneurs and smaller firms. There is no explicit disagreement or contention mentioned.


Passage number 275.
 Is that--MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think it's possible. The smallerfirms of the type you are talking of, especially in some of theservice sectors, often are not that capital intensive, and such firmsreally are not affected in a major way. Perhaps the corporate incometax rates play a more significant role. I don't know how to sort thatout. I think that is probably a longer-term kind of argument and theissues on tax reform as they would affect major capital expendituresprobably are shorter-term kinds of arguments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Kichline is expressing his opinion and uncertainty on the topic of whether smaller firms are affected by capital expenditures in the same way as larger firms. There is no clear disagreement or contention present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 276.
MR. PRELL. Governor Martin, I might mention that venturecapitalists in various paper surveys have indicated that therelatively low capital gains rates are very important to them. Withthese tax reform proposals, the capital gains taxes would not be asrelatively low as they are now, so that some shift--according to theseviews--might be in store in terms of that kind of entrepreneurship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Prell, suggests that venture capitalists believe low capital gains rates are important to them. However, the tax reform proposals mentioned would potentially change those rates. Therefore, there is a potential shift in opinion or disagreement between the venture capitalists' views and the proposed tax changes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 277.
MR. FORRESTAL. Jim, on the face of it I would have thoughtthat the lower interest rates that you're projecting would have givenmore stimulus to the economy than you have. I take it from what yousaid that you're seeing an offset in the Gramm-Rudman Bill. Butaren't there government spending plans in the pipeline that are goingto carry through to the first quarter and perhaps into the secondquarter. The second thing I'd like to have you comment on, if youwould--if you said it, I didn't hear--is the effect of inventoryinvestment on the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Forrestal expresses disagreement with Jim's projection of lower interest rates providing less stimulus to the economy than expected. He questions the offset mentioned by Jim and suggests that government spending plans and inventory investment may have a different effect on the economy.


Passage number 278.
MR. KICHLINE. Okay. With respect to inventories, we haveinventories as essentially a neutral force in 1986--basically runningclose to final sales. Our perception was that inventories currentlyprobably are about in line and that businesses would tend to add totheir stocks only as sales rose. So, the change in inventories isbasically not very much. Certainly, it wouldn't be affecting 1986 asa whole. As I noted in my briefing, there are some questionscurrently--that is, in the fourth quarter--as to what's going on; wemay be seeing somewhat larger accumulation than we have forecast,which would tend to give us somewhat stronger growth.-28-12/16-17/85With respect to the federal purchases, you're quite correct.There is a lot of spending in the pipeline. That's one of the reasonswhy--in putting this together and looking at Gramm-Rudman and sayingthat something happens March 1 to the tune of about $12 billion--wesee lots of offsets and lots of slippage in various programs, bothdefense and nondefense, so that our net cut is about $5 billion. Inaddition, some of these financial transactions don't really show up inthe GNP accounts as cuts. They wouldn't be cutbacks in federalpurchases as such, so some of the cuts will not appear in the GNPaccounts. It's very hard for us to parse out in our minds preciselywhat happens between cuts and how much is a reaction in some othersectors to interest rates changing. But on balance, we took somethingout as a result of the Gramm-Rudman package [and put in] a little moreconsumption in housing and a shade more in business investment as aresult of lower interest rates. But the net effect boils down to,roughly, a couple billion dollars out of 1986 because of that, andthat amounts to roughly 3 or 4 tenths [on GNP]. It's not a big neteffect. But the issues, it seems to me, are very important--especially as you look forward to the summer of 1986 when this majorproblem surfaces for fiscal year 1987. And we have not assumed thatcome October 1, things just come to a halt. Rather, we have continuedsort of along the path of having mild further cuts late in 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and discussing various factors that may impact the economy, but there is no argument or disagreement between different parties.


Passage number 279.
MR. FORRESTAL. If we didn't have Gramm-Rudman--if it weredeclared unconstitutional--would your forecast be where it was beforeor would you see greater strength than your previous forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a hypothetical question about the potential impact of a certain scenario.


Passage number 280.
MR. KICHLINE. I think it would have been about where it was.Since the meeting in November I don't think that things have changedin a way that would have induced us to have made major changes.Interest rates have come down, especially in the long markets, morethan we had thought. But, sorting through some of the other sectors,I would read them as about the same or maybe a shade weaker. So, Iwould say we took something out of the forecast for Gramm-Rudman. Iwould have had a higher number if we didn't have Gramm-Rudman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 281.
MR. PARTEE. But the main thing, Jim, that has happened sincethe last meeting is the increase in financial asset values, which ispretty big.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the increase in financial asset values.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 282.
MR. KICHLINE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The use of the word "Right" suggests disagreement or opposition to something that was previously stated.


Passage number 283.
MR. PARTEE. You would include that in the forecast as apositive element but with a considerably muted weight, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking for clarification on whether a particular element would be included in the forecast and is seeking confirmation of his understanding.


Passage number 284.
MR. KICHLINE. The quarterly model now would say that, giventhe increase in asset values in 1985, there is a lag in the impact onspending, which appears over 4 to 6 quarters. We have had somethinglike equity prices raising market values by $350 billion or so in1985. But that would add about a quarter of a percentage point topersonal consumption spending in 1986. So it's a limited effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information about the quarterly model and its predictions regarding the impact of asset values on spending.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARTEE. A quarter of a percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a specific percentage.


Passage number 286.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, keep in mind that a lot of those valuesshow up in pensions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kichline about the values that show up in pensions.


Passage number 287.
-29-12/16-17/85MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a numerical expression or equation.


Passage number 288.
 Yes, I know that a lot of them are not possesseddirectly by households; they're in pensions and--MR. PRELL. Even indirectly, to the extent that corporationscan recapture some of that. So it's a murky area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that some assets are not directly possessed by households but rather held in pensions and mentions the potential for corporations to recapture some of those assets. The mention of it being a "murky area" does not imply disagreement, but rather suggests that the topic is complex or unclear.


Passage number 289.
MR. STERN. In a way, though, given Gramm-Rudman the way youhave it in here and given OPEC and oil prices, I'm surprised thereisn't a bigger change in the inflation forecast--that it would haveslower growth. It seems to me we've had some positive developments incommodity markets generally and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stern is expressing surprise at the lack of a bigger change in the inflation forecast, considering the factors of Gramm-Rudman, OPEC, and oil prices. However, he also acknowledges positive developments in commodity markets.


Passage number 290.
MR. TRUMAN. On the oil price side, the OPEC announcementcame sufficiently late that we did not change the forecast that we hadbefore. So this $2 a barrel, roughly, further decline in the price ofoil is basically predicated on the assumption that the pressure thatis built on supply is coming from non-OPEC sources. It assumes, andthere is a lot if uncertainty in this area, that OPEC will be tryingto produce essentially in '86 what they produced this year in oilterms--16 million barrels a day. It's a little uncertain what theymean by fair market share in this context. If, contrary to thatassumption, we had them trying to produce more, then we would havemore oil price decline than we had built in. Because of the timing aswell the uncertainty we haven't put in an additional oil-price declinebecause of an interpretation of what OPEC did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own assumptions and uncertainties about OPEC's oil production, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 291.
MR. KICHLINE. On the risk side, I didn't mention that, but Ithink it is important. There are some arguments that this market maywell collapse by next spring. Some of the work we've done suggeststhat if you took, say, $5 off the price of oil and got closer to $20 abarrel, that's worth about 1/2 percent on the GNP deflator and addsalmost the same amount to real growth. So it is a major factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's viewpoint on the potential collapse of the market and the impact of oil prices on the GNP deflator and real growth.


Passage number 292.
MR. GUFFEY. What kind of impact would that have on ourtrading partners--Germany and Japan, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the potential impact on trading partners and mentions Germany and Japan as examples.


Passage number 293.
 Would that--MR. TRUMAN. On average, for the industrial countries you getabout the same impact. You'd have maybe a bit more positive impactfrom Japan and Germany, but you'd have an offset in Canada and the UKand those countries that are oil producers. So, on average, you wouldget about the same order of magnitude in those countries as a group asyou get in the United States with a $4 to $5 dollar [per barrel] cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the potential impact of a $4 to $5 dollar per barrel cut in oil prices on different countries.


Passage number 294.
MR. PARTEE. Jim, I understand there's going to be quite afull-scale revision on the GNP around the end of the year or earlynext year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating that there will be a revision on the GNP, without any discussion or disagreement between parties mentioned.


Passage number 295.
MR. KICHLINE. Friday morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is only providing information about a specific event happening on Friday morning and does not involve any sort of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 296.
MR. PARTEE. So, we're in fact going to be dealing withdifferent numbers next year. Now, that includes a rebasing thatchanges relative weights, doesn't it. My question to you would be,since it will be an issue, I believe: What kind of hazard would thechanges in weights and all that goes with rebasing present for theCommittee in making a projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the potential hazard of changes in weights and rebasing for the Committee in making a projection.


Passage number 297.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, this is going to be a massive revision.As you know, in many of these numbers significant changes will be made-30-12/16-17/85from 1959 to date. There are some definitional changes and they'vediscovered an error they've been making for the last 5 years thatinfluences something. These numbers will come out Friday. I thinkone of the areas that is important is the fact that on the oil priceside, when you rebase to 1982 oil gets a much lower weight. It hasmuch lower prices and a much lower weight. If you want to say thesenumbers would give you a deflationary impact, as of Friday they willgive you a smaller deflationary impact when you rebase. So, therewill be lots of things happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply explaining that there will be significant changes and revisions made to certain numbers, including an error that has been discovered. It also mentions a change in weight for oil prices when rebasing to 1982, which will have a smaller deflationary impact.


Passage number 298.
MR. PARTEE. It gives oil a lower weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee simply states that it gives oil a lower weight without any opposition or contradictory statement.


Passage number 299.
MR. KICHLINE. It will have a lower weight based on 1982dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing that something will have a lower weight based on 1982 dollars.


Passage number 300.
MR. PARTEE. Because the physical flow of oil has not done asmuch as other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the physical flow of oil has not been as effective as other factors.


Passage number 301.
MR. KICHLINE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a simple statement or response.


Passage number 302.
MR. PARTEE. I see. So you get less deflation because it isbased on '82 than you would by remaining with '72. Somebody told methat they thought it was going to moderate the growth rate throughoutthe period for some technical reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee, discussing the potential effects of using different base years for calculating deflation.


Passage number 303.
MR. KICHLINE. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 304.
MR. MORRIS. One reason, as I understand it, is that they hadbeen assuming that the price of computers has not changed over thisperiod. And they're substituting an assumption of a 10 percent peryear decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that one reason for disagreement is that some people have been assuming that the price of computers has remained constant, while others argue for a 10 percent per year decline in price.


Passage number 305.
MR. PARTEE. You'd think that would raise the growth rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 306.
MR. MORRIS. It's going to raise the growth rate[unintelligible]. And that's fairly significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris is making a statement about an expected increase in the growth rate, and there is no indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 307.
MR. PARTEE. But my understanding is that the whole effectwould be a moderated growth rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding about the effect of something, without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 308.
MR. STERN. There are a number of other changes beyond thatcomputer [change].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Stern is simply stating that there are additional changes beyond the computer change.


Passage number 309.
MR. MORRIS. What factors would moderate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about what factors could potentially moderate something.


Passage number 310.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know. I understand that it has to dowith the rebasing, fundamentally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their lack of knowledge or uncertainty about a particular topic, which does not involve disagreement.


Passage number 311.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, it is the rebasing. There are two thingsgoing on here. In the computer case it's not just that they aretrying to get an appropriate price index where they have arbitrarilyheld the price since 1982 to date at 100, but that they are going torebase from 1972 to 1982 and that effect will run in the otherdirection. So it's not clear to us at this moment how large an impactit will be. But you're quite correct; if you didn't rebase you'd havea substantial increase. There are other things going on, on theincome side in particular, where they have tried to account for someunderreporting of income. It's questionable at this point as to what-31-12/16-17/85impact that might have on the saving rate and other things. Butcertainly from what they have already published, in 1977 the savingrate is up about a percentage point from the now-reported numbers. Inany event, the world will be remade on the 23rd and will bear littlerelationship to what we're [seeing] now.SPEAKER(.). The 20th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kichline is simply explaining different aspects of the situation and acknowledging that the impact is not fully known yet. The speaker also seems to agree with the information presented.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Fortunately, we only have to look aheadinstead of back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is straightforward and does not express any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 313.
MR. MORRIS. Except, unfortunately, we don't know where weare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anyone want to comment on where weare and where we're going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for someone to share their thoughts or opinions on the current situation and future direction.


Passage number 315.
MR. MORRIS. I think events since the Group of 10 meetinghave been amazingly good in the sense that we have had a pretty sharpdecline in the dollar and that has been accompanied by a decline inlong-term interest rates. And that is the combination that must bedesired and I must say it's a little surprising. It seems to me thatwe're still rather vulnerable, despite this, to any loss of confidenceon the part of the foreign investors in the United States. I thinkit's quite impressive that, despite the size of the decline in thedollar, I haven't been able to detect any nervousness on the part offoreign investors in the United States. And that is a big plus forus. But I think we still have to be alert to the possibility thatthat kind of thinking could change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the decline in the dollar and long-term interest rates, as well as their impression that foreign investors in the United States have not shown any nervousness. The speaker also acknowledges the possibility of future changes in investor confidence.


Passage number 316.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot decide where to go on vacation.
Answer: No

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Black cannot decide where to go on vacation. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this statement.


Passage number 317.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I don't know where we are and Idon't know where we are going, but it didn't stop me from talkingbefore so I don't expect it to stop me this time. I think Jim and hisgroup have done a usually good job in dealing with a very difficultperiod. Their position is certainly plausible, particularly when youconsider Gramm-Rudman, but I think it's a little more likely that withthe kind of decline we've had in long rates, particularly mortgagerates, the surge in stock prices that Chuck mentioned awhile ago, thedecline in the dollar, the substantial recent growth in money andliquidity, and the prospects of further declines in oil prices, thatthe errors will be on the high side of their forecast rather than onthe low side. I just have to conclude that the economy has to respondat some time--I would think in the not too distant future--to thisconvergence of favorable factors. I don't have any great confidencein that view, but that's my best guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the position of Jim and his group is plausible, but shares their own opinion that the errors will be on the high side of the forecast. They also express uncertainty and lack of confidence in their own view.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 319.
MR. KEEHN. In terms of the Midwest perspective, our feelingsboth currently and prospectively are very much unchanged from theprevious meetings. As we look ahead we think the expansion willcontinue, albeit modestly and certainly unevenly. Therefore, ouroutlook is certainly consistent with the staff's forecast. Indeed,perhaps there is an opportunity for somewhat improved results nextyear as opposed to what the staff is suggesting, as the risk of comingin weaker is diminishing, I think.-32-12/16-17/85I have a couple of specific comments. I almost hate tomention it, but the agricultural situation does continue out there.And I think the situation is, if anything, more serious. The cropharvest is about completed, on normal schedule, but the production isgoing to be very significantly higher than last year. That willcontinue to put pressure on commodity prices, and I think we're in aperiod in which production loans are going to have to be paid off. Itwill be interesting to see how the production values come in relativeto the loans. There is also, of course, the issue of land values; therate of decline certainly is diminishing but values are down verysubstantially whereas the debt has not come down. So we have thisvery difficult gap between debt and land values, which has to be dealtwith. As a consequence of all this, I think the stress on theagricultural banks is continuing in a very significant way. Theircharge-offs this year are going to be substantially higher than wasthe case last year. A very significant number of them are going toshow losses this year as compared to last year. So the agriculturalproblem continues to be very important.My second comment is on the tax bill. I must say that thepeople I talk with say this continual uncertainty is extremelydifficult from a planning perspective. They just are having anawfully tough time figuring out what to do. There are a lot of peoplewho say cynically that a bad bill would be better than this continuinguncertainty that they are dealing with. Also, as kind of an editorialcomment: Those in the manufacturing sector do feel that the bill as ithas been proposed by the House is, at least from their point of view,a very bad bill.I think the most significant change that I've seen over thelast few weeks is related to this exchange value of the dollar. Theattitudinal change that I sense out there is just very important. Noone will say they got this deal or that deal because the value of thedollar is down; but everybody says it just is a much betterenvironment in which to at least negotiate. They'd like more. Interms of the yen, they would like 180 or 190. But most importantly,they are pleased with what has been accomplished and are very hopefulthat the rate will not go back up. The whole change of attitude basedon this I find very, very positive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

There is disagreement regarding the outlook for the Midwest perspective and the potential for improved results next year. Mr. Keehn suggests that there is an opportunity for improved results next year, while suggesting that the staff's forecast may be too pessimistic.

There is also contention regarding the tax bill. Mr. Keehn mentions that people in the manufacturing sector view the proposed bill as a very bad bill from their perspective.

Overall, while there may be some agreement in terms of the agricultural situation and the positive attitudes towards the exchange value of the dollar, there are clear areas of contention and disagreement expressed in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On this farm situation, I don't knowwhether you or anybody else had any comments, but we've had quite anincrease in agricultural prices from a very low level in the lastmonth or two months. Does that make anybody feel any better.MESSRS. KEEHN & GUFFEY. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the response "No" from Messrs. Keehn and Guffey, which suggests that the increased agricultural prices did not make them feel any better.


Passage number 321.
MR. KEEHN. The bankers are getting very afraid out there.Attitudes and emotions, particularly in Iowa, are getting very, veryfrayed. There have been some bad incidents. I don't think that isnecessarily symptomatic of the economic circumstances, but I don'tsense any improvement at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their observation and perception of the situation without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" is a proper noun that simply refers to a person's name, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 323.
 I wasn't thinking of the bankers so muchas whether anybody has any more hope for--MR. STERN. Well, if you're in the livestock business, Ithink attitudes really have improved. If you are in grain and barley12/16-17/85or corn and so forth, that's a different matter. Livestock people aremuch more optimistic. Jerry knows: Our livestock people areoptimistic almost all of the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different perspectives on the attitudes of people in different industries.


Passage number 324.
MR. MARTIN. They wouldn't be in the business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "They wouldn't be in the business" without a conflicting opinion or argument being presented.


Passage number 325.
MR. PARTEE. Well, the price changes mainly have been inlivestock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that price changes in livestock have been the main focus.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been by far the sharpest, indeed;but it's also significant in corn and wheat, though from a very lowlevel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about the sharpness and significance of something in relation to corn and wheat, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement presented.


Passage number 327.
MR. KEEHN. Still, comparatively, it's awfully low as you goback the last few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the low level they are discussing.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question that they are lowerin the longer-term perspective. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. It simply states a fact without presenting any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 329.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that as we enterthe fourth year, if that's what it is--if anyone can measure thebeginnings and ends of these expansions--the risk elements continue tobuild. The Chairman mentioned agriculture. There is some miraclekind of farm bill, which looks like it has made some progress, thatbegins to change the game a little--and perhaps in a positivedirection--with regard to world prices and targets and other pricesfrom the U.S. government. That bill would require a bit of change offormat by agricultural producers and traders in the commodity markets,if it passes in that way. I think that's characteristic of the exportarea on which we are depending for late-in-the-year support for theeconomy. What's different about that to me is the much more assertive--I won't say aggressive--stance and approach taken by Clayton Yeiderand by this administration. I am not criticizing that approach but itcomplicates the [effort to] increase U.S. exports in that there are[potential] retaliatory actions in Europe and elsewhere. I haven'tseen anything that really clearly lays out how in this assertive,almost adversarial, atmosphere we get that additional export help inthe GNP sense. Probably we will, but it seems to me that there is arisk when you approach these negotiations in a somewhat different way.As far as housing is concerned, I am usually the pessimist inthat area. I think the staff forecast in the housing area isreasonable at this time, but it is reasonable because of the monetarypolicy assumptions. A decrease of 125 to 150 basis points in rates isreally necessary if we are to get this more or less modestimprovement. There is a down side in this too, of course, in that asthe regulators put pressure on the originators and servicers ofmortgages, there is a risk that this plus in the GNP won't come aboutbecause the credit standards will be higher, because they won't beable to qualify the borrowers, and because there have to be morewrite-offs. They are getting to this talk about good banks and badbanks and splitting the mortgage originators into the goodinstitutions and the bad institutions. Well, that's another factor tocope with, another bit of uncertainty. Uncertainty means risks inthat area. The risk of a collapse in non-residential spending isobvious. We have gone over practically every molecule of that risk inour meetings here, and rightly so. There is a slight decrease, 0.7percent or something like that, in the model results here. And I-34-12/16-17/85understand that. Jim warned me that he built some other slow growthrates in there before and the markets raced on ahead. But there is arisk, isn't there, of a collapse--of a really sharp negative in thatarea. One could go on to examine the risks in the financialinstitutions; 113 banks have changed the name on the door. In mostcases, it's not a calamity, but the risk goes on. And banks reallyhaven't addressed the write-downs that they are going to have to dowith the Perus of the world, have they. Some have started, butrelative to banks in other countries and relative to so-called taxreform, now characterized as a revision treatment of the bad debtreserves, that certainly is a risk--in terms of facing that questionand in terms of bank credit growth (not off-balance-sheet but on-balance-sheet bank credit growth) and the funding of continuedeconomic growth. We are only talking about another four quarters ofaround 2 percent. We certainly have had enough quarters of around 2percent with the downside risk what it is. So what I want to stressthis morning is the need to keep in mind the monetary policyassumptions in this projection. I support the projection but I alsosupport the monetary policy assumptions, which go to a rather prompt--I almost said a bad word--a rather prompt accommodational posture andcarrying that on out for the balance of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, MR. MARTIN, expresses concern about various risks and uncertainties in the economy, such as the potential retaliatory actions in Europe and elsewhere due to changes in agricultural policies, the impact of stricter credit standards on housing, the risk of a collapse in non-residential spending, and the potential challenges facing financial institutions. However, MR. MARTIN also supports the monetary policy assumptions and the accommodational posture taken by the administration.


Passage number 330.
MR. PARTEE. Prompt accommodational.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. PARTEE. Prompt accommodational" does not involve any dispute or conflicting viewpoints. It appears to be an isolated response or statement without any context provided.


Passage number 331.
MR. MARTIN. Yes, I didn't want to say ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin simply agrees with something.


Passage number 332.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] 4 to 7 percent projectionin the long-term M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a projected percentage range without presenting any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 333.
MR. MARTIN. Well, I think that projection for M1 may be alittle on the low side, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is expressing his opinion about the projection for M1, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 334.
 Chairman, and given the interest rate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You like part of the monetary policyassumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker simply states the position of the Chairman and acknowledges the interest rate.


Passage number 335.
MR. MARTIN. I just noted that we get a 7-5/8 percent fundsrate pretty quickly and that it's at 6-1/2 percent by the end of theyear. It seems to me that's a vital part of making 2 percent growthnext year with all the downside risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the observations made by Mr. Martin.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The term "Governor Rice" does not provide enough context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 337.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, it appears to me that we aredepending on the modest growth in employment, some pickup in housing,and favorable consumer attitudes to get us to a moderate 2 percentrate of growth over 1986. If we look at the uncertainties in theforecast, particularly the uncertainties with regard to consumercapacities to continue spending, and if we also take account of ourexpectations that there will be some movement toward fiscal restraint,it seems to me that the risks to the forecast are on the down side.Now, obviously, some very good things have happened. In very generalterms, interest rates have come down and the dollar has come down.But when you try to evaluate what the impact of these generallyfavorable developments would be on specific sectors, it's very hard tosee how this is going to get us more growth than is forecast for 1986.So, far from seeing the risks on the up side as Bob does, I see themrather on the down side. So to me, the main question that is raisedis whether a moderate 2 percent rate of growth for 1986 is acceptable,-35-12/16-17/85all things considered, in the current circumstances, particularly inlight of the inflation outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage as Mr. Rice disagrees with the view that the risks to the forecast are on the up side and instead believes they are on the down side. He also raises the question of whether a 2 percent rate of growth is acceptable in the current circumstances.


Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which is what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only includes a fragment of a sentence with no clear context or information to indicate any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 339.
MR. RICE. Well, it's less than 4 percent. That's theoutlook, and it could be [less]. Most of the considerationssurrounding that would suggest that, if anything, it would be morelikely to be lower rather than higher. There are oil pricepossibilities. So, I would say that the inflation outlook is rathermore favorable than unfavorable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is stating that the inflation outlook is more likely to be lower rather than higher, and he believes it is more favorable than unfavorable. There is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 340.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 341.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, form the perspective of theSixth District, things are looking considerably better than they did amonth ago. We have had a very sharp decline in unemployment--from alittle over 8 percent to about 7.3 percent--and even the employment inmanufacturing, textiles, and apparel has tended to stabilize. Thetextile and apparel people, as well as some manufacturers, even haveseen some increases in their orders over the last month. This is notreducing the protectionist sentiment, I might say. They are notreally attributing this [improvement] to a fall in the dollar,although they recognize that there might be some of that. But theyare still looking for protectionist measures like the Jenkins bill tomake some fundamental changes in their situation. Constructioncontinues to be very good in most areas. To be sure, we have weakspots in the District, such as Louisiana, but construction in moststates is doing pretty well. Retail sales have been very, very good,particularly in the post-Thanksgiving period. And from animpressionistic point of view the business people that I talked toreally are exhibiting a good deal of confidence about 1986. Theythink that growth is going to be not marvelous, but fairly moderate,and perhaps a little better than in 1985. People I talked to, likethose Si Keehn mentioned, are very discouraged about the tax bill.They would like it either to be passed or to be taken off the table sothat they can make their plans. If the bill is revived, as perhaps itmight be, that is going to cause additional uncertainty, and I thinkthat business people might very well defer some business decisions in1986, which might be a negative for the economy.So, extrapolating from that kind of local experience, itwould seem to me that maybe the risk is slightly on the up side. Iwould think that the effect of interest rates would perhaps be more ofa stimulus to the economy, notwithstanding Gramm-Rudman, than in theBoard staff's forecast. So I continue to look for a little strongereconomy, perhaps somewhere in the area of 2-1/2 to 3 percent for GNP.I guess the difference between my forecast and the Board staff'sforecast is not so much in the numbers. Rather, it's in my feelingthat I can accept the 2-1/2 to 3 percent growth rate, while the Boardstaff's forecast would be unacceptable. If they're right, I thinkthat perhaps the time has come to make some move to bring that up alittle. But again, I believe we are probably going to see 2-1/2 to 3percent growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, disagrees with the forecast of the Board staff and believes that the growth rate will be higher than their forecast of 2-1/2 to 3 percent. He also disagrees with their assessment of the impact of interest rates and believes that they will have more of a stimulus to the economy.


Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 343.
-36-12/16-17/85MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, the economy in Texas and inthe Eleventh District has continued to grow at a sluggish pace.That's due in large part to a further deterioration in the energysector. For example, the rig count is at its lowest level in tenyears. The District's construction activity in 1985 has shown morerapid growth than that for the nation as a whole, but thatrelationship is expected to flip-flop in the year ahead. Even thegrowth of the service sector is like that of the nation, and noturnaround is in sight. Both the economy and the economic mood havecontinued to deteriorate, and I am hard pressed to find any sources ofpotential optimism. In short, the District's economic problems arepervasive and extend far beyond those attributable to the energysector.Having said that about the Eleventh District, our view of theeconomy as a whole for next year is that we would anticipate probablya little better year than we had in 1985. Our GNP number probablywould be closer to 3 percent than to 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the economy in the Eleventh District is growing at a sluggish pace and that there is no turnaround in sight for the service sector. However, they also mention that the construction activity in 1985 showed more rapid growth than the national average. This contradicts their previous statement and suggests some disagreement or inconsistency in their perspective.


Passage number 344.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 345.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just looking at forecasts--for whatthey are worth, which is probably not a lot--our forecast for 1986 isone that has GNP in real terms growing at about 3 percent or a shademore. In that sense, it looks more like the consensus of privateforecasts than it does the Board staff's forecast. There is anotherimportant difference in that our forecast basically assumes thatshort-term interest rates are unchanged from roughly where they aretoday rather than having a decline already built in. But likeGovernor Rice, I don't have a lot of conviction about that forecastbecause when you go through sector by sector it's hard to findconcrete evidence that would suggest that there is any real marginalgrowth on the up side, and there are the risks on the down side. Weare at a point, in my judgment, where we have 3 or 4 very, very majorfactors that transcend the sectors. I am not sure anybody has reallydigested these factors, and I am not sure one can. One is the declinewe have seen in the foreign exchange rate itself. I think we had somesurprises on the up side of that phenomenon and I think one couldargue that we may get more bang out of that than is being allowed forin the conventional kind of forecast. Just as one example: If the so-called Baker plan works as designed, that in itself could end upfinancing a very [robust] increase in import growth in the developingcountries and Latin America, and we would be presumably the majorbeneficiaries of it. But leaving aside that particular aspect of it,I think that one at least has to allow for the possibility that we mayget a little more help there than we are counting on.The second area that seems to me to transcend individualsectors is this recent run-up in stock and bond prices. I can make acase that if those gains are roughly sustainable, they could veryeasily provide more of a kick to the economy than the quarter pointthat Jim mentioned, particularly when you recognize how late in thisyear a major part of that gain, particularly in the stock market, hasoccurred. Of course, the big question is sustainability. I think onecould argue that there is some danger, especially in the stock market,that it already has overshot the mark in some fundamental sense, inwhich case what looks like it could be a plus for the economy rightnow could turn out to be a minus. I also think that there is at least-37-12/16-17/85a good chance that we do not really know how to build the oil price,and more generally commodity prices, into an economic forecast--especially the oil price implications. We don't know what will happento the oil price. That too strikes me as a variable that could have alarger effect than is being allowed for now, simply because nobody hasa way to take account of it. I think the fiscal situation nowpresents some real uncertainties: the combination of Gramm-Rudman,whatever it turns out to be, and the tax bill. Again, if you look atthem in a rather conventional way, I think one is powerfully drawn tothe conclusion that if they play out as scheduled, their effects onthe economy--at least in the timeframe of 1986-1987--are going to beto reduce growth, net, and possibly even to increase prices a little.But, again, I don't think we know enough about what in fact willhappen; we certainly don't have a good fix on the kinds ofanticipatory behavior, both in the market and in spending decisions,that have already been built into the equations so to speak.And finally, there is this whole money and credit problemthat we talked about yesterday. As I mentioned yesterday, when youmake what seem to me to be some reasonable assumptions aboutdefinitions and so on, I think you have to come to the conclusion thatmoney and credit, however defined, have been growing very, veryrapidly--whether you look at that in terms of debt accumulation or anyway you slice it up. Now what does that mean. As a number of people,including myself, suggested yesterday, you can argue that velocitytrends have changed. Nevertheless, even if you make that argument,that phenomenon still sits there and it has to be something of aconcern. So, back to the question of a forecast: As I said, ours is 3percent or so; but I don't think we can quite capture the dynamics ofthis situation we face simply by looking sector by sector, because Ithink these four of five things I have mentioned transcend that. Andit's not clear to me how they're going to play out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions several factors that could have a significant impact on the economy, but acknowledges that there is uncertainty and lacks conviction about how these factors will play out. This suggests a lack of agreement or consensus on the potential outcomes.


Passage number 346.
MR. MARTIN. Just a factual question, Jim. Is DRI stillsticking to a 1.9 projection of GNP for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for factual information.


Passage number 347.
MR. KICHLINE. I think that's the latest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement or response without any conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 348.
MR. PRELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 349.
MR. RICE. Jerry, do you expect the Baker initiative to havean important impact before the end of 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question asked is a straightforward inquiry about someone's expectations regarding the impact of the Baker initiative before the end of 1986.


Passage number 350.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's asking a lot. As Isaid, we have gone through the numbers and if everything panned outreasonably well over the three-year period as a whole, it couldsupport a very, very robust increase in imports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 351.
MR. RICE. I would agree with that. I just wouldn't expectto feel the impact before the end of 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses agreement, with Mr. Rice stating that he agrees with a previous statement.


Passage number 352.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We won't get that much, but we couldget some. And when you take into account Mr. Keehn's comments aboutsome of the anecdotal responses he picked up in terms of changes inthe foreign exchange rate, there may be a little more there. I'm notprojecting a humongous swing in the trade account in the firstquarter, but there could be a little more there than the conventionalwisdom is allowing for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a possibility of there being more in the trade account than what is typically expected, but it does not contradict or challenge any previous statements or ideas.


Passage number 353.
12/16-17/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage just mentions a date (12/16-17/85) and the name "Mr. Guffey" without providing any further context or information that would indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 354.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to thestaff's forecast, it has been fairly well detailed that there isuncertainty on either side that could affect that forecast, and as aresult the forecast seems to be quite reasonable. The news from theTenth District is [no] better than it has been before. Indeed, theoutlook is dominated by the problems in agriculture and energy and thenow-surfacing real estate problems that are fairly well known inDenver, Oklahoma City, and some of the other larger metropolitanareas. If you talk to individuals in the various areas, you will findmixed comments if they are not dominated by the agricultural andenergy [industries]. If they are in the urban areas, they thinkthings are going very well. But overall, I think the attitude is morenegative than positive. There is great uncertainty about the retailsales in the Christmas season, simply because we have had very coldweather that started right at the Thanksgiving holiday and it'suncertain whether or not there is enough time left to have goodChristmas sales.Having in mind that the staff forecast may be as good as anyother, and looking ahead to 1986--with 2 percent growth, a fairly highunemployment rate of 7.3 percent at year-end, inflation being down orin check if you will, and the hope that it will be even less than theforecast because there are no decreases in energy prices built intothat forecast, as I understand it, and with capacity utilizationprojected to be at fairly low levels--I think it would be unacceptablein even the fourth year of recovery that we should be concerned aboutan upside risk, frankly. I would like to see something greater than 2percent; something in the 3 to 4 percent range would be quiteacceptable. And to the extent that monetary policy has a part toplay, particularly against the background of some, albeit imperfect,deficit reduction package out of Gramm-Rudman, I think we ought to beon the side of doing what we can do; and that in my view is to bringabout somewhat lower interest rates fairly quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but the passage you provided is incomplete. Can you please provide the complete passage?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 356.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think the Philadelphia District is astronger area--particularly in New Jersey, Delaware and thePhiladelphia part of Pennsylvania--than many other parts of thecountry. There are still many depressed areas in other parts ofPennsylvania, but I think the District generally is doing better thanthe rest of the country.As far as the national economy is concerned, we are talkingabout roughly 2-1/2 percent real growth, give or take a little, and Ithink that's a reasonable forecast. One can make a case that it willbe somewhat stronger or somewhat weaker depending on the dynamics thattake place. But I ask myself this question: Is 2-1/2 percentsatisfactory. I don't think 2-1/2 percent is satisfactory. Supposethe dynamics lead us to 3 or 3-1/2 or even 4 percent. I think thatwould make me happy. I think it would move the economy in the rightdirection: it would help us get around some of these financialproblems. So, if we erred in that direction, I think it would be aplus. On the other hand, suppose we erred in the other direction.Suppose we end up with 2 or 1-1/2 or 1 percent. I think that wouldbring forth a number of negatives in the economy. So, even though it-39-12/16-17/85is a good forecast, and I think that the risks are probably about evenas to whether it will be up or down from that, I would much prefer ifI could do it to be on the high side, at about 2-1/2 percent. Andthat has some implications for monetary policy, which I think areappropriately dealt with later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses a preference for a higher rate of economic growth (3-4 percent) rather than the forecasted 2-1/2 percent. This indicates a disagreement with the current projected growth rate.


Passage number 357.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 358.
MS. HORN. We had some events in our District recently thatmight have some implications for the investment outlook. We have hadan unusual number of write-offs of properties in some of ourindustries. Olgivie Norton wrote off a major part of its iron oreassets. Sohio wrote off major amounts in both copper and Carborundum.There are some big write-offs from U.S. Steel as well. If one were togeneralize from these few situations, I suppose one could say that inbasic industries and in basic materials within those industries wehave a situation that would not be consistent with investment strengthnext year. That also goes along with my view of the investmentoutlook for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply presents some recent events and the speaker's interpretation of those events.


Passage number 359.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Griffith.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 360.
MR. GRIFFITH. The Twelfth District staff forecasts a 3percent GNP growth, but I would note that some of the assumptions usedin that have been described this morning as fragile. In our forecastwe give a lot more credit to the depreciation of the dollar as [afactor stimulating] the trade account next year--a $15 billionimprovement versus, I think, the Board staff's $6 billion. We assumethat there in fact will be a 50 to 70 basis point decline in thecommercial paper rate. But most importantly, thinking back to someearlier comments, we assume that whatever reduction of interest ratesoccurs will be front-loaded--that it will have to occur in the firstpart of the year to achieve any of this growth. And, although lessimportant, another assumption made in our staff forecast is that theprice of oil will get to a low of $21.50 by year-end 1986.As far as the Twelfth District is concerned, it is relativelyunchanged from our report last time. Unemployment is staying around7.6 percent and we are continuing to experience significant[weakness], as you are well aware, in the wood products sector as wellas in electronics, semi-conductors, and agriculture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Griffith is presenting his district's forecast and explaining the assumptions they have made, but there is no clear indication of disagreement with other forecasts or arguments.


Passage number 361.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Additional information is needed.


Passage number 362.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's extraordinarily difficult to have aforecast of the economy at this time. I could see the economy beingstronger or weaker than the staff projection. I really don't have anyidea how it is going to turn out. In a situation like that, I thinkit's best to look at the forces--as Frank did and as Jerry talkedabout--without line-by-line projections, to see which way thesevarious forces are moving. I am very impressed by two assumptions.One is that the decline in the dollar that we have had, which seems tobe extremely satisfactory, has to be for the good as 1986 goes on. Idon't want to put a number on it, as you just did, because I thinkit's awfully hard to say. We have so little experience to [help us]know what responses in buying patterns will occur with changes in theexchange rate. And I am impressed by Pres' comment that there is amore bellicose attitude in the foreign trade [arena] by us and others-40-12/16-17/85than there has been before, so that in fact we might not get the fulleffect [of the dollar decline]. But it is certainly to the good.Also, both the decline in long-term interest rates and the rise instock prices, which I never really dreamed would occur in the lastmonth, are desirable outcomes from the standpoint of increasingconfidence and reducing to some degree the debt service burden that'sinvolved in our very, very heavy debt load. So, those are both quitefavorable developments; I agree with Frank on that.I think there is a heaviness in the economy that is probablydue to uncertainty and the fact that it's getting to be a pretty oldexpansion now and there is not much momentum that anybody can see inplant and equipment that would carry this expansion any appreciabledegree upward in the period to come. And there is this housingsituation, which I think is quite extraordinary. I really thoughtlast month's housing start number was the right number and that theprevious number had been too low. Now, with November, we are backwhere we were with the previous number. Something is apparently goingon there that is making that sector less responsive to changes ininterest rates than it historically has been. I also think thatregardless of whether we get tax reform or not next year there isgoing to be a letdown in the economy, because I believe a lot ofthings have gone on--particularly in the second half of this year--inanticipation of some tax action next year, which won't be worth thecandle once we get beyond 1985. So, whether or not there is taxreform, the incentive to spend or to speed up spending commitments inthe hopes of getting out of the increased taxation has alreadyoccurred and there will be a letdown. I conclude, as I did last time,pretty much as Ed Boehne did: that it doesn't look like very muchgrowth in the economy next year. I am not sure whether it's 1 or 2 orpossibly 3 percent, but it doesn't look like very much. So, anyerring should be on the side of ease, I think, in order to try toencourage a little more expansion in the economy if we can get it. Iam particularly impressed that there hasn't been that much movement inshort rates as the whole rest of the structure has adjusted downward.So I think it is probably time to [lend] a little helping hand and goon down a notch in short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges various uncertainties in the economy and agrees with the positive developments mentioned by others. They also express their belief that there may not be much growth in the economy next year and suggest easing short-term rates to encourage expansion.


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 364.
MR. MELZER. First, on Jerry's comments about the responsesto the lower dollar: I think I mentioned last time that I talked to amajor national retailer based in our area about price responses, and Ihad an opportunity to ask that question again just a week or so ago.In terms of textiles and apparel, in particular, what they are beingtold in Japan is that unless they are prepared to pay price increasesof 10 to 15 percent on those goods, delivery can't really be assured.Now, that's not at all the case in areas such as electronics wherethere is a lot more softness in the markets; but I think we could seesome relatively rapid responses both in terms of shifting businessactivity and prices as a result of that. The second comment is that,particularly in view of the response in the long-term bond market toGramm-Rudman, I was somewhat intrigued a couple of weeks ago with theidea of that somehow providing some room for more accommodation on thepart of the Fed. But I guess I would have to say I am from Missourion that: I would have to be shown. I think that the amount of actualreduction we could get in fiscal 1986, as reflected in Jim's forecast,is next to negligible. And who knows what conditions--in terms of new12/16-17/85legislation or an outlook for a recession or whatever--might interferewith it down the road. So, I think it's very positive that it has hadthe effect of apparently reducing inflationary expectations amongstlong-term bond holders. But I guess I would say that moreaccommodation on the part of the Fed could actually run counter tothat trend, particularly against the background of what some mightview as an already very accommodative policy. So I think it'simportant that we not interfere, in a sense, with the process of thatreduction in long-term inflationary expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 365.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Seger without providing any context or information that could suggest disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 366.
MS. SEGER. Well, I think the economy has grown too slowly in1985. I went back and looked at the information we put out at thetime of the February Humphrey-Hawkins meeting and the July Humphrey-Hawkins meeting. Looking at the central tendencies that we published[in February] for real GNP growth for 1985, we had 3-1/2 to 4 percent.So it looks as if there are some other people who must be disappointedalso in the performance. By July we had cut it back to 2-3/4 to 3percent, but again that's above what we actually seem to be achievingfor this year. Then I look at 1986 and the staff forecast of arousing 2.1 percent growth rate and again compare that to the centraltendency for 1986 as published in the July Humphrey-Hawkins Report.That was 2-1/2 to 3-1/4 percent. So again, it seems to me that we arerunning short of a number of our expectations. I guess what concernsme is that even to get this 2.1 percent in 1986 we have to assumeadditional monetary ease, a significant decline in interest rates.And we also assume--I think I heard Jim say--that about half of theimprovement in real GNP next year will come from net exports. Thatmeans to me, anyway, that we will need further declines in the dollar.We all have our pet samples of people we talk to, and the group that Icheck my ideas with suggests that they have noticed the decline thathas taken place, but they are not going to be in pig heaven withoutstill further declines. I am also concerned about the impact that thetax reform proposals are having on the economy. I think it hascreated a lot of uncertainties and I am afraid, as Chuck said, that atsome point the activities that had been based on beating the taxreforms in certain areas are going to evaporate and that will yank therug out from under certain sectors of the economy. So having said allthis, what I would like to propose is that we get going with thisadditional monetary ease and that we try to get interest rates movingdown, in line with what the staff forecast is assuming. I would liketo suggest that one reason why short rates haven't come down is thatthe discount rate is preventing them from moving down. That's justlike an anchor, and I would hint that a one half percentage point cutin the discount rate would do great things to move a number of short-term rates down, including the prime rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger expresses her belief that the economy has grown too slowly in 1985 and that their predictions for growth have not been met. She is concerned about the impact of tax reform and suggests additional monetary ease to lower interest rates.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else who wants to be heard from.Why don't we get Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply proposes the idea of hearing from Mr. Axilrod, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 368.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual statement in the appendix.


Passage number 369.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without being able to understand the content. Please provide a comprehensible passage for analysis.


Passage number 370.
]MR. BOEHNE. May we ask some technical questions or are wegoing to break. Our borrowing assumptions are a little complicated bythe air of uncertainty that hangs over the table concerning the-42-12/16-17/85discount rate. I am trying to get [it straight] in my own mind.Suppose we had a discount rate of 7 percent versus the currentdiscount rate of 7-1/2 percent. What in your judgment are theequivalent borrowing and discount rate assumptions in terms of theirmoney market effects. In other words, is a $200 million borrowingassumption with a 7-1/2 percent discount rate roughly the equivalentof a $400 million borrowing assumption and a 7 percent discount rate.Or how does one trade that off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking technical questions related to borrowing assumptions and discount rates.


Passage number 371.
MR. AXILROD. With a $400 million borrowing assumption, undercurrent discount rates--I would not put too fine a point on it--itwould take a funds rate somewhere on the order of 7-7/8 percent or atick higher, something like that. So that's just [over] the discountrate. And at least in my judgment, the funds rate has not reflectedexpectations of a discount rate cut to any significant degree yet inthe sense that other market rates have. I'd expect that if thediscount rate were 7 percent, the funds rate would be almost, but notquite, half a point lower than that 7-7/8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their judgment and expectation regarding the relationship between the discount rate and the funds rate.


Passage number 372.
MR. BOEHNE. At what borrowing levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a question, and it does not express any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 373.
MR. AXILROD. Given the same borrowing. It's hard to say,but I would put it at 7-3/8 or 7-1/2 percent--in that range. I deferto Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod states his opinion on the borrowing rate and defers to Mr. Sternlight, indicating agreement or willingness to defer to his expertise.


Passage number 374.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think you are right. I think that ahalf percentage point move on the discount rate would bring funds downabout that same half percentage point. It could be a little lessbecause maybe a move has been discounted to a tiny degree. But if itset expectations going of things being on the easy side, you could getthat full half point on the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is agreeing with the other person's statement.


Passage number 375.
MR. BOEHNE. And that's with borrowing at the current level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is simply stating a fact about borrowing at the current level.


Passage number 376.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think $400 million is a little moreassured of getting a rate under 8 percent now than $450 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is expressing his personal opinion that $400 million is more likely to receive a rate under 8 percent compared to $450 million.


Passage number 377.
MR. BOEHNE. And if we have alternative A as presented in theBluebook, assuming a 7-1/2 percent discount rate, that would give afunds rate of what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the potential outcome of using alternative A and a 7-1/2 percent discount rate.


Passage number 378.
MR. AXILROD. I would think very close to 7 percent, if themarket sensed there was an easing. No, I mean right around 7-1/2percent--roughly equivalent [to the discount rate]. I don't thinkthat you can ease bank reserve positions without setting upconsiderable expectations on the discount rate. I am not sure wherebut I think the interaction would drive rates down; it could drive thefunds rate pretty sharply at first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion about the potential impact of easing bank reserve positions on interest rates.


Passage number 379.
MR. GUFFEY. If I can just follow on that question a minute.If we were to take "A" without a discount rate decrease and we got a7-1/2 percent funds rate with $200 to $250 million in borrowing asprojected in the Bluebook and then we had a discount rate decrease,that would be a double whammy if you will, and the rate would get downto 7-1/4 to 7-3/8 percent, I assume. Is that--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement followed by a question asking for confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 380.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I would think it would get down. If thediscount rate were reduced to 7 percent--depending on the timing and12/16-17/85direction of these--you would get the fed funds rate pretty much downfrom the discount rate. You would get not the minimal but close tothe minimal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their perspective on the potential effect of reducing the discount rate on the fed funds rate.


Passage number 381.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think if you went for something like $200million, the easier reserve conditions, there would be such a strongexpectation of the discount rate following that you would get thatvery strong expectational effect. And you could tend to get fundseven below 7-1/2 percent before the discount rate moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's opinion and speculation about the potential effect of certain conditions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 382.
MR. GUFFEY. And then a full half point after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The phrase "And then a full half point after that" suggests that there is a disagreement or difference of opinion between the speaker (Mr. Guffey) and someone else. The phrase implies that Mr. Guffey's perspective or proposed point is not fully supported or agreed upon by the other person.


Passage number 383.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, close to the half point after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight seems to be making a statement or giving information.


Passage number 384.
MR. AXILROD. In that context, President Guffey, it might beuseful to add that a combination like that--again, depending on howit's done--would have, in my view anyhow, a rather powerful effect onexchange rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It mentions an opinion held by Mr. Axilrod about the possible effects of a certain combination on exchange rates.


Passage number 385.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, the practical alternatives would be "A"with a discount rate change or "B" without a discount rate change, Iguess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only presents two alternatives without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 386.
 No, "A" without a discount rate--MR. PARTEE. No, "A" without a discount rate change, or "B"with one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that both option "A" without a discount rate change and option "B" with a discount rate change should be considered.


Passage number 387.
MR. GUFFEY. If you have "A" without, you would set in motionexpectations that [a discount rate move] would be forthcoming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is making a statement about the potential consequences of a certain action.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll go eat a donut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "We'll go eat a donut." It expresses a plan or intention without any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 389.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, indeed, we have to arrive at alittle decision here. I listened very carefully to what you all saidthis morning. I'm not sure it eliminated all the confusion that mightexist or the differences in views around the table. I must say Ithink we're in a rather strange situation historically: Three years ofexpansion and nobody's very happy. The economy, from one point ofview, seems to be stumbling a bit. There is not a very good growthtrend in the gross national product, but I remind you that theunemployment rate has been trending down very slightly and not up.When we look at those gross national product figures it mesmerizes us.I put it in the perspective that unemployment has been edging down andnot up. Our productivity has been rather dismal. When I look at whatwe're doing in terms of stimulus or spending it's pretty good. Grossdomestic purchases for the last three quarters have risen 3.9, 3.2,and 5.3 percent. Domestic final purchases have risen 4.1, 6.4, and4.1 percent--not exactly an economy that is starved on the spendingside. We have a decline in the trade balance, which arithmeticallyaccounts for the low gross national product. There is a lot ofspeculation about whether that's going to be changing or not or towhat degree. I guess nobody knows. There seems to be a consensusthat it is not going to continue to get worse. One question is howfast the economy should be growing. I don't think I know the answerto that, but I would express a little skepticism, given theproductivity performance, that a 4 percent rate is sustainable for allthat long without creating inflationary problems. Maybe the higher-44-12/16-17/85growth will help the productivity, but I don't know how much. Itshould help it in manufacturing [unintelligible] but manufacturing isfar from the whole of the economy. [Unintelligible] expansion in therest of the economy and no productivity growth; I guess it'spractically zero outside the manufacturing area. Is that right, Mr.Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly a general discussion about the state of the economy and the speaker's thoughts on it.


Passage number 390.
MR. KICHLINE. For the current quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in this passage. It is likely a statement made by Mr. Kichline about the current quarter.


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, for the past year or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact or situation without expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 392.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This is evident from Mr. Kichline's response, indicating that there is disagreement or opposition present.


Passage number 393.
MR. PARTEE. Zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement provided by "Mr. Party" does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints, but simply mentions the number "zero."


Passage number 394.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's 2/10ths or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement given does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement of a measurement or fraction.


Passage number 395.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It may even be negative outsidemanufacturing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that it may be negative outside of the manufacturing industry.


Passage number 396.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It isn't high, whatever it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that expresses uncertainty or lack of knowledge about the height of something.


Passage number 397.
MR. KICHLINE. It's 1/10th in our forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a factual statement about the forecast, without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 398.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that for the whole economy or just--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the scope of something without presenting any conflicting opinions or contradictory information.


Passage number 399.
MR. KICHLINE. No, the nonfarm business sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kichline.


Passage number 400.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So even with the increase--. So it'sminus outside of manufacturing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It seems to be presenting information without any conflicting opinions or ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 401.
MR. PRELL. You can't really couple the two series thatdirectly, but it sort of looks that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker states that it is not possible to directly couple the two series, but also suggests that they appear to be related. This contradiction indicates some level of disagreement or uncertainty.


Passage number 402.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The total is zero and manufacturing is up;it must look that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states two facts: the total is zero and manufacturing is up.


Passage number 403.
MR. PRELL. But it's a different statistical basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple statement of fact and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Well, maybe so" simply indicates uncertainty or a possibility, but it doesn't imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 405.
MR. PARTEE. You don't measure output properly in trade andservices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 407.
 Well, that may be right too, but--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Or input.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "but" suggests a disagreement or alternative viewpoint to the previous statement.


Passage number 408.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --it isn't very good. And we sit heredebating whether to ease some more. In a way, that's not anuncomfortable position to be in. Usually 3 years after an expansionwe worry about how much to tighten because we don't see any capacityout there and unemployment is too low, or appears to be too low, or weget inflationary pressures. None of those things exists. It's notthe worst situation in the world. On the external side, I feel alittle better about Europe. I might foresee a little faster growththere, or at least it's tending toward the more optimistic side; butit's certainly the reverse in Japan, where things look kind of sour.-45-12/16-17/85Everything that has happened recently makes the Japanese economy lookless favorable. We have a lot of problems in particular sectors ofthe economy. You all know that. We have problems with the LDC debt.None of these problems is going to be cured by easy money, but all ofthem might be assisted at the margin by an easing in money.The greatest dichotomy is [monetary growth]. I jumped when Isaw this Bluebook and the list on monetary and credit growth. If youlook at the November figures, we're talking about: M1, up 13 percent;M2 and M3 rather moderate; domestic debt, up 16 percent; bank credit,up 16 percent; total reserves, up 20 percent; the monetary base, up 10percent. If you just looked at those figures and you came from Marsyou'd say "Geez, it's mildly expansionary." If you look at the bondmarkets, we have had a rally of--I don't know whether it's of recordproportions, but it couldn't be going more nicely in terms of lowerinterest rates in that market; [the lower rates] may not affect muchexcept U.S. Treasury borrowing costs and the mortgage market. Just asidelight on this housing start figure: I heard a hypothesis from somemajor homebuilders of small houses who were in town about a month orsix weeks ago. They said sales went dead in October, and we may beseeing some reflections of that in this current housing start figure.Why did they go dead. Well, they didn't fully understand it, but partof their reasoning was that people bought so many cars in August andSeptember that they couldn't afford the downpayment on a new house.That was one reason. Another reason was that mortgage rates at thattime were going down and everybody was anticipating further declines,and nobody wanted to go house hunting until they saw how much furthermortgage rates were going to go down. They said if that was thereason, it was a pretty good forecast on the part of those potentialhome buyers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is primarily discussing the current economic situation and potential factors affecting it.


Passage number 409.
 I don't know whether--MR. MARTIN. Maybe that's their only floating rate. That'snot so difficult to counter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a possibility or alternative explanation.


Passage number 410.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: passage? You did not provide a passage to analyze.


Passage number 411.
MR. MARTIN. You sell and close at whatever rate is then thelower rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about selling and closing at the lower rate.


Passage number 412.
MS. SEGER. You put them in ARMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or fact made by MS. SEGER.


Passage number 413.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need more context or the complete passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement in it.


Passage number 414.
 [Unintelligible] in today's technical--MR. PARTEE. It's typically done, isn't it, Pres.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 415.
MR. MARTIN. Three or four months from now [unintelligible].I don't think they gave you a very good reason, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as Mr. Martin is simply expressing his opinion about the reason given to Paul.


Passage number 416.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't know. It's the differencebetween seeing the bird in the hand and saying how you feel. If myforecast is so correct I'm going to [unintelligible]. With respect towhy sales should go dead in October followed by [unintelligible] thebuilders apparently concluded that.In any event, we have this situation where interest rates aregoing down very rapidly in the long-term markets and the stock marketis going up at the same time. It's a rather strange--well, maybe it'snot a strange combination--but it's kind of strange when you put into-46-12/16-17/85it that gold prices and silver prices are going down at the same time.Leading indicators have been up for a while. It is a situation thatdoes not give me a great sense of urgency about the necessity to makedrastic moves in policy at this stage, unless this clarifies itselfone way or the other. The only other point I would make is that interms of overt moves, and given the risks on the dollar side, I thinkit would be important to try and get some coordination with ourtrading partners. I'm not sure how easy that is or how difficult. Itmay be easier with some than with others at this stage, but that wouldneed a little exploration. I don't hear anybody talking about anytightening. I presume the center of gravity is toward some easing sowe can get these money and credit figures really moving. [Laughter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their thoughts and observations about various economic factors.


Passage number 417.
]MR. RICE. They're perverse; they might turn around the otherway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing a possibility or suggestion, rather than a disagreement or argument.


Passage number 418.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear passage provided to analyze for contention or disagreement. Therefore, the answer is N/A.


Passage number 419.
MR. RICE. We tighten, then they move up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple observation about a series of actions.


Passage number 420.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, who would like to say something. Mr.Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for someone to speak up.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 421.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, if ours were a closedeconomy, I would support some lowering of interest rates at themoment. The forecast may be reasonable, but I don't think it'sacceptable as a good target. I would share your concern about a 4percent pattern of real growth, but it seems to me that 2 percent isnot acceptable as a target; 3 percent would be more in line with whatI think we ought to shoot for. But we're not a closed economy. Wehave overhanging us a necessity to continue to finance a $140 billioncurrent account deficit. So we have to keep in mind what the gnomesof Zurich are thinking about us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with the idea of lowering interest rates at the moment and disagrees with the idea of setting a 2 percent growth target. He suggests that a 3 percent growth target would be more appropriate.


Passage number 422.
 I hate to alarm, I hate torecognize--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All of us have a little gnome in the backof our heads.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a personal opinion or observation rather than presenting a conflicting idea or argument.


Passage number 423.
MR. MORRIS. I think the gnomes would look at our situationand would say: "Well, the dollar is going down; the economic news ismixed but certainly not weak; and the perception is that monetarypolicy is very accommodative." What we actually have in the monetarynumbers is a split decision: M1 and debt suggest a very expansionarypolicy; M2, M3, and total liquid assets suggest a moderate policy. Ifwe could arrange to publish an M3 figure weekly and only publish M1once a month, I think that people looking at the M3 numbers weeklywould get a perception that U.S. monetary policy is not terriblyaccommodative and that might be helpful to us. But it seems to me inthis situation that we ought to stick to a status quo policy until weget a trigger that will permit us to lower interest rates. Onetrigger would be a sustained upward turn in the dollar in the exchangemarkets. The gnomes, I think, would find it acceptable if we were tocheck that with a decline in short-term money rates. The othertrigger might be a serious weakening in the economic news, which Idon't think is terribly likely; I think we'll float along in thiscontinued mixed situation without any serious weakness. I'm notthinking of that as a very great trigger. And the third trigger wouldbe if the monetary aggregates, and particularly M1 because of it's-47-12/16-17/85signal value, should start coming in on the weak side. So until then,it seems to me that it's a little hazardous for us [to ease]; I don'tthink we can really make a very strong case that a move at this timeis compatible with continued emphasis on inflation control. So, Ithink we ought to go with alternative B. But there's a long timeuntil the next meeting; and if the dollar should start strengtheningin the exchange markets, I would lead off with a cut in the discountrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's opinions and analysis of the situation.


Passage number 424.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You reminded me of a couple more commentsI wanted to make. When I talk about 4 percent [GNP growth],obviously, I would not be concerned about a 4 percent growth in somequarters for a period of time. My skepticism is really that if growthwere sustained there for very long whether it would be desirable.Maybe we can do it and maybe we can't. But I think it would dependupon a considerably better productivity performance than anythingwe've seen lately or anything the figures give us hope about at themoment. You say it is a long time until the next meeting. I think alot could go on here, including the possibility of a discount ratechange, which may require a consultation--even fairly promptly. Wejust have to assume that, in terms of that [intermeeting] action andhow it could be integrated conceivably with some foreign moves. Idon't think we can sit here and sort out every permutation andcombination of possible developments over the next whatever [timeperiod] it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their skepticism about sustained growth and the need for better productivity performance, but there is no contradictory viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 425.
MR. BERNARD. Eight weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only states a period of time, "eight weeks," without any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements.


Passage number 426.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eight weeks. So, I would think that'squite likely: that at some point, with shorter or somewhat longernotice, [a consultation] would be necessary. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the necessity of a consultation after a certain period of time.


Passage number 427.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think we do have a window of opportunityhere for some amount of modest easing and I think we ought to takeadvantage of it. There is room on the up side: As far as economicgrowth, I don't sense any real risks that the economy is going throughthe roof and will jeopardize the progress that we have made oninflation. It's true that foreign concerns are a constraint, and moreof a constraint than we would like, but it strikes me that the climateis improved to make an easing move compared to where the situation wasjust a few weeks ago when the dollar seemed poised to drop; incontrast to that situation of several weeks ago, it has stabilized.The drop in the value of the dollar has shifted more to Europe ratherthan concentrating on Japan. So, the tone strikes me as being better.I think it would improve the chances of [not getting] a negativereaction if there were some kind of international coordination [onrate reductions]. I think that would be very helpful. But it seemsto me that the basic climate has improved; it seems to me that we havea window of opportunity in financial markets. Many of the goodthings--the long bond rally as well as the stock market--I think havebuilt into them some anticipation of an easing of monetary policy. Ifwe do not follow through with some easing of monetary policy, I thinkwe're talking about a backup in interest rates, and I think we don'twant a backup in interest rates. As far as Gramm-Rudman, there are anawful lot of negatives and criticisms one can say about it. I don'tknow whether it would do a lot of good or a little good. But it seemsto me that it is a nod in the direction of a policy mix that most ofus have advocated: that is, a somewhat tighter fiscal policy and some12/16-17/85easing of monetary policy. And without in any way expecting a wholelot in that area, it does seem to me that the passage of the bill doesgive us a bit of an opportunity. So, I think we have that window andI would take advantage of it. My preference would be for a drop inthe discount rate, with alternative B and around $400 million as aborrowing specification. If a discount rate were not forthcoming, itseems to me that we might want to move toward something like an "A"minus to "B" plus in terms of the open market specifications, whichmight be, say, $200 to $300 million for borrowing. But I think itwould be preferable to coordinate a discount rate cut with open marketoperations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Even though the speaker discusses different options and preferences, there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 428.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a comment on somethingyou expressed. I'm not sure about your interpretation of long-termrates in the bond market. Maybe I read into it what I hope. I thinkit certainly has been influenced by Gramm-Rudman and the prospect ofthe oil price moving lower. Everybody has been talking about that fora year and it hasn't happened. But I would like to think thatreflects partly a feeling about inflation--that it is less of a threatnow--rather than [expectations of] an imminent monetary policy easing.If I thought it was mostly the latter--if much of it was based uponmonetary policy easing--I'd have to ask myself why short-term rateshaven't moved lower. [Unintelligible] my interpretation would be thatit's very constructive in terms of inflationary expectations. I wouldhate to upset that; it would be counterproductive. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and opinions on the interpretation of long-term rates in the bond market. They mention that they are not sure about the interpretation and offer their own perspective, but there is no clear disagreement or argument.


Passage number 429.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ed Boehne has alreadysaid what I wanted to say, I think. I believe also that we have awindow of opportunity and we should take advantage of it. Withrespect to the international situation, it seems to me that the threatof a precipitous drop in the dollar has perhaps not disappeared, butit certainly is much less than it was at the time of the last meeting.And I would ask you, Mr. Chairman--perhaps you can or cannot comment--with respect to some lower interest rates here, what is your bestguess as to what Germany and Japan, for example, might do in terms offollowing us down. If they're satisfied with the current [exchangerate] levels of 2.50 and 200. for example, it would seem to me thatthere would be some leeway for them to move their interest rates downand thus become a bit more expansive in their own monetary policy andthus have some impact that would flow back to the United States overtime by permitting them to attract more of our export markets. Buthaving said all of that, it just seems to me that [we have a windowhere] with inflation not being a high visibility concern, though notat an acceptable level to be sure, and the Gramm-Rudman bill. Andwith the passage of that bill we may even have a bit of an obligationto give a nod to that by easing interest rates, if you consider thatfiscal policy will be somewhat more restrictive than it has been inthe past. And Gramm-Rudman will really have some impact. If there isa window, in view of the financial strains not only in the Midwest butthroughout the United States and internationally, I think we ought totake advantage of it. Like Ed Boehne, I would prefer to coordinate itwith a discount rate decrease rather than some easing through theDesk's actions and then a discount rate decrease that might have tocome thereafter. So, I would do the discount rate decrease, leaveborrowing at the $400 million level, approximately, and move interestrates down in that fashion rather than the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's belief and opinion.


Passage number 430.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 431.
-49-12/16-17/85MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, given my view of the economy, Idon't think we really need to do anything at the moment. I think theeconomy is going to be somewhat better in 1986 than it has been in1985. Certainly, my forecast is that it's going to be better than thestaff's projections. So given that, I'm not concerned about theeconomy at the moment. I am concerned, however, that if we were toease we might begin to lose some of the gains we've made in terms ofinflationary expectations. Now, if the economy in the shorter termwere to begin to turn down, or if we lost some of the gains we've hadwith respect to the foreign exchange value of the dollar or long-termrates--that is, if either of those began to back up--then I wouldsupport some easing in policy. As has been pointed out, we have beenaccommodative with respect to the monetary aggregates. I don't thinkanyone can say we haven't been. Of course, the question is howeffective that has been in terms of moving the economy. But allthings considered, I would prefer that we take a wait-and-seeattitude; and that means, I suppose, alternative B with a borrowinglevel of around $400 to $450 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Forrestal disagrees with the staff's projections and believes that the economy will be better in 1986. He also expresses concern about losing gains in inflationary expectations if they were to ease policy.


Passage number 432.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Martin, so it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 433.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I think you were quite right indirecting our attention to the growth in bank credit and totalreserves and other factors. They are labeled here the key monetaryaggregates. I think, though, particularly in terms of Ml, what hascome out of our discussion yesterday, which spills over to some ofthese other aggregates, is that given deregulation--given the pricingand the consumer reaction to new instruments and new spreads and newopportunity cost relationships--we really don't know what thosefigures mean. At least we don't know as much as we used to know aboutthem. Secondly, it seems to me that the staff's forecast has not beendemolished in our discussions earlier today. Therefore, with theforecast, which would be extant if we kept conditions as they aretoday with the adjustment and seasonal borrowings running $633 millionin September, $558 million in October, and $672 million in November,it seems to me that we run a risk of recession--to get that word outin the discussion--rather than a 2 percent growth.It seems to me also that your comments with regard tocoordination are certainly in order. I believe in the technicalinformation we've had with regard to a discount rate cut that what hasbeen assumed here is 50 basis points. I haven't heard anyone mention25 points; 50 points seems to have been implicit or explicit in thediscussion. Plus a move to a configuration such as alternative Amight be: (a) risky as far as the dollar falling; and (b) over-stimulative relative to what little we do know about these monetaryaggregates anymore. So, I would like to see the Chairman and thestaff use the alternative A course in conjunction with a futurediscount rate cut. I think there is merit in removing what appears tobe the floor under short-term rates vis-a-vis long-term rates. Iwould hope that we would have an alternative A which would merge inthe direction of alternative B down the road. I would hope that thisCommittee would give the Chairman an unusually wide band for theborrowing. I don't know what the band should be--perhaps $300 to $500million or something rather wide so that this operation could takeplace. By this operation I mean to start easing in the market, movingtoward $300 to $350 million so that the fed funds rate begins to comedown, and to adjust the discount rate by 50 basis points and continue-50-12/16-17/85to work the Desk operations so that the borrowings firm up a littlewithin that range, depending on the Chairman's judgment at that time,back to $400 million, let's say. At any rate, [I favor] a starttoward providing a 50 basis point change at the short end. I thinkthe market expects that and that we run the risk of its backing up onus, including in the short-term rates. That, as the Chairmanindicates, is certainly a desirable direction. But as we all knowrates are still at a very high level in real terms. And the staff wasindicating this morning that the high real level of long-term rateshelps produce 2 percent growth for another four quarters which, as hasbeen commented here, is insufficient. We should do what we can tobring growth up some. Therefore, I vote for alternative A with a wideband around the borrowings; and I'm looking forward to a discount ratecut and some adjustment of the borrowings accordingly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, disagrees with some of the points made by the chairman and expresses his differing opinions. He questions the meaning and significance of certain monetary aggregates and suggests that the staff's forecast has not been disproven. He also disagrees with the assumed 50 basis point discount rate cut and suggests using alternative A instead, with a wide band for borrowing. He argues for a start towards a 50 basis point change in short-term rates and emphasizes the need for higher economic growth.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided a passage for me to analyze. Please provide the passage you would like me to evaluate for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 435.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I was very close to what I take tobe your position and that expressed by Bob Forrestal. And I thoughtfor awhile that I might make history by agreeing with Frank Morris,but he went a little too far for me. I was very much encouraged bythe slowing we thought we saw in the aggregates at the time of thelast meeting. But I'm equally discouraged by what has happened sincethen, and in particular by the rapid growth in currency and demanddeposits as well as OCDs--the M1 target. And that really scares me,as far as the implications for down the road. So I think "B" is aseasy as we really ought to think about being at this point. As theBluebook points out and as we all know, of course, it's particularlydifficult to judge what's going to happen to the aggregates with agiven borrowing level. So I am more interested, I guess, in what ourresponse would be to deviations in the any of the aggregates in theevent that they don't come in on target. For example, if M1 shouldcome in at 12 or 13 percent instead of the 7-1/2 percent projectedunder alternative B, then I would hope that we would move theborrowing target up. Similarly, if M1 came in weak, I'd be glad tolower that [target] somewhat. And I would prefer "would," obviously,in the directive wording rather than "might," although I know youdon't see a lot of difference in those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing his agreement with the Chairman and Bob Forrestal, but also his concerns about rapid growth in certain areas. He also suggests possible responses to deviations from the target.


Passage number 436.
 As long as you wouldinterpret "might" to mean that you would move the borrowing target upI could go along with "might," but perhaps it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a conditional statement where the speaker is expressing their willingness to agree on the condition that a certain interpretation is accepted.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 437.
 Honesty compels me to say that we have notbeen terribly sensitive to small changes in Ml, but higher concern--MR. BLACK. I'm aware of that. But you did paint a pictureof a lot of liquidity that we had pumped into the economy, or so Iinterpreted your remarks. So I would hope there would be a bit moresensitivity to additions in liquidity on top of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement occurs when Mr. Black expresses his hope for 'a bit more sensitivity to additions in liquidity' whereas the speaker, at the beginning of the passage, admits that they have not been sensitive to small changes in monetary base (Ml).


Passage number 438.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no passage provided in the question, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 439.
MR. STERN. It seems to me, as we discussed earlier, thatthere have been a lot of significant developments over the past 5 or 6weeks, including the run-up in stock prices, the decline in long-termrates, developments with regard to OPEC, and Gramm-Rudman. Withregard to OPEC and to Gramm-Rudman even with all its blemishes, theimplication, at least to me, is that inflationary expectations havebeen reduced. And in the current setting, that's a significant-51-12/16-17/85development. It leads me to the view that the proper specificationsfor policy at this time now are somewhere between "A" and "B." I cometo that conclusion largely on the consideration that lower nominalrates would be associated with essentially the same real rate in thisenvironment, if inflationary expectations have diminished. So, that'swhere I would go. With someplace in between "A" and "B" I think wewill get an acceptable economic performance in 1986, as best I canjudge the situation. I kind of put aside the discount rate for themoment although, obviously, that's another way of going--depending, Isuspect, on your comments about coordination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their analysis of recent developments and their view on the appropriate policy specifications, based on those developments.


Passage number 440.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 441.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I tend to support the position laid out byMessrs. Boehne and Guffey. I do think there have been some importantchanges over the last few weeks and, as a consequence, that we havesomething of an opportunity here that we ought to take advantage of.The economic outlook, I think we agree, is positive. I don't think Iheard anybody talk about a recession near term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses support for the position laid out by Messrs. Boehne and Guffey and states agreement on the positive economic outlook. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 442.
 But also I must say Idon't have any sense that there's a significant risk of--MR. PARTEE. I'd be prepared to talk about it, Si.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 443.
MR. MARTIN. I would too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 444.
MR. KEEHN. Well, as I heard the comments, at least nearterm, I didn't hear that risk. But on the other side of that coin, Idon't think I heard anybody suggest that we are significantly at riskof an overheated economy, at least near term. With regard toinflation, notwithstanding the Chairman's comments, people I talk toin terms of labor contracts, for example, are still negotiating very,very favorable contracts with good work rule changes. And in terms ofpricing, the competition out there is just very, very rough. As aconsequence, I have a positive outlook on the inflationary side. Asfor the exchange rates, it's always dangerous to talk about exchangerates because you have to be on the Desk to know what is reallyhappening. But I have some fear, as I said yesterday, that whileearlier we were concerned about a precipitous decline, maybe we aregetting into an area of at least stability. The declines that we havehad had such an important and positive effect here on those who weremost affected, I'd like to try and provide an environment in which wecould continue at least to stabilize and hopefully continue to getsomething of a decline. But it is the interest rate side where Ithink there is the biggest change. Yes, medium- and long-term rateshave been going down for quite some while and short-term rates not somuch. But, frankly, I think the discount rate at this point issomething of a barrier to a further decline in short-term rates. As aconsequence of all this, I think that the discount rate becomesterribly important in our considerations. If I had my druthers, I'dopt for alternative B with a reduction in the discount rate and theborrowing level maintained at, say, $400 to $450 million. But iftiming were a complicated consideration and, therefore, if thediscount rate were going to remain at its current level, I'd go foralternative A and reduce the borrowing level to the $200 to $250million range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 445.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. In order to provide an explanation, the specific passage or sentence containing the mention of Governor Seger would need to be provided.


Passage number 446.
12/16-17/85MS. SEGER. Well, as I indicated earlier, I am concernedabout the slow growth in the economy that we've had this year and thestaff forecast of a continuation of that next year. While I'm not oneof the recession crowd at the moment, I think as we stagger along at aslow rate there is a vulnerability to a recession. I don't know whatwould push us in: a major financial institution failure or something.I don't know exactly what. Anyway, I think there is an underlyingvulnerability there. Also, I agree that the short-term rate declinecame to a halt some time ago and that it is not going to resume untilthe discount rate is cut. I would hope that we could take that stepsometime soon. I think that this would help the dollar to dropsomewhat further. I don't want it to drop 30 percent over a week'stime, but I think it would help our basic industries tremendously tohave some further decline in the dollar. Also, to the extent that wecut our interest rates, I think it would allow some of our tradingpartners to cut theirs. I don't know if it has to be absolutelycoordinated, but I think it would at least give them the opportunityto do so, particularly the Japanese. So, my preference in terms ofthe alternatives would be something on the order of alternative A witha 1/2 point discount rate cut sometime soon, and the borrowingsspecifications in some fairly broad range because I'm not thatimpressed with my ability to identify specific narrow ranges withmonetary growth outcomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 447.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 448.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I find the outlook for a 2percent rate of [GNP] growth for 1986 unacceptable in the currentcircumstances. So I find myself in sympathy with the observationsthat have been made around the table by Messrs. Boehne and Guffey andalso Mr. Stern. I would prefer an alternative somewhere between "A"and "B" for now. I tend to separate the reduction in pressures onreserves from the discount rate decision. I would prefer to easepressure on bank reserves somewhat now and see what effect that has,and then make a discount rate decision in light of what happens whenwe ease somewhat. So for now I would come down somewhere between "A"and "B," holding in abeyance the discount rate reduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice disagrees with the projected 2 percent rate of GNP growth and expresses sympathy with the observations made by Messrs. Boehne, Guffey, and Stern. He suggests an alternative approach and expresses his preference for easing pressure on bank reserves before making a discount rate decision.


Passage number 449.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions "Mrs. Horn" without providing any additional information or dialogue.


Passage number 450.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, as a number of people have pointedout, a lot of things have happened since the last meeting and maybe inone sense that does give us a bit of a window on monetary policy.Among the many things that have happened since the last meeting, onethat I focus on particularly is the euphoria in financial marketscombined with something that hasn't changed since the last meeting--the financial strains in the economy. Yesterday, there were a fewbrief comments exchanged about 1929 that I thought were quiteinteresting and it brings up the whole subject: If the Federal Reservewere in the business of trying to deal with the speculative mood inthe economy, what would we do. I guess one could argue the financialstrains issue either way on monetary policy: One could say that thestrains are so great that we have to be careful and ease--we have tobe careful always, of course--or that the way to take the speculationout would be to tighten. Altogether it comes down to the fact thatmonetary policy is a very big and heavy tool to use in this respect;I'd say our hands are kind of tied. I find myself, in addition tothinking a lot about discount rates at this meeting where they are not-53-12/16-17/85on the agenda, also thinking a lot about supervision and regulation,which is not on the agenda, because in order to deal with financialstrains I suppose we're reduced to other tools besides monetarypolicy. In any case, with all of those considerations, on monetarypolicy I come down on the side of saying that I wouldn't change muchfrom where we are today. I'd favor something like alternative B, andI think we do have room to go in the "B plus" direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual's perspective on monetary policy and their support for option B.


Passage number 451.
MR. PARTEE. Is "B plus" toward "A".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement mentioning a grading scale.


Passage number 452.
MS. HORN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of "Ms. Horn" indicates that someone is actively involved in a discussion or argument, indicating contention or disagreement.


Passage number 453.
MR. PARTEE. Toward "A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee's statement does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 454.
"MS. HORN. I guess after all of these two hands--[on the onehand and on the other hand]--it's hard to know. Toward "A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or confusion, but there is no direct disagreement or argument being presented.


Passage number 455.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 456.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I have a rather strongpreference to work within the framework of alternative B. I certainlyam not as sanguine as some are on this foreign exchange ratesituation. I think we've done very, very well to date. I'm notuncomfortable with where we are, but I must say that as I read thesituation I think the downside risks are still very much there. Onecould quibble about whether they're a shade less or more than theywere a month or six weeks ago, but I certainly feel that they arethere. Also, as I said yesterday, when I look at these financialaggregates and make some rough adjustments for what I think is reallyhappening with M2 and M3, I come to the conclusion that in anunderlying sense they all are growing very, very rapidly. And if Ican take a little poetic license, when we talk about easing policywhat in some sense we are saying is that we want people to go out andborrow some more. And when I look at what's already there, I'm justnot quite sure that that's the right response. I think Karen has apoint. You can almost, at least somewhat more abstractly, raise thequestion of whether given what is already there we should in somesense be looking at policy from a different vantage point altogether.But I don't think that's in the cards. In sum, I would want to workin the framework of alternative B. I think the nicest outcome that Icould imagine would be one in which we could lower the discount ratein concert with other countries doing the same thing and end up withthe borrowing sticking around the $400 million level. Now, I don'thave the authority on either side of the coin to say whether thatreduction in the discount rate should be 25 basis points or 50 basispoints, but I think the question of 25 basis points is one that is atleast worth serious consideration. On the question of what I would doif there were no prospect for some kind of a parallel movement inpolicy elsewhere--and, of course, that we won't know today--I think mydruthers would be to stick more or less with the framework of "B" asis. But, again, if there were some opportunity for movement elsewherein tandem with something by us, I think that would be fine. Thatwould be the best of all possible outcomes, from my perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement on several points, such as their preference for alternative B over other options, their concerns about the foreign exchange rate situation, and their hesitation about further easing of monetary policy. They also mention that Karen has a point and question whether a different vantage point should be considered.


Passage number 457.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions a person's name, Mr. Boykin, without providing any context or introducing a discussion or argument.


Passage number 458.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, just briefly going back tothe recitation you made in your opening comments, they indicated to me-54-12/16-17/85at least that we certainly have been accommodative any way you want tolook at it. In terms of what is going on now--speculation, if youwill--in the stock market and possibly some other areas, I would bevery concerned to further fuel what [seem] to be the excesses.Certainly the debt side of it is excessive, from my view point atleast. Every meeting is a critical meeting, but it seems to me thisis probably one of the more critical meetings because the wrong turnright now could have very far reaching consequences. My view, as Iexpressed earlier, in terms of what I see for the economy for 1986 isslightly more optimistic than the Board staff's forecast. Having saidall that, I would much prefer to stay right where we are which, if Iread it right, would be alternative B. The ability to bring thediscount rate down, if that should work out, I would find acceptableprovided that that type of action wouldn't lead to too much euphoriaotherwise. But I think that's manageable from the Desk side. So Iwould stay right where we are; I would stay with "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boykin expresses his view that he would prefer to stay where they are and pursue alternative B, while also mentioning some concerns about the stock market and debt levels. However, there is no disagreement or argument with other individuals in the passage.


Passage number 459.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There have been a lot of comments madeabout a speculative feeling in the financial markets. I guess I wouldlook at it slightly differently now. I think there's excessive debtcreation there; whether it's speculation or other motives, I don'tknow. It's certainly excessive in some very long-range perspective.So far as the bond and stock markets are concerned, I would like tointerpret that constructively. I would hope that a 9-1/2 percentlong-term Treasury bond rate is sustainable or normally reflects areasonable appraisal of the outlook; it may still be high indeed. A1,500 level on the stock market ought to be sustainable with areasonable outlook. I think that's partly because people have changedtheir views on inflation, which is constructive. And I wouldn't wantto undermine that by undermining what underlies it. That's myperception of it, myself. Mr. Melzer will tell us what the realattitudes are in the financial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective on the financial markets, without any conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 460.
MR. MELZER. Well, I think the long-term bond market wasdiscounting essentially nothing in terms of hope or progress on thefiscal side for quite a long period of time. We had a little flurrylast May and then some of that was washed out. So I would be inclinedto agree with what you said before: that even if the expectations of adiscount rate cut that are in the market now were washed out, I don'tthink we'd give up the gains in the long end of the market. They mayback up a little but they would not give up nearly as much as, say,the front end of the market might give up. I guess I'm a littlereluctant to get caught up in that euphoria. As I said before, Ithink it could conceivably be a mistake to have a discount rate cutand easing of policy--or however an easing might take place--somehowtied to Gramm-Rudman. And I think people would try to do that basedon what is on the table right now on that score. I also have afeeling that I'd like to see a little more evidence on what ishappening in the economy right now because of these forces we'vediscussed and what I sense is going to be a pretty good Christmasseason for retailers and so forth. I have a general reluctance to getcaught up in a [view] that this just has to happen--that it's a oneway bet and that's all there is to it. I would certainly beresponsive down the road if foreign exchange market conditions orcurrent evidence on the economy and other considerations indicatedthat there was room. But I'm not sure that this is the time. I havean aversion to, in effect, jumping on this bandwagon. So in terms of-55-12/16-17/85policy, I'd favor alternative B and might be sensitive to leaningtoward alternative A under the right circumstances down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is one person expressing their thoughts and preferences regarding the market and policy decisions.


Passage number 461.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Griffith.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided any passage for me to analyze and determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the full passage so that I can assist you.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 462.
MR. GRIFFITH. I am personally totally uncertain as to whatshould happen. But having discussed this with John Balles and no oneelse, and having listened to this conversation, I think we want to beon record as just a little concerned that the forecast that our staffis making for 1986 on growth, as I indicated earlier, depends uponlowering the short rates very rapidly--front-loading early in the yearto offset what may be sluggish spending in the last half of the year.So for that reason and other discussions that have gone on here aboutconcerns that 2 percent growth may not be what we want to happen--orat least not sufficient or desirable--we find ourselves in the Guffey-Boehne camp at somewhere between alternatives A and B, with some ease.I think we would feel a little more strongly that there ought to be adiscount rate cut to get the short rates moving downward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage as Mr. Griffith expresses uncertainty and concern about the forecast for 1986 growth and the need to lower short rates. He mentions that he is in the "Guffey-Boehne camp" between alternatives A and B, suggesting differing opinions or preferences among the group.


Passage number 463.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're missing, Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not express any disagreement or contention; it is simply stating that Governor Partee is missing.


Passage number 464.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I hadn't wanted to take any lead in thisbecause it's you people who will suffer the consequences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. Mr. Partee expresses his reluctance to take the lead and acknowledges that it is the other people who will suffer the consequences.


Passage number 465.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll just blame whatever goes wrong onMr. Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a plan to attribute any potential failures to Mr. Partee.


Passage number 466.
MR. BLACK. Remember, you're going to be on a fixed income.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black regarding a future circumstance.


Passage number 467.
MR. PARTEE. I indicated before that my preference would beto ease up a little in terms of a somewhat lower level of short rates.I think we do have a window of opportunity. There is a good deal ofexpectation that this will happen in the market. I think the budgetbalancing bill--I doubt too that it's going to materialize as aserious move--but it gives a basis or reasoning that I think evenforeigners could understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly expressing the speaker's personal preference and speculation about future events.


Passage number 468.
 And so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot generate a response without the specific passage or context provided.


Passage number 469.
]MR. PARTEE. Well, it might happen. After all, this is themost serious effort that has been made in a great many years to moveconsistently toward a balanced budget. And I think it will have apsychological effect so far as new programs are concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee expresses his opinion and there is no indication of disagreement or contention with any other person or viewpoint.


Passage number 470.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said [unintelligible] that it wasn'tserious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 471.
MR. PARTEE. I suspect that there will be great difficultieswith it. It is something that has occurred; it has been very much inthe press and I think it gives us an opportunity. I also agree thatit has been helpful to have a decline in long rates and that weprobably will not hold the decline in long rates unless there is somemove in short rates to help bolster what has occurred. So mypreference would be for some easing. I think it's proper, as a numberof you have done, to talk about this in the absence of a discount ratechange because this is not a meeting in which the discount rate isconsidered. I can appreciate that there would have to be somenegotiations and consultations and so forth with other parties abroad-56-12/16-17/85to see how everything would coordinate if that were to occur. So Iwould think that the best way to go, if the Committee wishes to movesomewhat toward ease, would be--as Emmett and Gary suggested--betweenalternative A and alternative B with maybe $300 to $400 million inborrowing, which would be enough to begin to move the federal fundsrate down. Now, I had expected that the federal funds rate was goingto move down this last time between meetings. I thought that, otherthings equal, that is what we had rather agreed to do. It didn'tmove, at least enough so anybody could notice it in the market. Butnow I think it could move down 20 to 25 basis points without muchtrouble; and that could be consistent with either a 1/4 point cut or1/2 point cut in the discount rate when the time comes to considerthat. It would sort of set the stage for where I would have liked tohave seen the meeting come out today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his opinion and preferences regarding monetary policy, but there is no direct contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 472.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The discount rate is not a matter for thisCommittee, as you technically point out, but I would [be interested]nonetheless if anybody wanted to express any great feeling about a 1/4or 1/2 point cut. We haven't done a 1/4 point for a long time--since'79 or '78. It's certainly getting down in a range where it has beendone before. I don't know if anybody wants to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is indicating that the discount rate is not a matter for the committee, but they would still be interested in hearing any opinions about a potential cut in the rate. They mention that it has been done before and invite others to comment on it.


Passage number 473.
MR. BLACK. If those are the only two alternatives, I'll takethe 1/4 point. If there's a third, I have another thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing his willingness to choose one of the two stated alternatives but also suggests the possibility of a third option.


Passage number 474.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite thinking of it in thatperspective--that those are the only two alternatives. But I just[wondered] in general if there is anything to be said strongly one wayor the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal thoughts and wondering if there is a strong argument for one particular perspective.


Passage number 475.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I would prefer 1/2 percentage point. Ican't remember how long it has been since we used the 1/4 point butthat implies some precision that I believe we shouldn't try todemonstrate in the market. As a result I would object to a 1/4 point.If we're going to make a move, we ought to do 1/2 point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is expressing his preference for a 1/2 percentage point instead of a 1/4 point, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 476.
MR. MARTIN. They have moved more in a week than they used tomove in a presidential term. I think 25 basis points is almost--whatis it that the advocates call it.--"de minimus" or some phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply expressing his opinion about the movement of something, and mentioning a phrase used by advocates.


Passage number 477.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN" is a simple identification of a person's position or title.


Passage number 478.
 Small--MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Guffey that could lead to contention or disagreement. It simply states "Small--MR. GUFFEY," which does not indicate any dispute or divergence of opinions.


Passage number 479.
 [Unintelligible] use that term to be--MR. AXILROD. The last 1/4 point [discount rate change] I seewas September 22, 1978 when we increased it from 7-3/4 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about a past event without expressing any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 480.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the base is lower now than itwas then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is providing a factual comparison stating that the base is currently lower than it was in the past.


Passage number 481.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, we're talking about a level of long ratesthat goes back to 1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or contradicting statements. It simply states that the discussion is about long rates dating back to 1979.


Passage number 482.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A 1/4 point move might also beperceived as saying that we want to keep some order in the bar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a perspective on how a 1/4 point move could be interpreted as maintaining order in the bar.


Passage number 483.
MS. SEGER. You mean that we don't have any courage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we" (presumably the speaker and the person they are talking to) don't have any courage.


Passage number 484.
-57-12/16-17/85MR. BOEHNE. Keep--what did you say, Jerry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a conversation that is simply relaying information or confirmations.


Passage number 485.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Unintelligible.] Order in the bar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It merely mentions the topic of order in a bar.


Passage number 486.
MR. RICE. I think when it's not clear what we expect tohappen we should do a 1/4 point; but when things are pretty clear wemay as well move in 1/2 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 487.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends on whether things are clear toyou or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is offering a conditional statement based on whether things are clear to the reader or not. It does not present any specific disagreement or contention.


Passage number 488.
MR. RICE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 489.
MR. PARTEE. Emmett thinks they're clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it merely states Emmett's belief without any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements mentioned.


Passage number 490.
 Well, I don't wantto--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose it's anybody's bet. But I donot believe the long-term rate structure is dependent upon whether wechange the discount rate or not. I think it is readily arguable thatit would be perverse. I think the short-term rate structure is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any contentious or opposing views. The speaker is expressing their own belief or opinion but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 491.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think it could use a little help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply expresses his opinion that something could use some improvement.


Passage number 492.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It goes up a point a day, including today,I take it. Well, nobody else wants to comment about the appropriatesize of a discount rate cut I take it. So far as the internationalimplication is concerned, there are two [countries] involved. One Ithink would be extremely reluctant to do anything. The other may beless reluctant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage simply presents statements and observations without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 493.
MR. PARTEE. Hopefully, the second one is Japan. Theycertainly ought to move their rates down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement as the speaker expresses a hopeful stance regarding Japan lowering its rates.


Passage number 494.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I had in mind. From ourstandpoint that obviously would be very helpful. The economics seemto dictate it, but in a way I think we're psychologically morevulnerable on the other side. But the Germans are feeling quitecontent with themselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts and feelings about a certain situation, without contradicting or challenging any other viewpoints.


Passage number 495.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, if we took the lead that would suggestthen that they might follow U.S. rates down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 496.
 Is that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think across the Pacific they're muchmore likely than across the Atlantic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a belief or opinion about the likelihood of something happening across different bodies of water.


Passage number 497.
MR. RICE. So you're pessimistic about coordination inEurope.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention between the speakers.


Passage number 498.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm 50 percent optimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply expresses an individual's level of optimism, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 499.
MR. PARTEE. The Pacific.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 500.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you can get one side; I'm not sureabout the other side. I'd be very skeptical on the other side. Youmay get an exchange rate realignment in Europe; I don't know whetherthat's good or bad. There's considerable pressure over there now.Well, it's hard to read this as a great consensus. And sincethere are too many variables in the equation, it is neither a-58-12/16-17/85consensus nor by and large an enormous difference. The tactics makeit very difficult. This is a little messier than I would like to makeit, but let me try to suggest something. For the moment we have asomewhat lower level of borrowing, but not so far that we couldn'treverse it without being too obvious about it, if the discount ratewent down. If the discount rate doesn't go down, we might want topress that further. If it does go down, we might adopt this strategythat a number ofpeople have suggested of reducing the discount ratebut not the borrowing, which means something like--particularly takinginto account a minor point, but nonetheless one that is there, thatseasonal borrowings are running very low--$350 to $400 million or $300to $400 million at the moment, and going to the upper side of that ormaybe above it if the discount rate went down by a half. If itdoesn't go down, depending upon the aggregates and other things, wewould push toward or beyond the low side. If the discount rate goesdown, or if it doesn't go down, we could reconsider or fine tune thatafter New Year's Day. I will be more specific: Assuming the discountrate doesn't go down, I think a borrowing number of $300-$400 millionor something like $350 million would be the mechanical number thestaff puts down [in the path] for the next week or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is unsure about the potential exchange rate realignment in Europe and whether it would be good or bad. Additionally, there is disagreement on the appropriate borrowing and discount rate strategies.


Passage number 501.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 502.
 Do you expect that to bring the funds rate--ofcourse this is a very difficult period with the funds rate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the funds rate is coming down, Ithink. It has a lot of psychology in it; it surprised me a little.If the discount rate expectations are all that strong, why has thefunds rate stayed so high. I'm not sure that they have been all thatstrong. But it seems to be coming down a little now. I don't knowwhether that's lasting or not, but I would guess that we are talkingabout no more than 7-3/4 percent and maybe a lower discount rate,depending upon the anticipation. You fellows down the end of thetable can refute that if you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and presents potential opposing viewpoints. The phrase "You fellows down the end of the table can refute that if you want" suggests an invitation for others to challenge or disagree with their statement.


Passage number 503.
MR. AXILROD. That seems reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod's statement implies agreement with the reasoning presented before.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You made a comment earlier that ifexpectations of a discount rate cut really became strong, then short-term rates will go down before the discount rate cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a cause-and-effect relationship without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 505.
MR. PARTEE. Do you agree that $350 million sounds like7-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 506.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, but that to me would mean as a practicalmatter that it would be under $350 million most of the days of the 14-day period. It's a funny business. You can't quite tell where--so Ithink you just have to be guided by the interaction of the funds rateand the movement of the borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and providing an explanation.


Passage number 507.
MR. KEEHN. I agree with the approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. This is evident from the statement "I agree with the approach."


Passage number 508.
 I just wonderoperationally if that's a wide enough band for you to operate with orwhether you ought not to have a little more--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I figure it's wide enough for themoment. But, as I said, I might consider a wider band in oppositedirections [depending on] whether or not the discount rate changes:wider on the up side if it did change, particularly by a half; andwider on the down side if it didn't change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about the width of a band and the possibility of making it wider in different directions depending on the change in a discount rate.


Passage number 509.
-59-12/16-17/85MR. KEEHN. That was my point. If, say, you pick a range of$250 to $450 million, you might accomplish that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's consistent with what I said,if you conceive of the upper side as an after the discount rate cut[level] and the lower side as a no discount rate cut [level] over thespace of the next two or three weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 511.
MR. GUFFEY. But starting out at the $300 million level untilthis all unfolds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It features a statement made by Mr. Guffey regarding starting at a certain level until something unfolds, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments presented.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $350 million, I think I said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement does not present any argument or opposing viewpoints. It simply states a figure, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 513.
MR. GUFFEY. I meant $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey simply clarifies that he meant $350 million.


Passage number 514.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Assuming no discount rate cut, $350million and possibly moving lower, depending upon developments. It's$350 million, possibly moving higher, if the discount rate is cut--again depending on developments. And we will explore the discountrate possibilities abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage presents different possibilities based on the discount rate and explores the options abroad. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 515.
MR. GUFFEY(.). Are we at $450 or $400 million now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit signs of disagreement or contention. It is a simple question asking for clarification on the dollar amount.


Passage number 516.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We've been using $450 million in the path.Actually, so far in this period, which ends tomorrow, borrowing hasaveraged just $200 million because, as Steve said, we tend to get lowlevels until the very end of the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Sternlight is simply providing information about the amount of borrowing that has taken place during a specific period.


Passage number 517.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The federal funds rate is close to 7-3/4percent today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement about the federal funds rate being close to 7-3/4 percent does not indicate any contention or disagreement, as it is a factual statement about the current rate.


Passage number 518.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It was 7-13/16 percent the last I heard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or information without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 519.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's pretty close. I don't know whetherthese numbers on the aggregates mean anything in any of these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge regarding the meaning of the numbers mentioned.


Passage number 520.
MR. MARTIN. M1 doesn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 521.
MR. PARTEE. Do we give December-to-March or November-to-March [figures].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two options and asks for a decision or clarification.


Passage number 522.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Use November to March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Use November to March" is a directive and does not express any form of contention or disagreement. It simply suggests utilizing the period between November to March for some purpose, without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 523.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that what we have usually done at thistime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple yes-or-no question and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 524.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, the Committee has mostly used theNovember-to-March rates; it did last time. One thought that the staffhad was that if the November-to-March period wasn't used, in somesense the aggregates look ignored in the last part of December. Butthe Committee may wish to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of agreement about the Committee's past use of November-to-March rates and the consideration of potentially ignoring the aggregates in December. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 525.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you feel strongly that M3 is going tobe a little lower than M2. Given the uncertainties surrounding all ofthese figures, it's nicer to use one figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the phrase "Do you feel strongly that M3 is going to be a little lower than M2" implies that there may be differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 526.
MR. AXILROD. I don't feel strongly at all about that, Mr.Chairman. The special circumstances are that we think there might not-6012/16-17/85be many municipal issues suddenly after the beginning of the year andbanks may not participate, therefore, as actively. But for all weknow they could start buying governments instead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply stating their lack of strong feelings on the matter and providing a reason for their perspective. There are no conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 527.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just given the vast amounts of uncertaintyin these numbers--. We had the same number [for both] last time,didn't we. For several times. Wasn't it the equivalent of 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that there is uncertainty in the numbers, and then questions whether the same number was used in the past and if it was equivalent to 6 percent. This implies that there may be different or conflicting numbers being discussed.


Passage number 528.
MR. AXILROD. To me, Mr. Chairman, it would be sensible togive a small range for both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is about providing a small range for both options, which suggests a logical and practical approach.


Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The same small range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments. It simply mentions the same small range without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 530.
MR. AXILROD. I think that that would be reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod suggests that something would be reasonable, indicating agreement or a shared understanding.


Passage number 531.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder if we have to say somethingindirectly or directly about the discount rate in the directive. It'sa little misleading, whatever we say, to leave it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing uncertainty about whether to address the discount rate directly or indirectly in the directive.


Passage number 532.
MR. MARTIN. They certainly expect it. The media discussionhas been revolving around the area of the discount rate and policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the media discussion has been focused on the discount rate and policy.


Passage number 533.
MR. RICE. But they won't see it for a while; we would havedone something or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is describing a future event and does not express any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 534.
MR. MARTIN. It's a little artificial to look as though weignored the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is expressing his opinion that it would be artificial to ignore the discount rate.


Passage number 535.
MR. BLACK. It will be February before anybody knows what wesaid anyway, so I think we ought to go ahead and mention it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is suggesting that they should go ahead and mention something, but there is no indication of anyone else disagreeing or offering an opposing view.


Passage number 536.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we mention it, it's a question ofwhere to mention it, I guess. Consistent with what we said, wepresumably say we decreased "somewhat" or "slightly" the existingdegree of pressure on reserve positions. I'm just thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is discussing the wording or location of mentioning a decrease in the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.


Passage number 537.
"Somewhat greater reserve restraint--"MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that there is "somewhat greater reserve restraint."


Passage number 538.
 Since we don't mention the borrowing target, it'skind of hard to mention the discount rate, since the two are linked,and I think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "degree of pressure on reservepositions" is our euphemism for the borrowing target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the connection between the borrowing target and the discount rate, and clarifying the meaning of the phrase "degree of pressure on reserve positions."


Passage number 539.
MR. BOEHNE. What if in lines 79-81 [of the draft directive],where we have "taking account of appraisals" etc., we just have acomma and a fifth item "taking into account possible actions on thediscount rate" or something like that. Just say "conditions indomestic and international credit markets, including a possible changein the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 540.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How would that be read if we did it thatway. It might be read that if the discount rate were decreased, wewould decrease reserve pressures further, and we are saying theopposite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a hypothetical scenario and acknowledging that it might be misinterpreted or misunderstood. They are not presenting conflicting viewpoints or arguing with anyone.


Passage number 541.
MR. PARTEE. That's not as clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 542.
-61-12/16-17/85MR. AXILROD. You could put it on the line after the firstsentence, Mr. Chairman, saying "taking account of the impact of the adiscount rate action should one be taken," or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a suggestion or proposal for adding a statement related to the impact of a discount rate action in a particular context.


Passage number 543.
MR. MARTIN. Yes, it goes there better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin simply agrees with the statement.


Passage number 544.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot control his emotions and often acts impulsively, which leads to poor decision-making. Yes. There is contention in this passage. The statement implies that Mr. Axilrod's lack of emotional control and impulsive behavior negatively affects his decision-making abilities.


Passage number 545.
 "The existing degree of reserve pressures,taking account of--"MR. BOEHNE. I think that is better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that Mr. Boehne believes something is better without stating what specific disagreement is being addressed.


Passage number 546.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't exactly clear up thatambiguity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it is stating a fact about the ambiguity without expressing or implying any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 547.
MR. AXILROD. It indicates the area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage given does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "Mr. Axilrod" is mentioned and it indicates the area.


Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions Chairman Volcker without indicating any conflicting opinions or contradicting statements.


Passage number 549.
 I don't reject that suggestion, but Isuppose if we said "In the implementation of policy the Committeeseeks to decrease somewhat the existing degree of pressure on reservepositions, particularly should the discount rate be maintained atcurrent levels"--MR. PARTEE. "Particularly in the absence of any change inthe discount rate". It seems a little odd.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion that the suggestion seems odd or unusual.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 550.
MR. BOEHNE. It's a little strained. I think we have to havea more general statement than that. We comment on something thatmight not happen, and we have control over it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne finds the statement to be strained and suggests having a more general statement instead. This shows a difference in opinion and a contention over the proposed comment.


Passage number 551.
MR. PARTEE. Why didn't you do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question being asked by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It merely provides a title or identification without expressing any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 553.
 We are talking here about "may"--MR. RICE. It's prospective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying that the topic being discussed is around the word "may" and its prospective meaning.


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context or information. The provided text, "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER," does not provide enough information to make a conclusive judgment.


Passage number 555.
 We just put in there "taking account"--MR. PARTEE. I really think, Mr. Chairman, the better way todo it would be to go without it, and then adjust this if there is adiscount rate, which we have done before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although Mr. Partee suggests an alternative approach, there is no direct contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 556.
MR. GUFFEY. We could adjourn this meeting and the Boardcould adjust the discount rate and clear the whole thing up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 557.
MR. PARTEE. Actually, Roger, I don't think we're talkingabout anything quite that immediate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his own opinion about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 558.
 Well, I think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think if we don't mention it here[in the directive] we should say something about it in the policyrecord discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states one person's opinion followed by another person's suggestion.


Passage number 559.
 If the discount rate is changed, we could have aconsultation and follow that by a paragraph--MR. PARTEE. And it even becomes a part of the same minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 560.
MR. MELZER. That would be cleaner, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Melzer, is expressing his personal opinion about something being cleaner. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 561.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, we will put something in therecord--as it should appear anyway, because it has been in the-62-12/16-17/85discussion--that would make this point clear as to what direction weare talking about. So then we just say "decrease somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests adding something to clarify a point.


Passage number 562.
"MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since no passage is provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 563.
 And we are going to say "this action is expectedto be consistent with" targets--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple reference to the expectation that a certain action will be consistent with targets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 564.
 It's hard to call what we have "pressure,"but- -MR. PARTEE. If we just say growth, it doesn't have tospecify the amount for M2 and M3. "This action is expected to beconsistent with growth in M1, M2 and M3." Forget any number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

The speaker initially suggests that it is hard to categorize the situation as "pressure." However, Mr. Party disagrees and proposes using the term "growth" instead. This indicates a difference in opinion between the two speakers.


Passage number 565.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with these very low levels ofborrowing is that we get that level of borrowing from computerbreakdowns sometime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a straightforward fact about the potential issue of computer breakdowns leading to low levels of borrowing.


Passage number 566.
MR. AXILROD. I think that the Committee ought to recognize,Mr. Chairman, that a lot of those high numbers of $600 and $700million do come from that sort of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is providing information or making a statement without opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 567.
 Even a $2 billion breakdowncan--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 568.
 "Seeks generally to decrease somewhat theexisting degree of computer-adjusted pressures on--"VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Really "seeks to increase somewhatthe reliability of the computers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states two different goals, seeking to decrease computer-adjusted pressures and seeking to increase the reliability of computers, without contradicting each other.


Passage number 569.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we keep this ritual of saying "isexpected to be consistent with"--. Shall we demote M1 a bit by takingit out again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a suggestion to demote M1 by removing a certain ritual.


Passage number 570.
MR. MARTIN. Let's demote it as much as we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is simply suggesting or stating a course of action.


Passage number 571.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "This action is expected to be consistentwith growth in M2 and M3 over the period from November to March atannual rates of about--".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is providing a statement without any apparent contention or disagreement. It is stating an expectation regarding the consistency of an action with growth rates in M2 and M3 over a specific period of time.


Passage number 572.
 If you really wanted a wide range, I guessyou would say--MS. SEGER. 5 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a wide range and estimating it to be between 5 to 10 percent.


Passage number 573.
MR. BOEHNE. 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a numerical range without any statements or arguments that could create contention or disagreement.


Passage number 574.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "6 to 8 percent" is stating a numerical range and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 575.
MS. SEGER. That's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's true" indicates agreement with the previous statement, implying no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 576.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 577.
MR. PARTEE. 6 to 7 percent is a little thin, isn't it,considering the differences in these projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee's statement implies that a 6 to 7 percent difference is not significant enough, suggesting disagreement with the projections.


Passage number 578.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 8 percent takes in the full range,then.have it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a numerical range without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 579.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only states the position or title of Vice Chairman Corrigan without any additional information or context.


Passage number 580.
 How does the sentence read as you-63-12/16-17/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "This action is expected to be consistentwith growth in M2 and M3 over the period from November to March atannual rates of about 6 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This sentence is simply stating that a certain action is expected to be consistent with growth rates in M2 and M3. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 581.
"MR. PARTEE. I don't see any great harm in that. It's anacceptable range. M1, I guess, [may be] about 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his opinion and does not seem to encounter any objections or conflicting views.


Passage number 582.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on M1 we don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the information on M1 is unknown.


Passage number 583.
MR. MARTIN. 9 percent plus or minus 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage simply states a range of percentage, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 584.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. How about a sentence that said thatthe Committee expects the action to be consistent with growth of allof the monetary aggregates at rates of 6 to 8 percent and then aphrase something like "recognizing that there continues to beespecially large uncertainty about M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "recognizing that there continues to be especially large uncertainty about M1" suggests that there is disagreement or uncertainty regarding the growth of M1.


Passage number 585.
"MR. PARTEE. It's hard to get [M1] down to 6 to 8 percent. Ifeel that anything could happen. Right now, the staff is expecting alarge December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Partee is expressing a personal opinion or observation, but it does not involve any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 586.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The latest estimate for December, for whatit is worth, isn't all that much. It's what: around 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "for what it is worth" implies that the author does not place much value on the latest estimate for December, suggesting disagreement or doubt. Additionally, the phrase "isn't all that much" indicates a lack of satisfaction or disappointment with the estimate, further reinforcing the contention.


Passage number 587.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. It gives a little more credibility to our8 percent under "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the information being discussed gives more credibility to something.


Passage number 588.
"MR. MARTIN. It's more like 7 to 10 percent, isn't it.Seriously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question asking for clarification or confirmation of a statement.


Passage number 589.
MR. AXILROD. We have a little more confidence that M1 mightmake the top of the 6 to 8 percent range over the four months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents the speaker's opinion or prediction without any conflicting viewpoints or contradictions.


Passage number 590.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It already has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something has already occurred.


Passage number 591.
 December was--MR. MARTIN. [Unintelligible] it and missing it all the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing that December was missed or not fully experienced.


Passage number 592.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But December was at 15 percent forpurposes of the Bluebook, wasn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation or clarification about the percentage value of December for a specific purpose.


Passage number 593.
MR. AXILROD. 14-1/2 percent--something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a specific percentage.


Passage number 594.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that shows [the uncertainty]. We aredealing with an aggregate that three days ago the staff estimated at15 percent and now they are estimating it at 10 percent for a monththat's half over. I don't know exactly what we should write down. Wecan take something like 7 to 10 percent. Anybody have an inspiration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty and seeking input or suggestions from others.


Passage number 595.
MR. BLACK. I like what Jerry said, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black states that he likes what Jerry said, indicating agreement or positive sentiment.


Passage number 596.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What's wrong with that. "The actionis expected to be consistent with growth in the three aggregates inthe range of 6 to 8 (or 6 to 8-1/2) percent keeping in mind that Ml inparticular still is subject to great uncertainties." Have a singlerange for all 3 aggregates rather than having a specific number forany one of the three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a suggestion or preference for having a single range for all three aggregates rather than specifying a specific number for any one of them.


Passage number 597.
12/16-17/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could start off the sentence by saying"While recognizing that particular uncertainties surround the behaviorof M1--." Well, that's all right with me if people are willing tolive with 6 to 8 percent. I guess we take the curse off the 6 to 8percent for M1 by the initial clause.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and a personal opinion.


Passage number 598.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, it's in a framework where Iam assuming that the borrowing arrangements are as you describedbefore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the assumptions made about the borrowing arrangements are based on the description provided.


Passage number 599.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just referring to the fact thatthe range for M1 for what it is worth--and I don't think it's worthmuch--is running below any of the numbers for M1 except for those inalternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is not expressing any disagreement or contention. They are simply stating a fact and sharing their personal opinion.


Passage number 600.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't care if it's 8 or 8-1/2percent [as the top].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the specific percentage, whether it is 8 or 8-1/2 percent, does not matter to the speaker.


Passage number 601.
MR. PARTEE. I really think that phrase ought to be at theend of the sentence, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 602.
MR. MARTIN. But Jerry, I thought the staff number forborrowing was $200 to $250 and they had 9-1/2 percent on M1. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Martin is simply stating his understanding of the terms related to borrowing. There is no disagreement or contention evident in his statement.


Passage number 603.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod simply agrees with the statement made.


Passage number 604.
MR. MARTIN. Okay--then we start off missing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin simply acknowledges that they are beginning without something.


Passage number 605.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we wouldn't have changed--or I wouldn'thave, in any event--our December-to-March estimate given the morerecent December figures. I would view that not entirely but slightlyindependently. It would be lower under alternative [C]; our December-to-March estimate was around 8 percent, with December 14-1/2 percent.I wouldn't be tempted to change that because of this number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's perspective and his decision to not change his estimate based on recent December figures.


Passage number 606.
MR. PARTEE. "The Committee expects...although it recognizesthat there has been unusual volatility and uncertainty in the behaviorof M1." Just because the first one says "consistent with that action"in the second one, where it started out with a parenthetical phrase, Ithink we say what we would expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "The Committee expects... although it recognizes that there has been unusual volatility and uncertainty in the behavior of M1" indicates that the Committee acknowledges the unusual volatility and uncertainty, but it doesn't explicitly express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the basic trouble is whetherit is really worth trying to get M1 in that same range. I think it'sa little tough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about whether it is worthwhile to achieve a certain goal (getting M1 in a specific range). They mention that they find it challenging, but there is no indication of any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 608.
MR. MARTIN. I would rather take it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing a personal preference or choice rather than engaging in a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 609.
MR. MELZER. You could use the prior structure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement.


Passage number 610.
MR. AXILROD. You could use 7 to 9 percent for M1, Mr.Chairman, which would not be too inconsistent with all of this--indicating it's slightly higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that using a range of 7 to 9 percent for M1 would be slightly higher but not inconsistent with the information being discussed.


Passage number 611.
MR. MARTIN. I would rather take it out. Treat itseparately; it's a separate behavior. This is the one that hasn'tbeen near the middle or top of the range; it has been off the charts.People know it has been off the charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is expressing his preference to treat something separately because it is a separate behavior. He also acknowledges that this behavior has been widely recognized as being exceptional.


Passage number 612.
-65-12/16-17/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably better too[unintelligible]. Go back to the second [sentence] and say "expectedto be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 of 6 to 8 percent."Semicolon. Do we need this phrase "assuming little net impact on theaggregates". It implies a degree of knowledge we don't have anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning the necessity of the phrase "assuming little net impact on the aggregates" and expressing uncertainty about the level of knowledge they have regarding the topic. However, there is no direct disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 613.
MR. AXILROD. Well, you don't absolutely need it. We couldput it in the policy record, perhaps. It's just a little safeguard,since we don't quite know what's going to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 614.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just put a semicolon and then "while M1 isexpected to grow between 7 to 9 percent, the Committee recognizes theexceptional range of uncertainty surrounding that aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 615.
"MR. MARTIN. 7 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of a percentage range, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 616.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 10 percent isn't even on the charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward statement indicating that 10 percent is not a significant amount. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 617.
MR. MARTIN. Neither is M1 on the charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that M1 is not on the charts, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 618.
MR. RICE. 7 to 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement without any conflicting opinions or ideas being presented.


Passage number 619.
MR. PARTEE. "M1 behavior continues to be subject to unusualuncertainty but may grow in a range of 7 to 9 percent--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a range of possible growth for M1 behavior. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 620.
" The halfis--well, 7 to 10 percent is a lot better than 7 to 9-1/2 percent, but10 percent is a high number and if it says may grow in a range of 7 to9 percent we get--MR. MARTIN. May or may not grow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions conflicting percentages and expresses uncertainty by saying "may or may not grow."


Passage number 621.
MR. PARTEE. You would say "may not".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that "you would say 'may not'" without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 622.
MS. SEGER. How about "will likely grow at some unknownspeed".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "will likely grow at some unknown speed" does not express disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that the growth of something will occur, but the exact speed at which it will happen is uncertain. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or opposing perspectives in this statement.


Passage number 623.
MR. PARTEE. It's important to say M1 behavior is subject tounusual uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or belief without opposing or contradicting any other viewpoints.


Passage number 624.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Put a semicolon and "while the behavior ofM1 has been subject to unusual uncertainty, growth of 7 to 9 percentover the period is anticipated." Is that all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of a semicolon and the phrase "while the behavior of M1 has been subject to unusual uncertainty" is used to provide additional information or context before stating the anticipated growth percentage. It does not introduce any conflicting or contradictory ideas.


Passage number 625.
MR. BOEHNE. Would you care to review it the way you have itnow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks if the individual would like to review something in a particular way.


Passage number 626.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says "decrease somewhat" in the firstsentence. "This action is expected to be consistent with growth in M2and M3 over the period from November to March at annual rates of 6 to8 percent; while the behavior of M1 has been subject to unusualuncertainty, growth of 7 to 9 percent over the period is anticipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the action is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3, while growth of M1 is uncertain but anticipated at a specific rate.


Passage number 627.
"MR. STERN. Better stick an "annual rate" in there, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker suggests adding the phrase "annual rate" to clarify a point, which does not indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 628.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Things aren't that bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that things are not that bad, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 629.
MR. PARTEE. Instead of "has been subject to" why don't wemake it "continues to be subject to". [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is suggesting a slight modification to the wording without expressing any opposition or disagreement with the current statement.


Passage number 630.
]-66-12/16-17/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's look at this next sentence. Do wewant after the "be acceptable" to take out the "taking account of".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 631.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 632.
 The foreign exchange markets part--MR. PARTEE. We must still be affected by the domesticbusiness situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 633.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But in reality I'd be putting foreignexchange markets [first] if I were doing it. Not that I'd argue this,but from an operational standpoint that's much more likely to have animportant change in a matter of weeks than the business situation.There is some merit in that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement is presented as a personal opinion or perspective, acknowledging that putting foreign exchange markets first from an operational standpoint is more likely to bring about important changes in a matter of weeks compared to the business situation. The phrase "There is some merit in that" suggests agreement or support for this perspective.


Passage number 634.
MR. PARTEE. Conditions in domestic and international creditmarkets also may have more operational significance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that conditions in domestic and international credit markets may have operational significance.


Passage number 635.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would agree with that too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they agree with something, indicating alignment of thoughts or opinions.


Passage number 636.
MR. PARTEE. If there's a collapse someplace that wouldprobably affect us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 637.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wouldn't be allergic to puttingbusiness expansion and progress against inflation last. In anoperational sense, probably, that's the order in which they come. Weprobably won't get a sharp change in the inflationary situation in thenext few weeks either. In the first place, do we take out "takingaccount of". It's probably a little more accurate, but I wouldn'tbleed or die [over it].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion on the order of prioritizing business expansion, progress, and inflation. They also mention a potential lack of immediate change in the inflationary situation. The mention of "taking account of" is more about accuracy and not a point of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 638.
MR. MARTIN. We'd be criticized if we didn't have it inthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows a potential disagreement or contention between Mr. Martin and an unidentified group or individual who might criticize them for not including something in the context.


Passage number 639.
MR. RICE. No, I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice simply expresses his opinion without any conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 640.
MR. PARTEE. We would still have them in there; we just takeout the phrase "taking account of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The phrase "taking account of" suggests that there might be differing opinions or disagreement over how to approach the issue.


Passage number 641.
"MR. RICE. That's really elevating those things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a statement or observation by someone named Mr. Rice.


Passage number 642.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It elevates them slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it simply states a fact without presenting any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 643.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think it does. It puts them on an equalplane.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee agrees that something puts them on an equal plane.


Passage number 644.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Now what do you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking what the reader possesses.


Passage number 645.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...be acceptable depending on behavior ofthe aggregates, appraisal of the strength of business expansion,developments in foreign exchange markets," etc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The information is presented as a conditional statement, stating that the acceptability of something depends on certain factors such as behavior of the aggregates, appraisal of business expansion strength, and developments in foreign exchange markets.


Passage number 646.
MR. GUFFEY. You do not have a reference to the discount ratein the directive, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Guffey without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 647.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We agreed not to. "Taking account of" isout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "We agreed not to" indicates a consensus among the individuals involved. The statement "Taking account of" being ruled out suggests a mutually agreed upon decision or action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 648.
MR. MARTIN. Do you want to take "appraisals" out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention regarding whether or not "appraisals" should be removed from something.


Passage number 649.
-67-12/16-17/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it makes any difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing an opinion about the given numerical expression and does not involve conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 650.
MR. PARTEE. The difference is the perception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply stating a difference without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 651.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh. But you are probably right; the"appraisals" now refers to all of them. It might be better to takeout "appraisals of" to avoid distinctions between appraisals of thestrength of the business expansion and developments in foreignexchange markets. Does anybody else have any suggestions. Doeseverybody know how it reads. "In the implementation of policy for thenear term the Committee seeks to decrease somewhat..." Is "somewhat"the right word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of someone seeking suggestions and input from others, expressing agreement with a suggestion, and questioning the use of a specific word.


Passage number 652.
MR. RICE. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement that was made.


Passage number 653.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...the existing degree of pressure onreserve positions. This action is expected to be consistent withgrowth in M2 and M3 over the period from November to March at anannual rate of 6 to 8 percent; while the behavior of M1 continues tobe subject to unusual uncertainty, growth at an annual rate of 7 to 9percent is anticipated. Somewhat greater reserve restraint..." Whatdo you want to do with these "woulds" and "mights".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The language used suggests a level of uncertainty and speculation regarding the future behavior of M1 and the desired level of reserve restraint. Words such as "expected," "anticipated," and "uncertainty" indicate that these statements are hypothetical or possible scenarios.


Passage number 654.
MR. MARTIN. Rephrase it "might" and "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is made in a neutral and speculative tone, without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 655.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leave it "might" and "would".SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting not to use words like "might" and "would" and instead use the word "several". This implies that there is disagreement or difference of opinion about which words should be used.


Passage number 656.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...be acceptable depending on behavior ofthe aggregates, the strength of the business expansion, developmentsin foreign exchange markets, progress against inflation, andconditions in domestic and international credit markets." When I lookat this I really wouldn't mind changing the order of those lastthings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply lists different factors that could affect the acceptability of a certain outcome, and the speaker expresses their personal preference for changing the order of those factors.


Passage number 657.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wouldn't change it from thatstructure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses the speaker's preference to keep something as it is.


Passage number 658.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Operationally, I think it's more accuratethat way. Do you want to change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply saying that they believe something should be done in a certain way for operational reasons. The question at the end about changing it suggests an openness to discussion but does not indicate disagreement or contention in the current statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 659.
MR. PARTEE. I would rather not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "I would rather not" which suggests that Mr. Party is expressing his opposition or disagreement towards something.


Passage number 660.
MR. MARTIN. Don't change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply requesting that something remains unchanged.


Passage number 661.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It isn't a big point. Do you have anyoverwhelming sentiment one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, the speaker clearly states that the point being discussed is not a significant one and expresses uncertainty or ambivalence about any strong feelings towards it. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 662.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not clearly stated and does not present any specific arguments or viewpoints that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 663.
MR. PARTEE. Take a show of hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes someone asking for a show of hands.


Passage number 664.
MR. FORRESTAL. You'd put foreign exchange first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a position or preference without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 665.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, "depending on the behavior of theaggregates, developments in the foreign exchange markets, conditionsin domestic and international credit markets"--that way we could-68-12/16-17/85reverse those two--"and the strength of the business expansion andprogress against inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply listing different factors that can influence certain outcomes. There is no conflicting or contradictory information provided.


Passage number 666.
"MR. RICE. I would prefer to see it stay as it is. Peoplewill be trying to figure out what we are trying to tell them. I don'twant to tell them that because that's not how I see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice simply expresses his preference for the status quo and provides his perspective on the matter.


Passage number 667.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We leave it unless there are strongfeelings and somebody wants to press the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply states that they will leave the matter unless someone strongly feels the need to further discuss it.


Passage number 668.
MR. RICE. One less thing for market watchers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is one less thing for market watchers.


Passage number 669.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Possession is nine-tenths of thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 670.
MR. PARTEE. And leave the funds rate at 6 to 10 percent.[Unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it only includes one person, Mr. Partee, stating a proposed action without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 671.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is all in a framework in whichthe initial borrowing is $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the initial borrowing amount of $350 million. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 672.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Initial borrowing in a $300 to $400million range, starting at $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the initial range of borrowing between $300 to $400 million, with a starting point of $350 million.


Passage number 673.
MR. PARTEE. And hope the funds rate will come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Partee's hope that the funds rate will come down.


Passage number 674.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the discount rate were down, wepresumably go toward the upper end of that range or even beyond, say,up to $450 million. If the discount rate doesn't go down, dependingupon these other things, we might get down below the $300 million.The outside range is $250 to $450 million with an inside range of $300to $400 million. Is that all comprehensible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining different scenarios based on the discount rate.


Passage number 675.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Remember that man from Mars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 676.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any further elucidation. I guess we willvote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Any further elucidation. I guess we will vote" does not express disagreement or contention. It simply suggests seeking more clarity and indicates a decision to vote.


Passage number 677.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or details about a Mr. Bernard, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


