Passage number 1.
]MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes Mr. Cross making a statement but not mentioning any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 2.
]MR. RICE. Sam, what will the BIS do with the deposits ofmarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 3.
MR. CROSS. They will deposit them in banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states what Mr. Cross is saying, which is that "They will deposit them in banks."


Passage number 4.
MR. RICE. Where. In Germany.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the location in Germany.


Passage number 5.
MR. CROSS. In German banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the topic is German banks, without providing any details or opinions that might spark disagreement.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In Germany.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
MR. CROSS. I think the idea is that the BundesbankSo Iassume that most of this will get back into Germany.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There doesn't appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a belief about the situation, but there is no conflicting or opposing view presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
MR. BOEHNE. You talked earlier about selling dollars inmarkets outside New York as well as in New York. My general sense isthat the extent to which you're intervening in markets overseas is agood bit more than has been the practice in recent years. I wonder ifyou could comment on the pros and cons of that and how you would judgethe effectiveness of being more active in markets in the Far East, forexample.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that there is an increased level of intervention in markets overseas, which is a departure from recent practices. The speaker asks for a comment on the pros and cons of this approach and how its effectiveness is judged. This implies a disagreement or difference in opinion on the effectiveness of being more active in markets in the Far East.


Passage number 9.
MR. CROSS. Well, I think it can be helpful at times. Forexample, at times when the Japanese were intervening rather heavily inthe yen we were intervening in the Far East, kind of following theiraction, to keep some action with respect to the mark. It showedevidence of a somewhat coordinated approach. And since we hadn't donethat sort of thing very much, as you said, certainly in quite a while,that certainly can have an impact in the proper circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and providing an example to support it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
MR. BOEHNE. Have you been as open in these markets as youare in New York. Is it as obvious to people in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The question implies that the speaker doubts the level of openness of the person being asked in markets outside of New York.


Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS. It's certainly known. We have tried differentapproaches in our own market and elsewhere, at times operating throughagents, at times trying to operate as openly and as visibly as wecould--dealing with a whole bunch of banks at once--in order to makeclear to all the participants that we were there and that we wereacting in a firm way. But it depends on the particular circumstancesand the time of day and things of that sort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is merely discussing different approaches that have been tried in their market.


Passage number 12.
11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions. We have arecommendation to renew the swap arrangements.[Secretary's Note: Motions to renew the swap arrangementsand to ratify the transactions in foreign currencies were made,seconded, and approved without objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there was a recommendation to renew the swap arrangements and that the motions to do so were made, seconded, and approved without objection. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
]MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 14.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. You said November 15 is"drop-dead day" or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 16.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, "drop-dead day"--when they have to trotout some gimmick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, simply agrees or acknowledges the concept of a "drop-dead day" and refers to it as a gimmick.


Passage number 17.
MR. BOEHNE. Right. Are there gimmicks there that can beused.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question about the presence of gimmicks, indicating curiosity or a desire for more information.


Passage number 18.
MR. STERNLIGHT. They did some disinvesting of trust funds afew days ahead of the normal schedule in order to make benefitspayments to Social Security and other pension recipients just in thelast couple of days--last Friday and today. Conceivably, they coulddo some disinvestment of trust funds even further ahead of time. Butthat's something they have talked about in their inner circlediscussions at Treasury but have no intention, as far as I know now,of doing. There was mention, I think, in one of the letters that wentup from Secretary Baker to the Congress about the possibility ofselling gold but they said that the Administration is totally setagainst doing something like that. There are probably half a dozenother things that are conceivable but that they have said they justdon't want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about certain actions and decisions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 19.
MR. PARTEE. Have they used up the Federal Financing Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "they" suggests that there may be multiple parties involved, some who believe the Federal Financing Bank has been used up and others who may hold a different opinion.


Passage number 20.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It will be just about used up by the $3billion cash management bill that they announced early this afternoonand will carry through tomorrow. I think that will leave about $1billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts about the cash management bill.


Passage number 21.
MR. MELZER. Peter, would you say that the somewhat firmerand more volatile funds rate is associated primarily with thisuncertainty surrounding the Treasury's financing requirements. Or arethere other factors that are operating now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for clarification or explanation on a specific topic, rather than expressing disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 22.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the firming of the funds rate has beenrather minuscule; it has changed from a 7.90 percent average to an 8percent average, approximately. It is conceivable that some of thechanging pattern had to do with low Treasury balances in the moneycenter banks, which may have put them under a little more pressure tobuy in the fed funds market, but I'm not sure it was verysignificantly that. I think it may have been more a carrying throughof the slight adjustment that had been made in our degree of borrowingpressure before the last meeting that was achieving its maturingeffect in the recent period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Sternlight explaining his perspective on the firming of the funds rate.


Passage number 23.
11/4-5/85MR. MELZER. Did the intervention activity create anydifficulty for implementing domestic--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is simply presenting a question about the potential difficulty caused by intervention activity.


Passage number 24.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think so. We had a good handle onwhat it was. Typically, that takes place in terms of the actualreserve impact with a couple of days' lag, and we were totally on topof what was happening there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is expressing confidence and agreement in the situation described.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions. If not, we have toratify those transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply confirming if there are any further questions before proceeding to ratifying the transactions.


Passage number 26.
MR. PARTEE. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" is typically used in meetings or discussions to indicate agreement or support for a motion that has been proposed. In this context, it suggests that Mr. Partee agrees with or supports the motion.


Passage number 27.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: ins the motion that climate change is primarily caused by human activity.


Passage number 28.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We can go home unlessyou want to hear an economic report. Mr. Kichline are you prepared togive an economic report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone has an objection to going home or if they would like to hear an economic report.


Passage number 29.
MR. KICHLINE. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a single short statement by Mr. Kichline and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 30.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to go home.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "You want to go home" is a simple statement indicating a desire or intention, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 31.
MR. PARTEE. I think we ought to have Mr. Kichline's reportin the morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating his opinion.


Passage number 32.
MS. SEGER. I do too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll see you all in the morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement indicating that the speaker will see the other people in the morning.


Passage number 34.
[Meeting recessed]11/4-5/85November 5, 1985--Morning SessionMR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage provides information about a meeting being recessed and a statement being made, but there is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 35.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage simply states a fact without presenting conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 36.
MR. MELZER. Jim, in what kind of shape are inventories ingeneral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about the state of inventories.


Passage number 37.
MR. KICHLINE. We think really quite good. Obviously, partof what is going on in the aggregate numbers is this auto story:stocks were run off substantially in the third quarter and are beingrebuilt now. As we go through the various sectors, in puttingtogether what we know, we think that inventories are about in line inthe aggregate, and in the forecast we just have them rising withsales. So they don't really run off any more and they don'tcontribute to growth; they're a neutral factor. There are a couple ofareas that I think are important. I have seen some figures for Sears,for example, which presumably is pretty close to the industry inplanning. They still feel that inventories are a little on the highside, are banking on decent Christmas spending, and expect that willtake care of it. But if indeed consumer spending turned out to be alittle weak, I would think retailers might not be very happy as theyenter the new year. Still, in that general merchandise area,particularly with respect to apparel and some soft goods, it dependson decent sales prospects coming along.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and observations about the state of inventories and the potential impact of consumer spending on retailers.


Passage number 38.
MR. PARTEE. Jim, that is an extraordinarily low saving ratein the third quarter. Would you attribute that mainly to the surge incar sales and the credit associated with it, or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking Jim to provide an explanation for the low saving rate in the third quarter.


Passage number 39.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it is two things: one is the surge incar sales; the other is that income growth was weakening and consumerspending outside of autos was still pretty good--not that weak. Ifyou want to take a percentage point or so off for auto sales, youmight do that. But even so, what we have been looking at is fairlygood consumer spending and weakening real disposable income growth, sothat consumers really have been in a position of reducing their savingrate, borrowing a lot and so forth, to fund expenditures. So, I thinkit is more than autos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining two factors that contribute to the strength of consumer spending, namely the surge in car sales and relatively good spending outside of autos. There is no opposing viewpoint or contradictory statement provided.


Passage number 40.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We did a calculation on that pointthat is kind of interesting. It is not an entirely valid calculationbecause you can't hold everything else equal, but with that limitationit is a valid calculation. If you use a benchmark of, say, 5 to 6percent as the average for the preceding quarters and work off that,the combination of two things--the reduction in farm income and highernet interest payments by consumers--appears to be worth a little morethan a percentage point on the saving rate itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author simply acknowledges the limitations of the calculation but still considers it valid within those limitations.


Passage number 41.
MR. PARTEE. Higher net interest payments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions a statement from Mr. Partee, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 42.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Net.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 43.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, net interest; so, payments minus receipts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement describing the calculation of net interest as payments minus receipts.


Passage number 44.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The combination of both of thosethings. Again, given the limitation of the way you do your11/4-5/85 -5-arithmetic, farm income and interest payments are about a half a pointeach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the combination of farm income and interest payments.


Passage number 45.
MR. PARTEE. I assume farmers aren't spending any money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a assumption about farmers not spending money.


Passage number 46.
MR. BOEHNE. Some farmers are. Some farmers in New Jerseyand Pennsylvania and Delaware are going out to places like Iowa andbuying up machinery that is on the block out there cheap and haulingit back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that some farmers are going to other states to buy machinery. There is no clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 47.
MR. PARTEE. Hauling it back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple statement without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 48.
MR. BOEHNE. Hauling it back. They are buying implementsthat might cost $50,000 to $60,0000 and picking them up for $15,000,$20,000, or $25,000. It is worth the trip out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage is simply stating a fact about people buying implements at a lower price and it being worth the trip to retrieve them. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 49.
MS. SEGER. That isn't recorded as consumer spending though,is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact or inquiry.


Passage number 50.
MR. BOEHNE. No. But some farmers are spending. That's mypoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Some farmers are spending" is a simple statement of fact and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anyone have any more comments on thebusiness scene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I myself just can't see anything outthere that is going to get growth up into the 3 to 3-1/2 percent rangeas opposed to the 2 to 3 percent range. For a long time I thoughthousing could make the difference in terms of that marginalcontribution, but I can't see that now either. Looking across thesectors of the economy at this point, it is just awfully hard to findsources of marginal growth that would get us to a bit more respectablerange on a forecast basis. On top of that, the anecdotal reports thatI, at least, am getting from business people and directors and so on--for what they are worth--are distinctly on the sour side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their inability to see any potential sources of growth that would push the economy into a higher range. They also mention that the anecdotal reports they have received from business people and directors are negative. This disagreements with the belief or hope that there may be sources of marginal growth.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 54.
MS. HORN. Looking around the District I find, much as is thecase for the national outlook, that the incoming data are notconclusive. I see no evidence of accumulating weakness nor signs ofstronger growth in the months ahead. The business investment picturehas come in consistently weaker than I had expected, both in theDistrict and of course nationally as well. But I wouldn't see achange in that outlook. Housing, which Jerry just spoke of, hasresponded to the lowering of interest rates with less strength than Iand many of us had expected, and that is in the District as well asnationally. The real question is with the consumer, and in ourDistrict retailers are encouraged about the Christmas season. Also,in talking to people in the business community I have noticed what Ithink is a change in attitude toward their formerly optimistic feelingthat the fiscal impasse might be resolved. I have long thought thatit probably would not but in that I differed with the businesscommunity that I talked to; they had been optimistic up until the lastcouple of months but I think now their view is that the fiscal impassewill remain an impasse. I am not sure that I can take the next stepand say how that will change their planning for the future, but Ithink there has been a distinct change in attitude there. I would say11/4-5/85that the business people I talk to continue to be guardedly hopefulabout efforts to reduce exchange rates. While they realize thedangers connected with an overly fast reduction of the exchange rate,I think they view what has happened perhaps as being maintainable.And if exchange rates were to back up, I think their reaction would bedisappointment and that might affect their future plans.My view of the economic outlook is about the same as thestaff's forecast--I don't know whether to describe that as moderateexpansion--in the next couple of quarters. As I look at the 2 to 3percent number, which may [turn out to] be closer to 2 percent, andask myself if that is a good or bad number to be looking at in theforecast, I am not sure I come to a conclusion. If I talk to mydirectors and others and look at the gaps in the economy, I see a lotof room to say it is not a good number. On the other hand, when Iremember the difficulty of reducing inflation and the high price wepaid, it looks better in that context.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their observations and opinions about the economic outlook, but there is no conflicting viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 55.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but no passage was provided. Could you please provide the passage you would like assessed for contention or disagreement?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
MR. MARTIN. Jim has given us a ritualistic comment thatthere has been no change in the forecast and I am going to give theritualistic response to that and say that there has been a change inthe forecast in a direction with which I concur--that is to say, it ismore realistic in that the numbers are down a few tenths for the nextfive quarters and unemployment is constant or creeping up a bit,depending on how well the forecast tracks. Like others, I [havereservations] about the assumption of the saving rate staying at alittle over 4 percent, but we explored that pretty thoroughly andthere is no point in going over that further. It is interesting thatthe forecast contains a shift in government spending in the fullemployment budget deficit sense, which should be a matter of someinterest with regard to what Jerry Corrigan has indicated as a verycautiously optimistic outlook with no sector particularly giving apush. It does not look as though [stimulus] is going to come from thefederal government sector. I am delighted to see the housing forecastrevised downward a little. I like that old joke about the people wholived in [unintelligible] and everybody knew everybody's story, sotheir stories were numbered. I am going to number my comments, so Iwill simply say "number 17" rather than make you listen to myritualistic housing comment. I warn you, however, that tightening ofcredit standards by lending institutions has yet to have its fulleffect and that is coming. That is down the road and I think it willbe in 1986 but that--in other words, "17.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes some disagreement and reservations about the assumptions made in the forecast, particularly regarding the saving rate and government spending. The mention of the tightening of credit standards also suggest potential concern or disagreement.


Passage number 57.
"MR. PARTEE. Does that mean that you agree with the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 58.
MR. MARTIN. No, I said "17" already, Chuck. That means Ithink it is a little too optimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin simply restates his previous statement in response to Chuck's comment.


Passage number 59.
MR. MORRIS. The tightening of lending standards doesn't seemto have hit the commercial construction market. How do you accountfor that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact and asking for an explanation.


Passage number 60.
MR. MARTIN. No, I am talking about housing. I am talkingabout that 1.8 million housing figure and that $5.6 billionresidential spending number, neither of which we will ever reach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the housing figure and residential spending number, expressing doubt that those targets will ever be reached.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 61.
11/4-5/85MR. MORRIS. What I don't understand is why the lendinginstitutions are still lending for office buildings at the rate theyare. I don't quite comprehend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "I don't understand" and "I don't quite comprehend." The speaker is expressing confusion or disagreement with the lending institutions' decision to continue lending for office buildings at a certain rate.


Passage number 62.
MS. SEGER. It's the lags.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by someone named Ms. Seger about "the lags," without any opposing point of view or conflicting information.


Passage number 63.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I got the answer to that the otherday, Frank. We had the chairman of one of the largest commercialconstruction companies in the world into the bank for lunch and Iasked him that same question. I said "How come you're still buildingall these buildings in Dallas and so on." He said; "It is very easy;the banks keep giving us the money. As long as they give us the moneywe will keep building.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It simply recounts a conversation between the speaker and the chairman of a construction company.


Passage number 64.
"MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not clear from the given passage whether there is contention or disagreement, as there is no specific information or context provided regarding any argument or conflicting opinions among individuals named "Mr. Martin."


Passage number 65.
 The banks, the thrifts, the life insurancecompanies--MR. FORRESTAL. Why are the banks extending the money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or question asking why banks are extending money.


Passage number 66.
MR. PARTEE. They don't have any other place to put it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 67.
MR. MARTIN. I think the reason is different. I think it isbecause there still is, from the '70s, the expectation that thoseoffice rents and that percentage lease income from the commercialproperty are going to increase with inflation down the road--in three,four years, whatever. I think that's built in. These people haveequity positions and they feel that the office rents and thepercentage returns off the commercial property will [provide a good]return. In conclusion, I don't think the major issue here is downsiderisk. Let me break another rule and say that I think this is acourageous forecast. I think the staff was willing to revise it in adownward direction and take the risk that they might be pessimistic.It has implications, of course, for our next round of discussion withregard to monetary policy. There is that assumption of somewhat lowerinterest rates over the 5- or 6-quarter period--a drop of 150 pointsin one case and 100 points in the fed funds rate in the other case.We have to consider whether the forecast results are appropriate--whether the monetary policy we adopt here is consonant with that 150basis points decline over this period of time. I think it's a goodforecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions about the reasons for certain expectations and the validity of the forecast. They also acknowledge that the forecast has implications for future discussions on monetary policy. Overall, there is no conflicting viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 69.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I can't bring in any great amountof optimism to this discussion. Our part of the country, I think itis fair to say, is pretty sluggish. It is uneven; it depends on whereyou happen to be sitting. We had an unemployment rate for Texas lastmonth of 8.1 percent, which is very unusual. The unemployment ratesin Louisiana and New Mexico are even higher. In the various sectorsof the economy, there is really not anything positive that seems to behappening. We continue to feel that the energy situation will remain[poor] even though there has been some firming in the price. We thinkthat is temporary and that the price will start sliding as we getthrough the winter. In our latest survey of our agricultural banks itis fairly obvious that the tone has changed and that some of thoseproblems now are starting to materialize. From that last survey, thedecline in land values now is estimated to be about 10 percent, whichdoesn't sound like all that much compared to what is happening in the11/4-5/85Midwest. But that is the first time that I have seen a number thatlarge from our respondents. The only thing that is really happening,and this was mentioned earlier, is in non-residential construction.We just had another major office building announced in Dallas byRepublic Corporation; it is going to be a 60- story building that theyare going to build with a developer--Vantage Company--and in theprocess they are going to reduce their occupancy costs; they havereally made a very nice scenario on how all that's going to work out.I was reading in the paper coming up on the plane yesterday thatPrudential, which now owns the second tallest building in Dallas, oneof the newer ones--InterFirst Tower II, which InterFirst sold--isgoing to spend $50 million putting a new facade on that building so itwill look prettier. I guess that is a good business decision; I don'tknow. But it just keeps on. We set new records in August in terms ofthe amount of commercial construction. Even in Houston--and I think Imentioned this before--there is a $250 million building coming out ofthe ground in downtown Houston. But that developer is going to catchthe curve right; he is going to come on stream just at the right time.I am inclined to agree with Pres in terms of the outlook 3 to 5 yearsout: that there still seems to be the conviction that you can catchthe turning point and it will pay off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their pessimistic view of the economy in their part of the country.


Passage number 70.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 71.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the Sixth District is seeing adefinite tapering off of economic activity. Unemployment is upsomewhat. The same sectors that have been suffering over the lastseveral months are still in difficulty, basically textiles andapparel. Agriculture, while not as bad as in the Midwest, is still inthe doldrums, and energy is pretty bad. On the other hand, we havethis continuing activity in the commercial real estate sector, which Ifind very, very difficult to understand. I get the same answer thatother people get: They're going to continue to build as long as theyhave the money to do it; I guess that's the way developers usuallythink. But it does seem somewhat irrational in that I think they aregoing to pay the price for it along the way. Housing, on the otherhand, has been fairly decent in the Sixth District. All of thestatistical information shows a downturn, but I must say that theattitude of directors and business people that I talked to is fairlyoptimistic. Again, I find it a little difficult to understand wherethis optimism is coming from. Even in New Orleans and in Louisianagenerally, which are really in the pits as it were, they seem fairlysanguine about the situation and are looking for some uptick inactivity.Going to the national scene, I don't have any strongdisagreement with the staff; I think they are about right. I thinkthat Jim is quite right to put out some of these warning signals,particularly with respect to the consumer. Housing is definitelysomething that, if it continues, is going to be a source of strengthto the economy. There really isn't much else that one can point to inthe near future that's going to be a positive force. But I'm a littleconcerned that housing may not be as strong as the forecast. On theother hand, I don't really see that we're going to have anyappreciable decline in activity. So, I think the staff's forecast isabout right. I should add--and I meant to note this in my Districtreport--that people are talking about beginning to see some pricepressures building up in some businesses. They say it's related to11/4-5/85the value of the dollar, which surprises me a bit, because that wouldsuggest that the effect is occurring a little faster than we wouldhave expected. But they are definitely reporting some increase inprices coming from abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

This passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing various economic sectors and expressing some confusion or surprise at certain aspects, but there is no direct disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: unable to attend the conference?


Passage number 73.
MR. FORRESTAL. "They" are basically in textiles--shirtmanufacturers and people like that. Their raw material is increasingin price.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes the activities of "They" and the increase in the price of their raw material without expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 74.
MR. MORRIS. What are the chances, Jim, that you're tooconservative on the net exports side. You don't show net exports asbeing a drag anymore but, certainly, we're not seeing any significantresponse to the fairly sizable decline in the dollar that has takenplace. Now, is this the normal--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris believes that Jim is being too conservative on the net exports side and argues that there has been no significant response to the decline in the dollar. This suggests a difference in opinion on the impact of net exports and the effectiveness of the decline in the dollar.


Passage number 75.
MR. KICHLINE. I think what we have built in here is afairly normal historical response. I'll let Ted answer. I might saythat question catches me a little by surprise because the usualquestion we get is: Why do you have net exports rising. So, I haven'tthought about this one recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have not thought about the specific question being asked recently and deferring to someone else to answer it.


Passage number 76.
MR. TRUMAN. I think that's the right answer; that's myreaction as well. We do have some increase. In fact the percentagechange on the export side we have is an increase of 7 percent in realterms for goods and services and 9 percent for goods alone. Theimport side is essentially flat or a very small decline--less than apercent in the imports in goods and a small increase in services,which would depend on more debt. So it's basically in line with whatwe have tended to say--this is the same question about the pricequestion on the other side. If you don't think prices are going tochange as much as some people argue, then import prices aren't goingto reflect it as quickly or as fully as with past exchange ratechanges. It also follows that you shouldn't get the response to theexchange rate changes as fully or as fast as in the past. So the twothings are sometimes linked together. We have tended a little towardthe conservative side on prices for various reasons, at least in theshort run. Until we know what is underway, we feel we shouldn't put alarge number in the forecast. Therefore, we also don't have a largenumber on the other, [real, side]; it's somewhat attenuated. But Ithink it's not far from what we believe is historical experience,given the quality of information on trade data at this point, which isnot very good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker discusses some statistical data and explains their reasoning and approach to forecasting, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 77.
MR. KICHLINE. I might say that the net export sectorcontributes about a half percent to growth next year. So, we wouldhave essentially 2 percent real growth fourth-to-fourth quarter if youheld net exports constant. That's the impact of these numbers Ted istalking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the contribution of the net export sector to growth.


Passage number 78.
MR. MORRIS. On your gradual depreciation path, at what pointwill we expect to get a real upward kick from net exports. Obviously,it's not in 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward question about the timing of a potential increase in net exports. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 79.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think that's a pretty big kick: 9percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion about something without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 80.
11/4-5/85MR. KICHLINE. Well, you get a kick early on from servicereceipts in the reevaluation in the current quarter. But lookingahead, where we think this begins to kick in is at the very end of1986; presumably 1987 is the important year and it's beyond theforecast horizon. But it's late '86 at best where we see someparticular strength and then we see it carrying on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing and predicting future events, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 81.
MR. TRUMAN. That's essentially a delayed reaction to thevery steep decline because from here on out we have a gradual move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a steep decline followed by a gradual move.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage as there is no information provided. The passage only mentions "Mr. Black" without any further context or indications of disagreement.


Passage number 83.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might ask Jim acouple of questions. Jim, you made some passing reference to theintroduction of IBM's new Sierra mainframe computers. I was struck bythis weekly publication of Citicorp the other day that estimated thereare 400 or 500 already on order to be delivered in the fourth quarter.That would cause a pretty sizeable increase in total producer durableequipment expenditures; it seemed huge to me, just looking at it. Iwondered if you had made any estimate of what that might do. Thesecond thing is that I'd taken some encouragement from the nonfarmpayroll employment figure and you suggested that ought to be averagedwith September, if I understood you correctly. Do you think that is aseasonal adjustment problem there or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 84.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. Let me comment on the employment figuresfirst. The problem occurs particularly in manufacturing andconstruction. In manufacturing, employment dropped 110,000 inSeptember, which we really didn't believe; and it rose 60,000 inOctober, which we don't believe either. And neither does the BLS.There are a couple of things going on. One is that the survey week inOctober was the earliest possible that could have occurred. Theseasonals are thinking in terms of declining employment in October,and it is thought that the survey week was so early it didn't pick upall of the decline; hence, seasonally adjusted, you get a largerincrease. Now, that's one part, particularly in manufacturing. Wehave some other evidence in terms of physical product and otherinformation that leads us to think there are some distortions. But Iwould still say it's a good number in that it is very clear that thosetwo months together look better than earlier in the year.With regard to the Sierra, we have seen [shipments] numbersthat range from an impact of $3 to $10 billion annual rate in thefourth quarter. We have talked to IBM and we have talked to others.Sothey are trying to build up what was a dismal year for IBM's earningsexpectations and make it all up in the fourth quarter, or do the bestthey can.Other manufacturers,being one, are just not doing very well at all. So wethink some offsets are occurring there. In addition, in the fourthquarter we expect a very sharp decline in business purchases of autossince some of those autos sold in the third quarter were businesspurchases at cut-rate terms. So the Sierra effect is a little-10-11/4-5/85uncertain. In our own thinking we picked a low-end number and used apositive $4 billion annual rate attributable to that, largely offsetby autos and to some extent truck sales, which we think will be down.But it is a big impact. If we're wrong--. As I say, the numbersoutside [forecasters are using] range from $3 billion to $10 billionannual rate and it depends in part on what you assume is happeningelsewhere in the computer industry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own analysis and opinion on the employment figures and the impact of the Sierra shipments, but they are not disputing or contradicting any other information or perspectives.


Passage number 85.
MR. BLACK. And also partly offset by declining shipments ofothers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only states a fact about declining shipments of others without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 86.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kichline simply agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 87.
MR. BLACK. What they must have done in that Citicorp report,which was not clear to me, was to look just at the gross effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is describing the confusion of the speaker, Mr. Black, about the content of the Citicorp report. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 88.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is disagreement in the passage. The response "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without additional context, it is not possible to provide a more specific explanation.


Passage number 89.
MR. BLACK. It was surprisingly large; I wish I couldremember that percentage because it shook me. I ought to remember it,but senility has overtaken me and I can't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion and reflecting on their own memory.


Passage number 90.
MR. PARTEE. You need a computer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 91.
MR. BLACK. I may be too old for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Black may be too old for something without any conflicting opinions or opposition.


Passage number 92.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions the name "Mr. Keehn" without providing any context or information that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 93.
MR. KEEHN. There really is very little to report in the wayof change in our District since the last meeting. Those businessesthat have been showing some strength continue to do reasonably well.But there is certainly no noticeable improvement for the beleaguered.The steel industry and most lines of mechanical equipment remainawfully weak. On the steel side, the import restraints have had someeffect but they have been far from perfect. And pricing conditions inthe industry are very intense. Agriculture, I think, speaks foritself. The harvests have been late because of wet weather.Nonetheless, the crop estimates are being increased a bit, so that thepressure will continue on commodity prices. More positively--we'vecommented on the construction industry--certainly commercialconstruction in Chicago is very strong. I saw a presentation theother day showing that Chicago is going through a building period thathas been unsurpassed since the great fire. An awful lot of buildingsare going up. Just to add a comment to what Jim said earlier, theauto inventories really are very low; when they finished this bigsales program they were down to 24 to 26 days' [supply], which was thelowest inventory level in some 20 years. So, for the rest of thisquarter and going through January, one manufacturer at least is goingto be running absolutely flat out including their maximum overtimeschedule. They will be running their plants at the absolute maximumat least through January. Their outlook for '86 with regard to carsales is pretty good--a bit lower than ours but nonetheless the recentsales program hasn't had as big an impact on the '86 volume as onemight have expected. On balance, as we look at conditions in theDistrict, the staff forecast would be rather consistent with the waythat we see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an update on various industries and economic conditions in the District.


Passage number 94.
-11-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't had the last 10 days' autosales yet have we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for confirmation about whether the last 10 days' autosales have been received or not.


Passage number 95.
MR. KICHLINE. No, it comes out this afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kichline.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Mr. Melzer without any additional information or context to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 97.
MR. MELZER. To pick up on what Bob Forrestal said, I heardthe same thing from a major retailer in St. Louis: that in the FarEast the Japanese and others already are beginning to jack up priceson apparel and other textile goods. One other thing I've noticed intalking to people around the District is that there seems to be aninterest developing now in bidding on farm land. People have talkedabout it before but I sense now that there is some very seriousexpression of interest, along the lines of what Ed Boehne was sayingin terms of equipment, for putting together groups to bid on the land,which I think is a constructive development.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 98.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first I've heard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "The first I've heard" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker is hearing something for the first time.


Passage number 99.
MR. MELZER. That's at very low prices. This would be inArkansas and northern Mississippi and I'd say prices are probably down40 to 50 percent from their highs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact about the decrease in prices in Arkansas and northern Mississippi. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 100.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Mr. Stern without providing any context or details about his actions or opinions.


Passage number 101.
MR. STERN. Well, on the one hand, it appears that thespillover effects of the agricultural problem in our District aregrowing in the sense that recent gains in employment in the Districtstates, to the extent they have occurred at all, have been sluggish.Unemployment rates in most District states have been on the increase.On the other hand, if you get away from the agricultural sector, thetone of the anecdotal comments that I've been hearing is that thesituation isn't great but it isn't bad either. I take that to beroughly consistent with the kind of forecast reflected in theGreenbook. And I think the Greenbook forecast is largely consistentwith the incoming evidence that we've been seeing in terms ofemployment as discussed, the strength in final demand, relativelyacceptable levels of inventories, and so forth. I guess it's fair tosay that we do have an ongoing construction boom in the Twin Cities.In both Minneapolis and in St. Paul vacancy rates have been rising,although they haven't kept up with the Sun Belt, so they don't looktoo bad relative to some of the national numbers. Developers thatI've talked to give roughly the explanation that you've heard: thatbasically it's an equity play for some financial institutions who feelthey missed out in the late '70s and early '80s and don't want to missthe next opportunity. Finally, I have not been disappointed, to dateanyway, by the performance in housing. At least in terms of the levelof starts, the first half came in somewhat stronger than I hadexpected. The fact that the last few months have been weaker doesn'treally surprise me. I don't think we're very good at timing thesethings precisely and I suspect that just as we did maybe a bit betterin the first half, we're now going to do a little worse. But, net, Idon't see any reason to think that anything terribly unusual is goingon so far in the relationship between rates and housing activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing ideas or conflicting viewpoints. It only mentions Mr. Balles without presenting any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 103.
-12-11/4-5/85MR. BALLES. From the Twelfth District, there's a combinationof good news and bad news that we have had now for some long time.The areas which have been weak and continue to be weak are thetraditional ones that I have talked about so many times: forestproducts, agriculture, and oil. And now more recently, somewhat toour consternation, the electronics industry is in something of aslump, at least for the time being. On the other hand, there isconsiderable strength in defense spending and in the kinds ofcompanies that benefit from that. I suspect we are on the receivingend of an unusually big share of that in the West. My staff tells methat two of our states taken together, California and Washington, haveabout 28 percent of defense contracts, so that's obviously a strongplus in terms of the tone of business, at least in those two states.Retail trade figures seem to be going very well; most stores have beenreporting year-over-year sales gains of 5 to 10 percent. Auto salesare going well in most of the states. And of course the serviceindustries, which are not nearly as identifiable as anything likesteel or whatever, are reporting pretty good news in terms of theirperformance. Our staff reports that the market for single-familyhousing appears to be relatively healthy, which I was pleased to see.Whether it's permits, sales, or prices, all seem to be holding up inmost markets, although it differs quite a bit if one moves from stateto state. We do have nine states, but as a generalization this doesnot appear to be an area of great weakness at the moment.In terms of the outlook, our view is not much different fromthe Board staff's with respect to the balance of this year. Our staffis a little more optimistic as we look into 1986, simply in the sensethat we expect somewhat greater shrinkage of net imports--that therewon't be as big a drag on the economy as there has been in 1985. Ofcourse, this is a judgmental difference, but we think we ought to geta little more kick out of the improvement in our foreign tradeposition coming from the expected decline in the value of the dollar.That's the thumb-nail sketch from the West.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 104.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. John, I don't know whether I shouldask you or Bob Forrestal, but do you know if Boeing is expecting greatthings, particularly in the export side, from this new model 747 thatthey are beginning to market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
MR. BALLES. Do you mean the 757.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide any context or information about what the speaker is referring to as "the 757." Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement based solely on this information.


Passage number 106.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, they have a new model, a veryhighly fuel efficient 747.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a fact about the new model of the 747 being highly fuel efficient.


Passage number 107.
MR. BALLES. Gee, Jerry, I am not familiar with what that is,unless it's a 747 SP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles simply states that he is not familiar with something.


Passage number 108.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states the title or position of the individual, without any additional information or context to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
 No, no, it's a new generation of--MR. BALLES. I haven't heard about that I am sorry to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing that he has not heard about something mentioned previously, without showing any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 110.
MR. STERN. Northwest ordered a bunch of them--I don'tremember how many--as part of the $2 billion capital spending programthat they have just initiated. But that's all I know about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating what they know about Northwest's order of aircraft without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 111.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do you know anything about it, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Jim if he knows anything about something.


Passage number 112.
-13-11/4-5/85MR. KICHLINE. No, I don't. I'm sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline simply states that he does not have something, without any apparent disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 113.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming in your budgetaryprojections about a farm bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward question asking about assumptions made in budgetary projections. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 114.
MR. KICHLINE. We have a $45 billion deficit reductionpackage for next year. That's about $8 billion less than theCongressional estimates. They expected $53 billion or so for fiscal1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different figures for the deficit reduction package.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not real.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: N/A


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, what I am trying to tell you is that wedidn't accept the $53 billion figure. We think there will be overrunsin a number of areas. The farm area is a prime one; we don't have thespecific number on the farm bill, but we think that it is going tocome in higher than the Congress had expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage contains disagreement or contention. Mr. Kichline is expressing his belief that there will be overruns in several areas, particularly the farm area, which he believes will come in higher than what Congress had expected. This contradicts the initial statement about the $53 billion figure.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] pretty optimistic--that's [unintelligible]. Why did you lower prices in your forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is unintelligible and does not provide any clear information or argument to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 118.
MR. KICHLINE. Why did we lower them. They are not reducedby much, a couple of tenths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement or question about the reduction of something.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER AND MR. MARTIN. One half percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions the names of two individuals, Chairman Volcker and Mr. Martin, without providing any further context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 120.
MR> KICHLINE. Which price measure are you looking at--thedeflator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply poses a question about which price measure is being referenced. There is no argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm looking at any of them--grossdomestic business product deflator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 122.
MR. KICHLINE. All right. That's .4 down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response "All right" suggests agreement or acquiescence to the previous statement.


Passage number 123.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excluding food and energy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states that something is being excluded, with no conflicting or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 124.
MR. KICHLINE. A couple of reasons: One is that the incominginformation in a couple of areas was a little better than we hadthought in the third quarter. That's the case for the gross businessproduct deflator. On compensation and wages, we went through thatagain and that continues to look really quite good to us, or indeedmaybe a little better. And with weakness in economic activity, we nowhave a little more slack in labor and product markets than we hadbefore. In addition, taking another look at what we were doing onimport prices, we felt that perhaps there was a reason to say it willcome along a little slower--that is, rising prices from the dollarwould occur later on in the year--so we pushed that back a bit. Andall of those things together add up to .4 on the index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing reasons and explanations for their observations and decisions.


Passage number 125.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 126.
MS. SEGER. I just had two comments. One involves housingand the comment is that the tightening of terms and lending standardsis there and that it is going to get more prevalent. We haven't seenmuch of it yet in the statistics but that doesn't mean it won't showup in 1986. I just hear too many comments from specific lenders abouteither tightening on their own or being forced to by the mortgageinsurers; so I think that that may knock 100,000 to 200,000 off the-14-11/4-5/85numbers we are showing. Also, a comment on office building financing:If you get into some of the details, what you find is that the banksare doing the construction financing and they are willing to do itbecause there is permanent financing being supplied by the lifeinsurance companies. Also, there is still a lot of syndication goingon. There are rich doctors, lawyers and dentists who haven't adjustedto the new economic realities of a less inflationary environment and,also, they view this kind of investment as a good tax shelter. If taxreform measures actually get passed and the marginal rates are cut, Ithink that will kick that in the head real well. So, again, thecombination of the financing facts and the agency rates suggests thatsometime this is going to peak out, although I am not smart enough toknow when.One final comment about the value of the dollar: The businesspeople I talked with in the Midwest are certainly not sitting thereworrying about the inflationary impact of further declines of thedollar because they long ago ceased believing their economists'forecasts. But one thing they do know is that the appreciating dollarnearly killed them and they are making decisions right now on thingssuch as closing plants or moving production abroad. So time is of theessence here to get the dollar down, because these are decisions thatare not going to be reversed quickly if they ever are reversed.Somehow or other I don't think that we necessarily appreciate thatfact. They are not that concerned about what the declining dollarwill do to inflation, but they are very concerned about what willhappen in terms of their survival if it doesn't decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is primarily sharing their observations and opinions about housing, office building financing, and the value of the dollar.


Passage number 127.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you ever find a businessman worriedabout his ability to raise prices when--. They like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking if the reader has ever observed a businessman worried about their ability to raise prices.


Passage number 128.
MS. SEGER. They also buy supplies, though, that are imports,It's a very competitive world out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions. It simply states that companies buy imported supplies in a competitive world.


Passage number 129.
MR. PARTEE. They prefer to buy low and sell high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "They prefer to buy low and sell high" is a general observation about a commonly held preference in investment or business strategies. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement alone.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 131.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I tried to have a very optimistic view ofthe economy all through the summer, thinking that there would be apretty good resurgence in the fall. There were some pretty favorableindicators at our last meeting, but I must say that this recent setbothers me. I am most affected, I guess, by the McGraw-Hill surveywhich is down one percent--and nobody mentioned that--in nominalterms. Now that's a pretty good survey. It's the oldest, and wealways thought the best, of the private surveys. That's a prettypoor, unrespectable survey result to be occurring in the fall afterboards have met and plans have tended to firm up for the next year.That did shock me. The other thing that I worry about is thatpersonal saving rate; the only thing you can do really is assume thatit won't come back very much. But it's so low that one wonderswhether there hasn't been some kind of a spending desire on the partof consumers associated with the use of credit that will disappear,and that in fact the automobile producers are wrong about theirforecasts for next year and it won't be as good as Si, I guess it was,suggested. I don't know; that bothers me. I am not sure, but it's avery mysterious thing to have a saving rate that low. After all,there was supposed to be an environment that would encourage saving in-15-11/4-5/85connection with supply side economics. It's totally the wrong answerthat has come out of the data from that point of view. It's verydifficult for me to incorporate the net export/import picture becausewe have had so little experience with that being a large factor. Itmight be that there could be a bigger increase in exports than thestaff has forecast, but the fact of the matter is that for the nextyear they have a contribution coming from net exports--that is,smaller net imports. It's the first time since 1980 that there hasbeen any contribution to the economy from that source, so it is arather radical change in GNP effect that they have already put inthere. As far as office building is concerned, I think the longer itgoes on the worse it is going to be. I don't know when it is going tobreak, but it is going to break pretty big; and the longer it goes onthe bigger the break will be when it occurs.So, I'm starting to lose my optimism; I figure at best wewill get the staff forecast for the period to come and it could be agood deal worse. There is a possibility of a recession and we need torecognize that. I said that last time, thinking of it as sort of aremote possibility. My feeling is that the possibility is a littlestronger now that there will be a recession some time in the next ninemonths. It's a distinct possibility. In any event, I would want topoint out to you--and I think this is what Pres Martin did--that thestaff forecast is well below our bogey for the performance of theeconomy. We [as a group] forecast 4 percent for the second half ofthe year, I believe, in real terms. Apparently, it is going to bewell below that. We forecast a pretty good 1986, and it looks asthough it is going to be below that by an appreciable percent or so.So we are below our bogey; that seems to be increasingly clear as themonths go by, and I think we will need to take that into account indetermining what the monetary policy ought to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses concern and skepticism about the state of the economy and the accuracy of the staff forecast. He mentions several indicators and data points that bother him, such as the low personal saving rate and the possibility of a recession. He also disagrees with the staff forecast, noting that it is well below their desired performance for the economy. Overall, Mr. Partee's statements indicate disagreement and a lack of optimism about the current economic situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have made our forecast a bogey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "You have made our forecast a bogey" implies that the person being addressed has caused the forecast to be considered unachievable or unsuccessful. This suggests a disagreement or disagreement in expectations or performance between the speaker and the person being addressed.


Passage number 133.
MR. PARTEE. I thought it was a minimal acceptableperformance of the economy that we predicted in July. That's the wayit was presented in the Humphrey-Hawkins report, I thought: as asatisfactory performance. Otherwise, we would have needed a change ofmonetary policy to get a different economic result. So it wasacceptable, but now we have fallen more below that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement from Mr. Partee expressing his understanding of the predicted performance of the economy in July and his perception of it being acceptable.


Passage number 134.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You seem to be a GNP targeter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a reflection or observation about someone's behavior or attitude. It does not express disagreement or contention.


Passage number 135.
MR. PARTEE. I think I am, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evident contention or disagreement in the statement.


Passage number 136.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure that the Committee hasaccepted that. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the Committee's acceptance of something, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 137.
MR. BOEHNE. As far as the District goes, I continue tothink that the tone is a little better in my part of the country thanit is in many of the other Districts. Even in the District, though,it is usually described as not great but not terrible. But I thinkit's generally above the national average.As far as the economy across the nation goes, I think we arevery much in the hands of the consumer and that gives me some pause atthis stage of the recovery, because I would have hoped that we couldbe getting some help from some of the other sectors, notably11/4-5/85investment. But as Chuck pointed out, that doesn't seem to be there;in fact, it seems to be a drag. Therefore, [the economy] pretty muchis riding on whatever momentum there is that the consumer is going toprovide; and looking at that one can avoid extreme pessimism, but itis awfully hard to get very upbeat about it. If you look at whatdrives the consumer, the job income side is moderate, but it seems tome the consumer is held back by the debt situation. Inflation hasbeen another factor that has either helped or hindered consumerspending. That seems to be about neutral: it doesn't seem to begetting any worse and it doesn't seem to be getting any better. Butin a kind of static dynamic view of the situation, we are not gettingany help from there anymore. And that leaves interest rates, whichalso have a major impact on what the consumer does, and I suppose theoutlook there is flat to down. We do have some constraints on theinternational side [in terms of] what we can do there. But I just getthe feeling that the expansion is much like a person entering hissenior years. He can go on a while longer, but I get the feeling thathe could fall over any time. And while I wouldn't predict arecession, I get the sense that sometime out there in the forecasthorizon this recovery is just going to fall over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is primarily a reflection on the state of the economy and the concerns of the speaker.


Passage number 138.
MR. PARTEE. He's a lot younger than the average age.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "He's a lot younger than the average age."


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the actual content of the passage.


Passage number 140.
MR. GUFFEY. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I don't think I shallburden the Committee with reciting again the problems in our regionalarea, other than to tell you that the latest survey we have done atthe banks suggests that farm land prices have fallen another 5 to 6percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing information about the latest survey results regarding farm land prices. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 141.
MR. PARTEE. In what period is that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 142.
MR. GUFFEY. That's in the third quarter; they are down inthe 40 to 50 percent range now below the high of 1981. But there isanother activity that I would like to bring to the Committee'sattention. Because of the rather depressed conditions in our region,and based on the resourcefulness of the people who live in theMidwest, they do turn to other activities to provide food for thetable. As a result, game wildlife hunting is a big activity this timeof the year and I can tell you that, at least in the immediate areaaround the Bank, there is some optimism for the Thanksgiving holidaybecause the hunting season opened early. You will find four out ofseven Bluejays and four out of seven Cardinals will be served.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the current economic conditions in the Midwest and the popularity of game wildlife hunting in the region. There is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 143.
MS. SEGER. I thought you were going to say that they got acouple of bankers to serve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their initial perception that someone was going to say something, without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 144.
MR. PARTEE. That's an upbeat report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's an upbeat report" suggests a positive and agreeable response to the report.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's turn to Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply suggests shifting attention to Mr. Axilrod without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 146.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I can be quite brief. It seemsto me that the alternatives presented--not alternative C, butalternatives A and B at least--are generally consistent with thegrowth path adopted by the Committee for the fourth quarter at itslast meeting. One is toward the bottom end of that range and one, ina sense, is toward the middle or upper end. I should point out a-17-11/4-5/85technical point: that M1, for example, under alternative B we have 5percent; the Committee said 6 to 7 percent or lower. The hurricaneeffect raises M1 growth in September by 3 percentage points andreduces it in October by about the same amount. So in some sense that5 percent under alternative B could be construed as 6 percent with thehurricane allowed for. That's a minor bit of expertise. It does tendto buttress the point that the differences between "A" and "B"relative to the growth path adopted by the Committee are small. Theonly other point that perhaps one might make in a general way, Mr.Chairman, is that the weakness in the economy is in those areas mostsusceptible to long-term rates, and one could advance very gingerly aproposition that in providing reserves as they will have to beprovided over this period perhaps there is some usefulness inproviding them through acquisitions of coupon issues, at least to adegree, to do whatever could be done to keep pressures on long ratesfrom going up or encouraging them to go down even while short ratesmight need to be sustained for international reasons or for reasons ofmonetary growth rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and analysis without expressing any opposing views.


Passage number 147.
MR. MARTIN. Steve, let me ask: You pointed out some of thesimilarities of "A" and "B" with regard to the aggregates. Could youhelp me understand the differences--and I am talking forward now--inalternative A for the next short-run period versus alternative B. Youhave borrowings on page 8 [in the Bluebook] of $450 to $550 millionfor "B;" you have borrowings of $200 to $300 million for "A" on page10. That seems to me a rather substantial difference. Can you helpme rectify this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and understanding regarding the differences between alternative A and alternative B.


Passage number 148.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that was essentially a difference wethought was roughly consistent with a drop of a half point in thefunds rate, and presumably to a degree in other short rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement about a difference in thought regarding the drop in funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 149.
 The--MR. PARTEE. And with no drop in the discount rate, I takeit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses a different viewpoint or stance by stating "And with no drop in the discount rate." This indicates that he disagrees with the previous statement or expectation being discussed.


Passage number 150.
MR. AXILROD. No. But I feel absolutely certain that if theCommittee leaned in the direction of alternative A, expectations of adiscount rate decrease would shortly begin to dominate the market.And I think the risk, as we tried to indicate, would be that shortrates--at least in the short run--would fall more than is specified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing his certainty and belief about the potential consequences of the Committee leaning towards alternative A.


Passage number 151.
MR. MARTIN. From midpoint to midpoint, that would be $500million for borrowing for "B" and $250 million for "A." So that's 50basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the amounts for borrowing for options "B" and "A."


Passage number 152.
MR. AXILROD. Well, one model gives you 25 basis points per$100 million [on borrowing], and we tend to think judgmentally morelike 20 basis points per $100 million. These relationships are quiteloose, so I think that is consistent with what we have there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating two different options or possibilities based on different models or perspectives. They mention that the relationships are loose, suggesting that the differences in opinions are not significant or implying any disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
MR. PARTEE. You suggest a little operation twist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention or disagreement in the following passage. The phrase "You suggest a little operation twist" implies that the speaker is questioning or challenging the suggestion made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 154.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or information about the content of the passage.


Passage number 155.
 Well, I didn't mean to be very--MR. PARTEE. As long as we have some time, would you like todiscuss that a little more. That's an unusual recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker shows a lack of intention or purpose in their statement, and Mr. Partee suggests discussing the matter further. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict between the two speakers.


Passage number 156.
-18-11/4-5/85MR. AXILROD. We are coming to a period of reserve need, andI guess I was bitten by fears of the dollar dropping sharply. Workingthrough that chart show, I think that the dollar is probably sensitiveto both short-term as well as long-term rates in some degree. So inproviding reserves over this period, I was trying to think of a waythat would minimize the possibilities of adverse expectational effectson the dollar. So I didn't really mean a substantial operation twist,but that when the opportunity came it might be desirable to thinkabout buying coupon issues rather than bills, depending a little onthe circumstances at the time and how people were thinking in themarkets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal thoughts and considerations about the possibility of the dollar dropping and the best approach to providing reserves.


Passage number 157.
MR. PARTEE. Well, there will also be a bunch of Treasuryissues, I assume. Will any of those be coupons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 158.
MR. STERNLIGHT. There are likely to be. Yes, there is thenormal 3-, 10-, and 30-year issues that would have been up for auctionthis week that have been postponed. They just did last week the 4-,7- and 20-year issues that had been postponed by about a month becauseof debt limit problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the passage discusses the postponement of various bond auctions due to debt limit problems, there is no explicit mention of contention or disagreement. The statement provided by Mr. Sternlight is simply stating the facts without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 159.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only long-term fixed rate borrower wehave is the U.S. Treasury. I think there is very little in that idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express or imply any disagreement or contention. It is a statement about the only long-term fixed rate borrower being the U. S. Treasury and the speaker's opinion that there is very little in that idea.


Passage number 160.
MR. AXILROD. You see that was not checked with the Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating a fact and expressing that the action of not checking with the Chairman was not appropriate.


Passage number 161.
MR. RICE. Is that because you think long-term rates have asmuch effect on exchange rates as short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is asking for the speaker's opinion on the impact of long-term rates on exchange rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, I don't think the differencein their rate levels will be visible to the naked eye; and I thinkyes, that is a possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "First of all, I don't think the difference in their rate levels will be visible to the naked eye" suggests disagreement with the idea that the difference in rate levels will be easily noticeable. The phrase "and I think yes, that is a possibility" indicates agreement or support for another perspective or possibility.


Passage number 163.
MR. PARTEE. We did study that operation twist at somelength, and I can't recall that there were any findings of significantdifference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there were no findings of significant difference, indicating there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 164.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In fact, I don't think there are manyprivate borrowers out there in the long-term markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not introduce any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement of the author's opinion.


Passage number 165.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you have the mortgage borrowers: there area lot of those. And they prefer fixed rates if they can get them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents the preference of mortgage borrowers for fixed rates if available.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's probably related more to the short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply providing an explanation without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 167.
MR. PARTEE. There's [unintelligible] at least in the homemortgage market. Consumers have a very distinct preference for fixedrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Despite the missing word in the passage, there is no contention or disagreement expressed. The statement is a simple observation about consumers' preference for fixed rates in the home mortgage market.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some of it is fixed rate and some of it isfloating rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states that there are both fixed rate and floating rate components within the unspecified subject.


Passage number 169.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am attracted to the idea of tryingto do a little something in the coupon end--not because I think it'sgoing to have any great effect on relative rates--but just because thethought runs through my head every now and then that at some pointdown the road we may feel that we have to do something in coupons for11/4-5/85other reasons, and if we get so removed from that segment of themarket the mere fact of doing something for a particular reason hasmuch more signal effect to it than we might otherwise want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the speaker's personal attraction to the idea of doing something with coupons and their potential signal effect.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we want to do it for a particularreason, we presumably want to signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is simply stating a hypothetical situation without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 171.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I am not sure of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or doubt about a particular statement, but there is no engagement with opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 172.
MR. RICE. You mean we may need the twist somewhere down theroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 173.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We may need something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "we may need something" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement expressing a possibility or potential need.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
MR. PARTEE. What do you mean: because the Treasury will haveso much difficulty financing. If so, why would they continue to issuecoupons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker raises a point by saying "What do you mean: because the Treasury will have so much difficulty financing." This indicates that they do not agree or understand the reason mentioned previously.


Passage number 175.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know what the precisecircumstances might be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any specific circumstances or details, making it impossible for any contention or disagreement to arise.


Passage number 176.
 I think preserving some flexibility--MR. PARTEE. I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the speaker's view on preserving flexibility, with no contrasting opinions or conflicting positions.


Passage number 177.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. --in our market presence isdesirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "in our market presence is desirable" is a straightforward statement expressing that having a presence in the market is desirable. There are no opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas presented.


Passage number 178.
MR. PARTEE. You don't extend that view to agencies, I takeit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking for clarification or confirmation of a view.


Passage number 179.
MS. SEGER. Like Farm Credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Ms. Seger is provided without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 180.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide an answer based on the given information.


Passage number 181.
 Well, I didn't want to mention any particular--MS. SEGER. It would narrow that spread, if they knew the Fedwas in buying the Farm Credit ones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing someone's hesitation to mention a specific entity, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 182.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only argument I hear for buying long-term issues is that the market expects us to buy long-term issues insome [unintelligible] or that we expect ourselves to buy long-termissues and, therefore, we ought to buy them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The statement is simply presenting a reason for buying long-term issues based on market expectations or personal preferences.


Passage number 183.
MR. BLACK. Oh, it might be kind of fun.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses enthusiasm and anticipation towards the situation, suggesting a positive outlook and lack of conflict.


Passage number 184.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we buy them once in a while, you know.For what reasons, it's not quite clear to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the reasons behind occasionally buying the items, but there is no contention or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 185.
MR. PARTEE. Steve, you have [forecast] a pretty calm M1behavior for the remainder of the year. You are not expecting anyyear-end surge or anything like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the opinion of Steve, who is forecasting a calm M1 behavior for the remainder of the year without any year-end surge. There is no apparent contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 186.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it's calm, largely because of theaveraging of the zero to minus one that we are projecting for October.Growth would have broken out--whether it's "A" or "B"--in between 8and 9-1/2 percent over that last two months of the year. Those arefairly substantial growth rates in and of themselves and, as wementioned, if rates went down and particularly if expectations carriedthem down more, we could get a powerful surge in M1 as rates moved-20-11/4-5/85closer to these NOW account ceilings. So there is a considerable riskof a very substantial growth, particularly under "A," I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing potential growth rates and the potential impact of interest rates on that growth. They mention the possibility of a "powerful surge" in M1, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M1 is very high. Well, I think ourproblem on that is relatively simple and difficult at the same time. Idon't attach a lot of weight to small changes in this forecast,whether it's prices or GNP within the ranges that are set. I don'tthink that we know what GNP is going to be in this quarter. Thingshave somewhat less than an ebullient tone to them, so I think: "Fairenough; one might think of easing slightly if the dollar gave one roomto do that." I am not sure it does right at the moment, but that's[unintelligible] a shorter-run perspective. I am considerablyconcerned that a continuing sharp decline and a real change insentiment there, which I think we're on the edge of, would give usmore difficulties than we bargained for. And whatever we do has totake that into account. The stronger the dollar is, the more we canease; the weaker it is, the more stuck we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 188.
MR. RICE. But the amount of intervention that has occurredmost recently would suggest that there are still some strong upwardpressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact and expressing a suggestion based on that fact.


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's all a matter of judgment. Theintervention that took place when we were intervening heavily is what:two weeks old. The big intervention was what: ten days ago. Sincethen the markets definitely have been on the other side. How much ofthis is short term. It could go back the other way; I don't know. Iwouldn't be unhappy if it went back the other way; it will give us alittle more room. But this is all a fairly narrow focus. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their perspective and acknowledging that there is uncertainty and potential for the situation to change.


Passage number 190.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I agree with your analysis, Mr. Chairman,because I don't think we have much room to maneuver here. If we hadsome evidence that the economy was softening, then I think we could goahead and move to lower rates, despite the growth in the aggregates.But I don't think we have anything to tie an easier posture to at thismoment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is a difference in opinion regarding the appropriate course of action, it does not lead to contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris is expressing agreement with the analysis provided by the chairman and explaining his own reasoning for why he believes there is little room for maneuver in the current situation.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is another element thatcould arise. I don't know what the odds are, but if Congress reallypassed one of these budget resolutions that calls for a sharply lowerdeficit than I think is at all probable in the current fiscal year,it necessarily follows that within weeks after they passed this bill,I presume, they would have to do something to cut expenditures in abig way. I might point out that the way some of those bills arewritten, it could include the Federal Reserve. Then I think we have akind of platform, and maybe a necessity, for seeing that interestrates go down. I don't know how much easing that would take; theymight go down by themselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their own thoughts and speculations about the potential consequences of a budget resolution passed by Congress.


Passage number 192.
MR. MORRIS. That's exactly the kind of thing--something tohang our hat on--that we don't have now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is expressing a need for something specific that they currently lack.


Passage number 193.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the odds are onsomething like that happening. I am totally confused by this process;I don't know whether it is all a game, whether there is any chancethat they are going to get together, or whether they are carefullymaking positions that are mutually inconsistent so [unintelligible].They may end up with a bill that is vetoed. If it happened that we-21-11/4-5/85got a dramatic difference in the budget, in one sense it would beconstructive and in another sense it may be rather chaotic if they doit in a hurry. Then I think we have a new ingredient that we'd haveto take into account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 194.
MR. PARTEE. Well, Frank, I don't know. If we have acontinued sub-par performance of the economy, it would seem to me thatthat would be a reasonable justification. On Friday of this week wewill get the McGraw-Hill survey, which I think is going to be a bignews item. In addition, I think the retail sales figure, just becauseof car sales if nothing else, is going to be very poor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions about the potential justification for a sub-par economy without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 195.
MR. MORRIS. I personally think that McGraw-Hill survey willreflect the decline in exchange rates. That certainly has to be aplus for domestic investors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It states the personal opinion of Mr. Morris regarding the McGraw-Hill survey and its potential impact on exchange rates.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that it's going to make muchof a difference--maybe in the short run. I don't know how good thatsurvey is. Retail sales are assumed to be down because of auto sales;I guess you look at the rest of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It includes statements expressing uncertainty and personal opinions, but there is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 197.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. I have no idea what that will show.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply states that he does not know what the mentioned outcome will show.


Passage number 198.
MR. BOEHNE. I take it your basic proposition is to staywhere we are now but be alert for opportunities to ease, and thatthose opportunities may come from the international side or the budgetside or wherever. I think that makes a lot of sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the proposition and stating that it makes sense.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's sort of where I am.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is indicating the speaker's personal position or current state of mind, without expressing any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 200.
MR. BOEHNE. I think that general proposition is quite sound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne agrees with the general proposition.


Passage number 201.
MR. RICE. I certainly agree with that proposition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The person is expressing agreement with the proposition, indicating there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 202.
MR. BLACK. Maybe we can get the post FOMC questions pre-lunch today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion or proposal being made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's not assume too much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement as it suggests caution and the need to avoid making assumptions based on limited information.


Passage number 204.
MR. BLACK. I just said "maybe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black simply acknowledges that he said "maybe."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 205.
" I didn't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, looking at operational policy in ourusual format, I didn't hear anybody talking about anything thatsounded like alternative C. I suppose it's impossible that themonetary numbers would come out that low. Who knows. But I don'tthink anybody wants to drive them there, if I heard the conversationcorrectly. The difference between "A" and "B" in the actual numbersI'm not sure is big enough to send anybody very much. We had 6 to 7percent last time. We're in one of these mid-quarter periods when,just as a matter of form, I prefer to make fewer changes rather thanmore in these targets that we don't meet anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt about the possibility of alternative C and suggests that nobody wants to drive the monetary numbers there. There is also uncertainty about the difference between "A" and "B" in the actual numbers.


Passage number 206.
 But--MR. PARTEE. We might as well leave it the same, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee seems to be proposing that they keep things unchanged, but the passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is any opposition or disagreement to this idea.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is my inclination unlesssomebody--although where we had them was 6 to 7 percent and that maybe a little high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two different perspectives or possibilities. The phrase "that is my inclination" suggests a personal opinion, while the statement "where we had them was 6 to 7 percent and that maybe a little high" implies a potential disagreement or opposing view.


Passage number 208.
-22-11/4-5/85MR. PARTEE. That was for Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without mentioning any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 210.
 I think it was--MS. SEGER. M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a personal opinion from the author.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --6 to 7 percent for all of them. We caneasily say around 6 percent for all of them without it being asubstantial change. But in terms of the borrowing and our actualoperations, I heard more worries about being too tight than too easypurely on the domestic business outlook, which is not the wholeequation, certainly. From the standpoint of the international debtsituation and a lot of other things if interest rates came down, itwould be nice. On the other hand, I continue to be impressed by theamount of credit that this economy is dealing out, including in thereal estate construction area. I'm not sure that inviting it to spewout a little more is in the long-term interest of anything. But therewe are. Right now, as I suggested before, I would look toward notmaking any very startling changes; but if the dollar really gave usthe opportunity or--more remotely but conceivably--if the budget gaveus more opportunity, I'd be alert to go down in the absence of any newstriking news in the other direction. There's a slightly peculiarsituation in the market right now. We have had borrowing low all weekbut the federal funds rate is higher than one would expect, presumablyin reaction to Treasury financings. I presume that's just a passingphenomenon and that the market doesn't seem to be taking it seriously.Well, let's see what others have to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It seems to be describing the speaker's thoughts and observations on interest rates and the economy.


Passage number 212.
MR. PARTEE. It's going to be hard to evaluate the budgetthing isn't it, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing that evaluating the budget will be difficult.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. I have no idea what'scoming out. I don't particularly expect this, but I suppose onepossibility is that they could pass something that virtually demandedexpenditure cuts pretty quickly. I don't know how you avoid them ifthey pass something. The budget is clearly running above what theysay. I can see how they might ignore this law next year if they passit; it's a little hard to see how they ignore it three weeks afterthey pass it. I have no idea what's going to come out of this. Iwould think from the Administration's standpoint, Congress has managedto screw it up enough that the bill would end up being vetoed, so youhave nothing. I would think that may be the most likely scenario--orthat they just never agree so they finally pass the debt ceiling billand they give in on the thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is uncertain about what will happen and is speculating on different possibilities.


Passage number 214.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement agreeing with a previous statement, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or they could pass it in the Senateversion and could say that it has no implications for this year sothey'll think about it next September, in which case it would not havemuch implication for us either, I guess. Any one of the above [ispossible], and I have no idea how it's going to come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents multiple possibilities without taking a strong stance on any of them.


Passage number 216.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, would that argue for a bit widerrange in the borrowing without having to consult with this group,considering the wide range of both that uncertainty and the dollaruncertainty and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indications of contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 217.
-23-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to leave ourselvesa little range on the dollar side. I don't mind consulting when thechange gets significant in any event, but a little week-to-weekflexibility or two-week flexibility is useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that it would be beneficial to have some flexibility in terms of the dollar range and consulting when there are significant changes, but they do not express any disagreement or argument against another person's viewpoint.


Passage number 218.
MR. RICE. Or aiming for the lower side of the range more sothan the upper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not demonstrate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a preference for aiming for the lower side of a range compared to the upper side.


Passage number 219.
MR. PARTEE. Or changing the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 220.
MR. RICE. Oh, I wouldn't go that far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what do have now: $400-$600 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the amount of money that is currently available. It does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 222.
MR. RICE. We could talk about $400 to $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a possible topic of discussion, which is the amount of money being discussed.


Passage number 223.
MS. SEGER. $300 to $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 224.
MR. RICE. Aiming at being more comfortable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that someone is aiming to be more comfortable.


Passage number 225.
 Or is it asclose to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $350 to $550 million. I think we're inthat neighborhood someplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty about the estimated amount of money.


Passage number 226.
MR. MARTIN. $350 to $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states an amount of money without providing any context or indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 227.
MR. PARTEE. We're now at $450-$550 million, and saying wewould like to err toward some ease--if there is an opportunity--andwidening that band on the low side is a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion that widening the band on the low side is a good idea.


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in case we get too involved in thenumerology here: These are always starting points and if somethingelse happens, we can go below it or above it.SEVERAL. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides a clarification or reminder that the given starting points are flexible and can be adjusted if necessary. The word "several" at the end seems to emphasize that there are multiple options available.


Passage number 229.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's clear enough. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is clear, but does not mention any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 230.
MR. MELZER. One thing that struck me, really, is thevolatility of expectations about the economy around the table. Thismonth they tend to be negative, while last month they were veryconstructive. Before that I think they tended to be negative. Thatonly leads me to the conclusion that there is still a lot ofuncertainty with respect to what's going on in the economy, and Ipersonally wouldn't be inclined to overreact to that. The other thingI would say is that there was mention yesterday of expectations in themarket about the possibility of a concerted action among the G-5countries to get the dollar down. So any easing that is undertaken inthe near term here could be misconstrued in a sense, in the context ofthat, and could be potentially very damaging in terms of that thought.It could cause a more dramatic fall in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their observation and personal opinion about the volatility of expectations in the economy and the potential consequences of certain actions.


Passage number 231.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say in that connection, just incase there's any uncertainty around the table, that this move of theJapanese to increase their rates came out of the clear blue sky as faras I am concerned. I still don't quite comprehend it. I'm not sure,but in the larger scheme of things I assume they did it--maybe it willaffect the yen in the short run--given that the Japanese economy is11/4-5/85not showing much pep and that they just absolutely are blocked on thefiscal policy side. It's not the move that I would have chosen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 232.
MR. MARTIN. It's certainly not consonant with the actionplan: the notion of stimulating housing and infrastructure spending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It simply states Mr. Martin's opinion about the notion of stimulating housing and infrastructure spending not being consonant with the action plan.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It goes I think in the wrong basicdirection. Excuse me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing their opinion about a certain direction, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement with anyone or anything else.


Passage number 234.
MR. MELZER. The other thing that I have been turning over inmy mind, in reaction to yesterday's presentation, is a feeling that interms of responding to a rapidly declining dollar my instincts lead meto feel that the right national policy response to that is probablyfor interest rates to rise somewhat. Easing in response to a weakerdollar had some implications that I didn't particularly like. WhatI've been thinking about is that we already have had a fairlysignificant decline of the value of the dollar and that possibly someof the general dynamics that were talked about in the hypotheticalpresentation yesterday may be coming into play here. We may bedealing with a sort of natural increase in interest rates and I don'tknow, frankly, whether it would be appropriate to lean against thattoo heavily. Now, I know there are other considerations. Net, basedon those several considerations, I would be inclined to stay where weare, with some degree of reserve restraint, and not be looking for thenext opportunity to ease at this juncture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of the speaker's personal thoughts and considerations regarding the response to a declining dollar and whether interest rates should rise or not.


Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me introduce another smallrefinement, given where the dollar is now and given the greaterhesitancy in the market and all the rest. It is given that there arerisks on both sides. But given the risks of this thing getting alittle out of hand--in terms of speed anyway--I guess I don't see muchpoint in intervening aggressively to push the dollar down or to holdit down. If the dollar is all that strong, in the short run it mightbe that the proper response is through a modest monetary policy changerather than trying to do it by intervention. It takes a littleflexibility to get it on the monetary policy side. So, interveningvery heavily increases the risk you are talking about: it freezes us;it has the opposite effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The author is expressing their own opinion and perspective on the topic of intervening in the market to control the value of the dollar.


Passage number 236.
MR. PARTEE. I get awfully uncomfortable with the idea thatwe should put the dollar as the centerpiece of policy. I think theeconomy is the centerpiece of [policy].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing discomfort with the idea of putting the dollar as the centerpiece of policy, and instead suggesting that the economy should be the centerpiece. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure I see that distinction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses uncertainty about understanding a distinction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 238.
MR. PARTEE. I don't disagree that the dollar is asignificant variable, but I would point out that the objective was toget the dollar down. That was a program to which you agreed: to getthe dollar down. And it has come down and, I think, has behavedextremely well. I thought for the whole period between meetings thatthe dollar had a lifting tendency and that's why we had to do theintervention. If it doesn't lift, we don't do the intervention. Itwas just very recently that we got a little weakness. And I think theweakness has come because of the Japanese raising their rates, whichis certainly a contra-economic policy from a world point of view--notbecause of anything we did. So, I don't disagree with what is beingsaid about the dollar, but I would again want to emphasize that I11/4-5/85think what we need to have is a decently performing domestic economy.That's the primary objective of monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee agrees that the dollar is a significant variable, but he disagrees with the idea that the objective was to get the dollar down. He argues that the objective was to have a decently performing domestic economy.


Passage number 239.
MR. MORRIS. I can see the case for moving to somewhat lowerinterest rates, but I don't see that that necessarily means weshouldn't intervene also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris acknowledges the case for moving to lower interest rates but also believes it does not necessarily conflict with the idea of intervening as well.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
MR. MARTIN. It seems to me--I don't know whether Tom wouldagree with this--that we're talking about the immediate 2 or 3 weeksof the 5- or 6-week intermeeting period. I would think by the end of5 weeks we might have enough feedback from the markets and from ourown economy to change our position, which I would certainly agree to.We don't need to ease this moment but that doesn't say that 5 weeksfrom now we might not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin expresses his belief that their position might change after receiving feedback from the markets and their own economy, while acknowledging that Tom may have a different opinion on the matter.


Passage number 241.
MR. MELZER. That's right. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges and agrees with a previous statement that was made.


Passage number 242.
MR. RICE. Where do you see the natural tendency of interestrates--to rise right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question being asked is simply about the natural tendency of interest rates, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 243.
MR. MELZER. I guess it's relatively minor, but some weeksback we were running borrowing levels that were well in excess of thesomewhat lower target and funds were trading below 8 percent. Now wetend to be running at borrowing levels that are somewhat below thetarget and funds are modestly above 8 percent. It's relatively minor:15 to 20 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 244.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Chuck, I agree with your point aboutthe primacy of the economy, but I come out a little differently interms of emphasis at the margin. With that primacy in mind I say tomyself: What are the things that are on the table in the very nearterm that could really louse up the situation with the domesticeconomy in a major way. And the one that just leaps out at me is therisk--and everybody puts his own arithmetic on this--of the dollarbreaking out on the down side. If that happens, the one thing we'resure of--or at least I'm sure of--is that that would do considerabledamage to the domestic economy and the world economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that they agree with Chuck's point about the primacy of the economy, but they have a slightly different perspective on the potential risks to the domestic economy.


Passage number 245.
MR. PARTEE. If it broke down sharply, yes. We have had agreat big program to bring it down and we have gotten it down alittle. The evidence hasn't been that it is tending to rush away.Maybe it will. I agree with you that that would be a bad thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of agreement between two individuals.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention expressed in the given passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply states a title or position of authority but does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 247.
 It is downMR. PARTEE. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not know something.


Passage number 248.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage is a statement of personal knowledge or belief, indicating that the speaker has a certain understanding or awareness of something. It does not involve any conflicting or contradictory viewpoints.


Passage number 249.
MR. PARTEE. Nobody ever told me what the program envisaged,so I don't have any sense [of that].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing the speaker's lack of knowledge or understanding about the program.


Passage number 250.
MR. MORRIS. If you attribute it solely to the program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Morris.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 252.
 I'm not talking about the long run---26-11/4-5/85MR. MORRIS. We have had a bigger response than I would haveexpected solely from the program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions. It simply states that there has been a larger response to the program than anticipated.


Passage number 253.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, we certainly have. I think the timing wasexcellent in terms of making the program look effective. Anyhow,having been worrying about a high dollar for the last year and a halfor two, I find it a little odd that we're now talking about howserious the possibility is. And there is a possibility that it isgoing to break all the way down; [I don't know] how clear and presentthe danger is. I suspect that some of Gov. Seger's manufacturerswouldn't mind a little further drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply expresses his thoughts and observations without contradicting or opposing anyone else's statements.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Chairman Volcker or any potential contention or disagreement related to him.


Passage number 255.
 They would like the yen at about 120 and--MR. MORRIS. The fact is, Chuck, that the markets that have ahigh level of speculative activity tend to overshoot, both on the upand the down side. And that makes this not something to be concernedabout in a [unintelligible] way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both parties are discussing the behavior of the markets and expressing similar views about the tendency for them to overshoot.


Passage number 256.
MR. PARTEE. Are you suggesting that after I have left here,the Committee is going to keep the interest rates very high to keepthe dollar from falling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a question asked for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 257.
 And thus put [the country] in a majorrecession that the rest of the world is in--MR. MORRIS. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "No" indicates agreement with the statement made by MR. MORRIS.


Passage number 258.
MR. PARTEE. With the same bad policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 259.
MR. MORRIS. No. I would think that one would describe whatwe are talking about now as hoping to avoid the necessity for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris states that he does not think there is any disagreement and describes the current conversation as an attempt to avoid the necessity for it.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Precisely. The dollar going down isn't afree ride. That's what the people were supposed to demonstrateyesterday. It may have to get down over a period of time; it probablydoes. How it gets there and what the accompanying policies are makesall the difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating a fact that the dollar going down is not a free ride and emphasizes the importance of understanding the accompanying policies.


Passage number 261.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, go back to that chart nine inyesterday's presentation. We sit here and we have a situation, whichwe have had for a long time, where we have a simply lousy fiscalpolicy. Monetary policy is trying to out-muscle and out-maneuverthat, and there is a point here where it just can't be done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a situation where fiscal policy is considered "simply lousy" and monetary policy is attempting to compensate for it, but there is a recognition that there are limits to what monetary policy can achieve.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
MR. MARTIN. Let me play devil's advocate for just a minute.We have been talking about what I think is the real risk of aprecipitous decline of the dollar. We had a good staff presentationyesterday on the same subject. On the other side of this issue is thelack of real action by our trading partners of any kind ofcoordination of policy, fiscal or monetary. And the Japanesecontradiction is exhibit A. Now, suppose the market players feel thatthere is not going to be any change in fundamentals--we all know thelimitation of intervention policy--and the market moves the other way.Is that of some probability. It may not be the most probable outcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is presenting an opposing viewpoint or perspective ("devil's advocate") to the previously discussed risk of a precipitous decline of the dollar. He mentions the lack of action by trading partners and questions whether the market players may believe there will not be any change in fundamentals. This suggests disagreement or differing opinions on the potential outcome.


Passage number 263.
MR. MELZER. I think that's possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 264.
-27-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then if domestic business looks somewhaton the softer side, then it is an opportunity to ease--to lowerinterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that if domestic business appears to be weakening, it could be seen as an opportunity to lower interest rates.


Passage number 265.
MR. STERN. That strikes me as a possibility as well. Andthat probably would provoke some natural upward pressure on thedollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Stern expressing his opinion and acknowledging the possibility of an outcome.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, then we're in the dilemma that wehave been in for years. You have a simple choice: What sector of theeconomy takes the rap for inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting a statement and presenting a choice without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being expressed.


Passage number 267.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Then they all take the rap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. There is no conflicting opinion or opposing viewpoint presented. The statement "Then they all take the rap" simply suggests that all individuals involved in the situation accept responsibility or bear the consequences together.


Passage number 268.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is all very useful, but I detect thatwe have a rather more limited range of possibilities. I think thisconversation is very relevant, but I don't know whether you want toextend the general conversation or focus on just what we put down herefor a directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the usefulness of the conversation but expresses uncertainty about whether to expand the discussion or focus solely on the directive at hand.


Passage number 269.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as policy itself isconcerned, I'd be quite comfortable with alternative B as in theBluebook. That had borrowing of $450 to $550 million, but I could gowith the $350 to $550 million range that Governor Martin suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they would be comfortable with alternative B as suggested in the Bluebook and also mentions that they could accept the range suggested by Governor Martin. This indicates agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Making it 5 to 6 percent [unintelligible],I guess--that's one possibility. We could just reduce it from 6 to 7percent to 5 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a possibility and presenting it as one option among others.


Passage number 271.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm somewhat agnostic on that. Ithink the [unintelligible] to me at this point isn't so much whetherit's 5 to 6 percent or 6 percent, it's the framework that wedescribed: that given the domestic economy, if the opportunity werethere to try and nudge things down a bit we would grab it. I don'tknow how you can articulate that in a very precise way. So, I wouldlean toward the 5 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty and lack of a precise articulation regarding the specific range of percentages, but they still lean towards the 5 to 6 percent range.


Passage number 272.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What this will be, I suppose, is "maintainthe existing degree...." It has fluctuated a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is expressing a subjective opinion or speculation about the future ("I suppose") without presenting any contentious or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 273.
MR. MARTIN. We wouldn't want to say "decrease slightly".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Martin, expressing a preference or opinion about not using the phrase "decrease slightly."


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you take the most recent week, it'sdown below $400 million, I presume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of presumed fact based on the most recent data.


Passage number 275.
 The most recent 2 weeks--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think we can quite say that.We might be able to jiggle "woulds" and "mights.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It includes speculation or uncertainty about the accuracy of a statement, but there is no direct disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 276.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But all these words imply more precisionthan we have had in the last 4- or 5-week period in terms of a preciselevel of borrowing. Most of the time we have been below what we aretalking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is a lack of precision in the previous 4-5 weeks regarding the level of borrowing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 277.
MR. MORRIS. Since we are having a wider borrowing range,wouldn't it make sense also to have a wider range for the aggregates--maybe 5 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is suggesting that the range for the aggregates should be widened, while the other person or people in the conversation may hold a different opinion.


Passage number 278.
-28-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it wouldn't bother me. But I'm justwondering whether there is some word in that first sentence thatimplies something consistent with the existing degree but also impliesa little broader interpretation of what the existing degree is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of personal opinion and a query about the first sentence.


Passage number 279.
MR. AXILROD. "About".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "about" does not indicate contention or disagreement in this context. It seems to be a simple statement without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say "about the existing degree".We could say "seeks to generally maintain about...." Do we put in 5to 6 percent or 5 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of using different percentage ranges and there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 281.
MR. RICE. 5 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "5 to 6 percent" is a factual statement made by Mr. Rice without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information mentioned.


Passage number 282.
MR. PARTEE. I would think we ought to put in 6 percent oraround 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion on what percentage should be put in.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we still say "a marked slowing of M1growth". It depends. It's certainly true for the quarter. But it isnot exactly true if you take October as the base. I guess it's overthe period there as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Instead, it presents different perspectives or viewpoints depending on the time frame being considered.


Passage number 284.
MR. PARTEE. It's certainly true that we already have had thenumber that makes the 3 months slower. I wonder whether we shouldleave it out and make it around 6 percent in all three [aggregates] inthe previous sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply questioning whether a certain number should be excluded and suggesting a different value for all three aggregates.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't feel strongly about this butthat implies that we drop out the other part of the sentence that sayswe don't mind if M1 comes in quite low. Do you want to drop that outor not. As I look at it, it might be useful to keep that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their neutral stance on the issue and suggesting a possible alternative without taking a firm stance either way.


Passage number 286.
MR. PARTEE. That's right. We could keep that the way thestaff has it here in brackets and still not have that previous phrase,Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 287.
MR. BLACK. We could just say "Growth in M1 over the periodat an annual rate of around 6 percent is also anticipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents an anticipated growth rate without any opposing viewpoints or contradictory information.


Passage number 288.
"MR. GUFFEY. Yes. I think that's good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 289.
MR. MARTIN. That's not what's anticipated in the Bluebook.It's 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The statement "That's not what's anticipated in the Bluebook" suggests that there is disagreement or contention regarding what is expected or stated in the Bluebook.


Passage number 290.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only provides the name "MR. BLACK," without any further context or information. Without any additional details or statements, it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 291.
 It is if you go with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5 to 6 percent is what's anticipated.Well, I am not sure how much that captures what we are talking about:"The Committee seeks to generally maintain about the existing degreeof pressure." Then it is "6 percent," "6 percent" again, and "slowergrowth would be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements mentioned are expressing different perspectives or considerations, but they are not conflicting with each other.


Passage number 292.
"MR. MARTIN. And "somewhat lesser would" and "somewhatgreater might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a fragment or an incomplete sentence, so it is difficult to determine the context or intent of the speaker.


Passage number 293.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way it is written now there is oneverb for both of them. How do we split it. We used to split it. Nowit seems to take a radical change in language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a change in language structure and questioning how to split a verb.


Passage number 294.
-29-11/4-5/85MR. AXILROD. You could say "somewhat greater reserverestraint might and somewhat lesser restraint would be acceptable,depending on" behavior. That makes it very clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 295.
MR. MARTIN. The juxtaposition would delight the Fedwatchers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy, I tell you. That really emphasizesit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Boy, I tell you" is an expression typically used to convey strong emphasis or agreement. It does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 297.
MR. MARTIN. They would count the words in prior directives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions that "They would count the words in prior directives," without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 298.
MR. BLACK. I think we create less problems if we always keepthem as "woulds" so it is symmetrical in both directions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply presents a statement or opinion about creating less problems by keeping something as "woulds."


Passage number 299.
MR. MARTIN. We don't want to be symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin simply expresses a preference or opinion by stating "We don't want to be symmetrical."


Passage number 300.
MR. BLACK. I know you all don't. But symmetry is one of myfavorite attributes. You can't tell by looking at me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Black's personal preference for symmetry.


Passage number 301.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's just a matter of language. Wesay: "generally;" "about 6 percent for M2 and M3;" and "6 percent forMl." Then "Slower growth of that aggregate would be acceptable in thecontext of satisfactory economic performance, given the very rapidgrowth in M1 over the summer. Somewhat greater reserve restraintmight and somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable." Weleave the range of 6 to 10 percent [for the funds rate]. Now, doesanybody have improvements on that language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing ranges and possibilities in language related to economic performance, monetary aggregates, and reserve restraint. They are seeking suggestions for improvements on the language used.


Passage number 302.
MR. BLACK. Make them both "woulds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The statement simply mentions making two things "woulds" without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing positions being presented.


Passage number 303.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have one vote for both "woulds." Theborrowing range we're talking about is roughly $400 to $600 million;the possibility of making that $350 to $550 million has been broached.I don't think there is an enormous difference between those two.Mechanically, it's $50 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the range of borrowing and acknowledging that a suggestion has been made to potentially decrease that range by $50 million. However, they express that they do not see a significant difference between the two options.


Passage number 304.
MR. BLACK. It's more important to me where we start off. Isit anticipated that we will start at $500 million. That was sort ofthe tenor of the discussion, as I read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an opinion and sharing their understanding of the discussion.


Passage number 305.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that depends a little. Yousay start off at $500 million; I don't think we will want to go to$500 million this week when the federal funds rate is high, althoughthe dollar is [weak]. Even with the dollar weak, with the federalfunds rate as high as it is, we weren't anxious to go to $500 millionthis week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing different perspectives on the topic of increasing funds, but there is no direct contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges a differing opinion but does not argue against it.


Passage number 306.
 It may have been what we had in the path but we--MR. BLACK. I am really talking about the path. I recognizethat those points you make are very valid points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: While the speaker acknowledges that the points made are valid, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say consistent with $350 to $550million, the center of gravity would be a little less than $500million but not much. I would say something like $475 million, whichis right in the middle. No it's not; it's $450 million. I can't domy arithmetic right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially suggests a range of $350 to $550 million, and then states that the center of gravity would be around $500 million. However, another person interjects and disagrees, stating that it is actually $450 million.


Passage number 308.
-30-11/4-5/85MR. PARTEE. I would like to see the funds rate drift down,maybe an 1/8th of a point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses a desire to see the funds rate drift down by possibly an eighth of a point. There's no indication of any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the dollar was not weak, I see nothingthe matter with that; certainly, you wouldn't expect it to stay whereit is now. And I think there is no expectation in the market, as nearas I can see, that that's the appropriate funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not show any contention or disagreement as it solely presents a statement without contradicting or opposing perspectives.


Passage number 310.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, what do you have in mind when youspeak of the dollar being weak, in terms of this intermeeting period.Are you talking about stringing ten days together all on the down sideof some magnitude.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 311.
 Or are you going to let it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have that mechanical a test--thatit takes ten consecutive days of decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement.


Passage number 312.
MR. GUFFEY. I guess when you talk about the implementationof this policy, I don't know what "weakness in the dollar" reallymeans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply displays Mr. Guffey's confusion or lack of understanding regarding the meaning of "weakness in the dollar".


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure I can describe it purely inexchange rate terms, although obviously a weak dollar means that theexchange rate is tending to weaken. However, when you try to quantifythat, I don't know. Sometimes it doesn't feel good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the passage discusses the uncertain nature of quantifying the impact of a weak dollar on the exchange rate, there is no contention or disagreement present. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the description and quantification.


Passage number 314.
MR. RICE. A good test is how much intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we were actively intervening on kind ofboth sides, that would be a good test. Two weeks ago, or whenever itwas that the dollar had a little strong feeling to it, there was a lotof intervention to keep it from going up. It was clearly, in thattime period, strong. I would say in the last week it has been a biton the weak side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing the fluctuating strength of the dollar and suggesting a potential test of active intervention on both sides. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 316.
MR. GUFFEY. The weak side with respect to the yen largely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is quoted from someone named Mr. Guffey, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention within the statement.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be one of my measures. If itwas just the yen and it wasn't infecting the psychology generally andrates generally, we would have a different situation. But that's notwhat we had in the last week. I guess the movement was greatestagainst the yen, but it was clearly affecting the others too. Isuppose the preferable thing, if the yen really got weaker, is thatthe Japanese might ease up a bit, but I don't think they'll do it.That might be the better way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is discussing the potential impact of the yen's movement on rates and the psychology of the market. The speaker is speculating on possible scenarios but does not express conflicting views or engage in a debate.


Passage number 318.
MR. GUFFEY. My point is that I would like to see rates comedown a bit, but it isn't clear to me how that occurs. If the dollaris a constraint and the measure of the dollar's weakness is feel, howdo you get there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is expressing his concern about wanting to see rates come down, but he is uncertain about how that can be achieved given the constraint of the dollar's weakness. He does not express any disagreement with anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the dollar is weak, you can see it inthe market, but I don't think you can measure it by the extent of amechanical measure or movement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the impact of a weak dollar on the market but doubts the ability to quantify it accurately through a mechanical measure or movement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
MR. PARTEE. I find your description too subjective also. Iguess I would just have to vote for an easier money policy instead ofaccepting something as fuzzy as you described.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, disagrees with the subjective description given by someone else.


Passage number 321.
-31-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One way of getting out of it is to have abad policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about a potential solution or approach to a situation.


Passage number 322.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it's a private policy. I'm tryingto bow a little toward you internationalists, but I can't bow too muchbecause I think we need to be easing up a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his personal opinion about a private policy and his attempts to accommodate internationalists while also expressing the need for a more lenient approach.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, so we divide it up. What borrowinglevel are we talking about. Who prefers $350 to $550 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement where the speaker is discussing the division of something and questioning which borrowing level is preferred by someone.


Passage number 324.
MR. BLACK. What is the alternative, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, Mr. Black poses a question to the Chairman, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement. He simply seeks clarification or an alternative solution.


Passage number 325.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the alternative can be anythinganybody thinks of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It simply suggests that the alternative can be any idea or thought that someone comes up with.


Passage number 326.
MR. BLACK. I don't have any problem with that, consideredasymmetrically, but I just don't know on which side the other one isgoing to be. I guess it is going to be a lower level, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is expressing his uncertainty about the position of the other person, but there is no conflict or disagreement present.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somebody expressed an opinion of $400 to$600 million, staying right where we are. That's slightly higher butothers may be lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there are differing viewpoints mentioned (one person suggesting $400 to $600 million while implying that others may estimate lower), there is no explicit contention or disagreement. The passage simply presents different possible estimates without any conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 328.
MR. BLACK. If we have the choice of staying right where weare, that's the one I would prefer rather than this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a preference for staying in the current location rather than the alternative option.


Passage number 329.
 If this isthe higher--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At this point, you have any choice at all,but I don't know if anybody's going to join you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact that they don't know if anyone will join the person they are addressing.


Passage number 330.
MR. BLACK. Well, if we're reasonable about it, I think I'lljoin the majority this time. That's what I am trying to do: getsomething I can agree with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. Mr. Black states that he will join the majority this time and is seeking something he can agree with. These statements show his willingness to find common ground and align with the majority opinion.


Passage number 331.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who wants it higher. Who prefershigher than that. Well, do you prefer slightly higher than $350 to$550 million.. I don't hear anybody expressing that. Thesedifferences are very small. The other alternative, I guess is: Whoprefers slightly lower than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a series of questions asking for preferences and noting that the differences in numbers are small. There is no


Passage number 332.
MS. SEGER. I do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: not believe there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 334.
 We have one on each side, so I--MR. BLACK(.). We sit next to each other and balance it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments. It simply states that there is one person on each side, and they sit next to each other to maintain balance.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think $350 to $550 million is theclosest we're going to come to a consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting that a certain range of money is the closest to a consensus.


Passage number 336.
MR. PARTEE. I think of $450 million as being the startingpoint. I don't know whether that puts me on Governor Seger's side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between Mr. Partee and Governor Seger. It only states Mr. Partee's opinion on the starting point of $450 million.


Passage number 337.
MR. BLACK. That's the midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 338.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No


Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with $450 million beingthe center of gravity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion or preference without opposition.


Passage number 340.
 But---32-11/4-5/85MR. BLACK. Just as an added bit of information, could we askSteve and Peter to give us some idea of what they think the federalfunds rate associated with that might be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for additional information or opinions.


Passage number 341.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think at that level that the fundsrate would tend to be around 7-7/8 to 8 percent. My thinking with$500 million is right around 8 percent, maybe 8 to 8-1/8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is presenting his own opinion or prediction about the funds rate, but there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. An illustration of that, if I am not wrong,is that when we were above $500 million the funds rate was below 8percent and now that we are at $375 million, it is above 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a factual observation without any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply states the correlation between the funds rate and the amount of money.


Passage number 343.
MR. STERNLIGHT. One little thing that has happened is thatseasonal borrowing has come off some recently, and I think that tendsto make the given level [unintelligible] a tiny bit more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Sternlight about a change in seasonal borrowing.


Passage number 344.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My guess is that it would be a federalfunds rate slightly below 8 percent--or maybe even more than slightly--depending upon expectations in the market. It isn't very reliablefrom week to week. If people think rates are going down, the federalfunds rate will probably go down; if they think they are going to goup, it is going to go up. It sits there for several weeks untilpeople change their minds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the federal funds rate is unpredictable and dependent on market expectations.


Passage number 345.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is generally aboutunchanged and it will be generally about unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a situation where in the past fewdays it has been above 8 percent. If the statistics are right, themarket is going to be quite easy tomorrow, but that will show up maybeat 4:30 in the afternoon. In the previous two-week period, it wasbelow 8 percent most of the time and showed up in a tight money marketwhat--at 5:30 in the afternoon. For a whole day it was above 8percent on that Wednesday. I think we are at the center of gravity asnearly as I can see. We are left with what flexibility there isaround it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing the market and stating their observations and opinions.


Passage number 347.
MS. SEGER. Peter, are you more sensitive to rate movementsagain. I know we are not targeting them, but are you more sensitiveto what happens, say, the first day or two after an FOMC meetingbecause every Fed watcher in the world is hanging over his or hertelerate and over the various machines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question asked by Ms. Seger to Peter about his sensitivity to rate movements and the impact of FOMC meetings.


Passage number 348.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm not able to provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 349.
 I think there's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the plan gets a little tricky here. Ithink we have been avoiding, except in more extreme cases--well, notthat extreme, but 1/4 percent, 3/8 percent above where we would expectit to be--just intervening on the basis of the federal funds rate,because then you really feed this notion that we are going to guidethe federal funds rate within an eighth or within a quarter. We gotin trouble in the past with that and I want to avoid it if I can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns about a plan, without presenting any opposing viewpoints or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 350.
MS. SEGER. Well, what if tomorrow at 11:00 a.m.--the dayafter the FOMC meets--the fed funds rate is at 10-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 351.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Sternlight" without providing any additional context or information about him, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 352.
 It's also the final day of the reserveperiod, and I think that's---33-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At 10-1/4 percent, we'd probably put somemoney in, even if it is contrary to what the statistics seemed toshow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that they would put some money in at 10-1/4 percent, even if it goes against what the statistics seemed to show. This suggests that there is disagreement between the speaker's personal opinion and the analysis of the statistics.


Passage number 353.
MR. RICE. Even if it is the final day of the maintenanceperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that it is the final day of the maintenance period.


Passage number 354.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, if it's 10 1/4 percent in themorning, I think that might suggest something is the matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion based on the information given.


Passage number 355.
MR. BLACK. I think I would even advocate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement made by Mr. Black without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 356.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's an outside [case]. If it were8-1/2 percent or something, it's a more difficult question. It maywell happen tomorrow that the federal funds rate is 8-1/4 percent,even though the borrowings are running whatever they are running now--$375 million. Then we have a much more difficult decision to make.We may not do anything, but 8-1/2 percent begins getting marginal; Iwouldn't like to do it at 8-1/4 percent or 8-1/8 or 8 percent, justbecause we theoretically thought that the funds rate should be 7-7/8percent--or the reverse when it got lower. A few weeks ago it wasrather consistently lower. We might do it earlier or later in theweek, depending upon how the funds rate was going. I would be lessthan forthcoming if I did not say those judgments as to whether toanticipate or delay action a little bit partly would depend upon whatthe dollar was doing on that particular day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the difficulty of making a decision on the federal funds rate based on various factors such as borrowing levels and the movement of the funds rate. They mention that their decision may depend on the dollar's performance as well. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention among different perspectives or parties.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 357.
MR. PARTEE. I wonder whether the borrowing level shouldn'tbe in the directive. It seems to me that that's what we areconcentrating on now and it's not even specified. It used to be thatwe said the aggregates, which were in there; then we said the reservepressures, which were in there. But the fact of the matter is thatthis discussion of policy for the last hour has been almost entirelyon the question of what the initial borrowing level will be and it isnot even mentioned in that directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee argues that the borrowing level should be specified in the directive but it is not. He points out that the policy discussion has been focused on the borrowing level despite it not being included in the directive.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not mentioned apparently, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that something is not mentioned without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 359.
MR. BALLES. The emperor has no clothes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Balles is expressing an opinion that the emperor has no clothes. While it may represent an unpopular or dissenting view, there is no explicit mention of disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 360.
MR. PARTEE. It might not be a bad time to introduce it,since we have a pretty wide range: $350 to $550 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that introducing the topic at hand could be beneficial given the wide range of values.


Passage number 361.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is because the phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" is simply stating the name of someone, rather than expressing any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 362.
 I don't know that we want to take such aradical step this morning at this late hour, but--MR. PARTEE. I'm just struck by it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing hesitancy ("I don't know that we want to take such a radical step") while Mr. Partee is expressing surprise or curiosity ("I'm just struck by it"). However, without further context, it is difficult to determine if there is any underlying disagreement or contention.


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the problem with it is that it pinsus to a very precise number. You are right that it is a wide range,but we don't always have that kind of a range. Our ability to hitthat consistently is not overwhelming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 364.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's true of the other things mentionedin the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact or agreement.


Passage number 365.
-34-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well understood. After you put theborrowing level in there for a while and don't meet it, then you willbe looking for something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a concept and stating a logical progression of actions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 366.
MR. BALLES. One more target to miss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "One more target to miss" implies that the speaker believes that missing the target is a negative outcome, while others may believe that missing the target is acceptable or even preferable.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will put in next quarter's GNP--this isMr. Partee talking. I don't know whether he wants the flash or thepreliminary or the final revised figure 10 years from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it only presents uncertainty or confusion about Mr. Partee's preference for a specific figure related to the GNP.


Passage number 368.
MR. PARTEE. I want an average for the next four quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating what he wants, without any opposition or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 369.
MR. BLACK. That's what Mike Keran says our target is, nowthat he is out of the Federal Reserve System.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating something that Mike Keran says about their target, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 370.
MR. PARTEE. I really thought he was right until this morningwhen the Chairman denied it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement as it only mentions the perspective and assumption of Mr. Partee, followed by the statement that the Chairman denied it. There is no direct interaction or disagreement expressed between the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 371.
MS. SEGER. If we are forced by Humphrey-Hawkins to talk interms of GNP growth and unemployment and inflation, it seems to me,though, that sometime it has to be tied into what we do, whether weare targeting it precisely or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the idea that GNP growth, unemployment, and inflation should be tied to actions taken.


Passage number 372.
MR. PARTEE. I used to think that way when the bill waswritten [unintelligible]. I even thought the Congress might ask: Whydon't you get a better outcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the difficulty with thatapproach is that it rather promises more than we can deliver.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker is expressing their opinion about a certain approach, without any indication of disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 374.
MR. PARTEE. That seems to be true of everything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. That's precisely it. It istrue of most things. If it were as simple as that, we'd never have arecession or inflation. Well, maybe we're prepared to vote. Are weprepared to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a series of statements and asking a question, but there is no conflicting viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 376.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 377.
MR. BALLES. Can you repeat the specifications so we will allbe singing from the same hymn book.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles is simply asking for clarification and ensuring everyone is on the same page.


Passage number 378.
MR. BLACK. You do that and we may not get unanimity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply presenting a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 379.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the numbers are all clear in thedirective and the language. They are all 6 percents with a "would"and a "might" worked in there. It's 6 to 10 percent, I presume, onthe federal funds rate. And we are talking $350 to $550 million, with$450 million the center of gravity and with some flexibility of goingup or down depending upon the aggregates and all this other evidence,including the exchange market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about numbers and their corresponding language in a directive. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 380.
MR. MARTIN. And a slight bias toward a little moreaccommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement only expresses a slight bias towards more accommodation, without indicating any conflicting opinions or differing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which is expressed to some degree inchanging the range itself and in the "would" and "might" language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of "would" and "might" language suggests a level of uncertainty or speculation, indicating that there may be differing opinions or perspectives on the matter at hand.


Passage number 382.
-35-11/4-5/85MS. SEGER. But the monetary growth numbers are cut back fromwhat we talked about at the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that the monetary growth numbers are being reduced, without indicating any conflicting views or opposing perspectives.


Passage number 383.
MR. PARTEE. Because we have had that low October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Partee about having a low October is a factual statement and does not involve any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 384.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are at the bottom end of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating a fact about the position or status of something without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 385.
MR. BLACK. They don't matter when they are over; theyshouldn't matter when they are under either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 386.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to discuss this other paragraphtoo, but if we know enough to vote on this one, let us vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific information that suggests disagreement or contention among individuals. It simply indicates the need for discussion and the suggestion of voting.


Passage number 387.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention Mr. Bernard and therefore there is no contention or disagreement related to him.


Passage number 388.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger NoCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we have this other paragraph. Somepeople's consciences suggest that something like this is appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The second paragraph is expressing a personal opinion or belief, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention among the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 389.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, since the market seems to belargely disregarding large swings in M1, I think to add this paragraphthat is on page 12 of the Bluebook would call attention to somethingin an inappropriate way. We had some language in this direction sixweeks ago; I think the same logic applies today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are right; we had some language in thediscussion six weeks ago; we could sharpen that and say something likethis in the general discussion as an alternative, if that's desirable.Now, the question that was raised was whether we have to make anannouncement of this. I don't mind saying this: Since everybodyanticipates it anyway, it looks a little odd to go out of one's way tofind the special occasion to say it. I might be testifying later thisweek. If I do, I could just plant a question; that's easy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 391.
 But if Idon't, I need some natural occasion to--MR. MARTIN. If we say it this way, isn't there a slightimplication that we're leading up to putting M1 in the future into amonitoring range or something of that sort. If we go out of our wayto say this, aren't we saying: "Next week, folks, we are going to putM1 on a monitoring--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation seems to be a discussion about the implications of phrasing a statement in a certain way, without any clear disagreement or conflict between the speakers.


Passage number 392.
"MR. MORRIS. I would hope so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The statement "I would hope so" suggests agreement or support rather than disagreement.


Passage number 393.
MR. BLACK. If you are right, Pres, you have just changed mywhole view.this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement acknowledging that the speaker's view has been changed on a particular topic.


Passage number 394.
MR. MARTIN. I'm asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a single person, Mr. Martin, expressing a statement or asking a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 395.
 Is that the implication of stating-36-11/4-5/85MR. PARTEE. It seems to me the word is "acceptable" insteadof "appropriate." If you use the word "acceptable," it doesn't implyanything as to the future. I wonder what a reading of theCongressional history of the Humphrey-Hawkins [legislation] wouldsuggest. There used to be the idea that if the targets were changed,the Congress would be notified that the targets were changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests contention or disagreement. The speaker questions the use of the word "appropriate" and suggests using "acceptable" instead. They also express curiosity about the Congressional history of the legislation, indicating a potential disagreement or differing opinion.


Passage number 396.
 We havenever utilized that, but I recall that as being characteristic of theHumphrey-Hawkins--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any doubt. If wewere making a change in targets and that implied some change in theway we're approaching things, the implication is that we'd announceit. Now, this has kind of crept up on us--well, [not] crept up; itstarted out with a burst when we did it. But the point ofinterpretation is that we haven't said we had to announce it when wethought we were going to miss a target. We have missed lots of them.Is this missing a target or is this a change in target. That's thequestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and clarification about targets and announcements. They state that they haven't utilized a certain approach but they recall it being a characteristic of the Humphrey-Hawkins. They also mention there being no doubt about something, but it is not specified what that something is. Overall, there is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 397.
MR. MORRIS. To me, it's changing the targets because weclearly are not attempting to hit the targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his opinion about changing targets and stating that the current strategy is not working.


Passage number 398.
MR. AXILROD. On Friday, when the directive of the previousmeeting comes out, it will be clear, as everyone knows, that theCommittee was not aiming at hitting this target, given the September-to-December [figure]. I believe we could put it in the policy recordas you suggested, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the release of a directive and the belief of Mr. Axilrod regarding its contents.


Passage number 399.
 Chairman, and just say that the Committee, inits discussion, recognized that given the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that takes care of it insubstance, but that's not announced for a month; that's the only realproblem. Are we forced to make an announcement here. We probably aredancing on the head of a pin, but I don't know whether you can findsome previous time where we missed a target--I suspect that you could--whereby this late in the year it was evident that we were not goingto hit it and we weren't aiming at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 400.
MR. GUFFEY. If we were missing M3 or debt, we wouldn't beconsidering this, it seems to me; and I don't think we should for M1.I wouldn't raise the question: "Why is M1 more important than M2 or M3in the context of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Guffey is simply expressing his opinion and stating that he does not think they should consider M1 as more important than M2 or M3 in the context of policy.


Passage number 401.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People think it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 402.
MR. GUFFEY. I understand that, but to the extent we coulddiminish that perception, I think it's important. Therefore, Iwouldn't do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their understanding and stating that they would not take a certain action.


Passage number 403.
MR. MORRIS. I recall in October 1982 we specifically statedthat we were setting aside the M1 targets for the year, and that wasin the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that Mr. Morris recalls a specific action that was taken in October 1982, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 404.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions the title or position of someone (VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN).


Passage number 405.
 Was it in the minutes or did we dothat in this business of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think that was announced. Thesubstantive difference is that then we weren't so far off. We wereoff, but not so far off, and it was meaningful to say we were not-37-11/4-5/85[aiming to hit it]. This time people know we're not going to hit it,I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a difference in timing or approach.


Passage number 406.
MR. MORRIS. Well, as I recall, it would have taken a zerogrowth rate in the last quarter to hit the target in '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply recalling information and discussing a historical target.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This time it would take a minus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or situation without presenting opposing viewpoints or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 408.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, do you think there are anyexpectations or fears in the markets that we might actually takeactions to get back close to that 3 to 8 percent range. If there are,I think it would be well if we eliminated those fears or expectations,and putting this paragraph in would be a way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is making a statement and suggesting a course of action, without expressing any disagreement with others.


Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there is that expectation,but the question may be there. It's a question of how hard we'retrying to come closer; I think that is the practical question. Ifthey did their arithmetic, I don't think anybody really would think weare going to hit it or even are trying, because we would have to saywe are aiming for a minus figure in the fourth quarter like weachieved in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 410.
MR. BOEHNE. If you look at what we say here about the M1range, we say that there are a lot of uncertainties surrounding itincluding velocity, etc. When you testified back in July, you wrappedit in a lot of uncertainties. I would think we'd be smarter to treatthis as simply a miss of a target and say: "We pointed out last Julywhen we set it that this was a very fuzzy target, given all theuncertainties, and we missed it." My sense is that's the way peopleon the outside read it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. Mr. Boehne is suggesting that the situation should be seen as a simple miss of a target and that the uncertainties were already acknowledged. The speaker believes that people on the outside are interpreting it differently.


Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I feel under no pressure to make such anannouncement on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the speaker's lack of pressure to make a certain announcement.


Passage number 412.
MR. BOEHNE. And I wouldn't want to put the spotlight onthis picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne simply states that he wouldn't want to draw attention to the picture.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have no trouble with doing it ifan occasion arose to do it in the next few days very simply. Mylittle trouble is what do we do--put out a press release or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their willingness to do something in the future, but they are uncertain about the appropriate way to announce or communicate it.


Passage number 414.
I don't know what the heck people would--MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 415.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot answer this question without the specific passage being provided.


Passage number 416.
 Well, your speech in Toronto was interpreted bysome--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sorry now in retrospect that I justdidn't say that. I wasn't thinking about it, but I could have easilysaid that we're not going to meet the target a little more directly.I'm sorry I didn't because that would have taken care of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing regret for not stating something directly, indicating that there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 417.
MR. STERN. I think we should say something like this myself,in part because we're not under any pressure to do so, and yet comingforth with some additional information or clarification under thosecircumstances strikes me as a plus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stern is expressing his personal opinion and stating that providing additional information or clarification in certain circumstances would be beneficial.


Passage number 418.
-38-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The issue, it seems to me, is do we put itin here. What would you do as a practical matter apart from what weput in here. Go out and make an announcement tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is discussing a practical matter without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 419.
MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't make an announcement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is simply stating that he would not make an announcement.


Passage number 420.
 I would waitfor a very natural occasion and simply say that the uncertaintiessurrounding M1 continue and the range is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do have a speech on the 19th or sometime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their plan to wait for a natural occasion to address the uncertainties surrounding M1 and mentioning their upcoming speech.


Passage number 421.
MR. BALLES. Yes you do, in Los Angeles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is a simple statement by Mr. Balles, asserting that the person he is speaking to does have something in Los Angeles. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 422.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that's two weeks off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 423.
MS. HORN. It doesn't seem to me that time is of the essencehere. Two weeks from now is fine; it wasn't as if we decidedsomething at this meeting relative to M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Horn is simply expressing her opinion about the timing of a future meeting and stating that it is not urgent.


Passage number 424.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "MR. BOEHNE" without providing any context or information about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 425.
 I think if we put out an announcement--MS. HORN. If it's two weeks from now, it's fine just to sayit a little more clearly than you did in Toronto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a clarification or suggestion.


Passage number 426.
MR. BOEHNE. If we put out an announcement along these linesnow, I think it will be interpreted as the Fed is about to ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It solely mentions Mr. Boehne's suggestion for the Fed.


Passage number 427.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided any passage or statement for me to assess. Can you please provide the passage you are referring to?


Passage number 428.
MR. BOEHNE. I don't think we want to convey that at thispoint. We may want to ease but I don't think we want to convey that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Boehne is expressing his opinion about not wanting to convey something, but there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement between different parties. It is a statement made by Mr. Boehne without any opposing viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 429.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if that's the way you feel about it,I'll couch it in appropriate words in Los Angeles if I don't find asuitable occasion when I'm in public to say it before then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a decision to express something appropriately at a later time or place.


Passage number 430.
MR. FORRESTAL. And leave it out of the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Forrestal.


Passage number 431.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what do you want to do. I wouldleave it out of the directive but say it pretty clearly in thediscussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their personal opinion on how to communicate something.


Passage number 432.
MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, I think that's a good way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Forrestal simply agrees with the proposed idea.


Passage number 433.
MR. BOEHNE. I do too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement of agreement.


Passage number 434.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, given the record that will be published onFriday this week, it will be no surprise that we're not going to makethe 3 to 8 percent target. And I don't see any reason to make anyannouncement at all, unless you're asked the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey simply states that they will not meet the 3 to 8 percent target and sees no reason to make an announcement unless asked.


Passage number 435.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can put it into a speech easilyenough. I could just put in some sentence saying of course we're notgoing to meet this--that given what has happened, we don't have anyexpectation that we're going to be within the range. That's notdifficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a simple and straightforward opinion or intention.


Passage number 436.
-39-11/4-5/85MR. PARTEE. We have had commentary from both the House andthe Senate on the summer Humphrey-Hawkins [report], haven't we. Andthe House specifically recommended that we not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there has been commentary from both the House and the Senate on the summer Humphrey-Hawkins report.


Passage number 437.
 But the Senate Ithink--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I haven't answered those yet, haveI. That's another thing we can do. They send a letter and say: Whatcomments do you have. I could just put it in the answer. That's whatI could do: put an answer in that letter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display contention or disagreement. It consists of the speaker considering different possibilities and suggesting potential actions in response to a letter received.


Passage number 438.
MR. PARTEE. That, it seems to me, would follow theprocedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion or observation without any conflicting views being expressed.


Passage number 439.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think those are on my desk, aren't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement followed by a question seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 440.
MR. AXILROD. This letter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 441.
MR. PARTEE. These are on the two reports. I have copies;I'm sure all Board members have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Partee has copies of the reports and assumes that all board members also have them.


Passage number 442.
MR. FORRESTAL. It's the Fauntroy report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the "Fauntroy report."


Passage number 443.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I have those letters on my desk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement of personal belief or assumption.


Passage number 444.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about disagreement or contention. Mr. Axilrod's response simply begins with "Yes."


Passage number 445.
MR. ROBERTS. You have the Fauntroy letter; I don't knowabout the Garn letter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roberts is simply stating that he is not aware of the Garn letter.


Passage number 446.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't make any difference--one or theother.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The statement suggests that either option being discussed is equally acceptable or insignificant.


Passage number 447.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker simply agrees by saying "yes" to something without expressing any conflicting opinion or argument.


Passage number 448.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes, that's a good idea--just to have it in thatletter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the idea mentioned.


Passage number 449.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. We'll word it in the answer to:"What do you think of our report." I can say that we take your reportso seriously that we are not going to meet the M1 target. I thinkthat's quite a natural way to handle it, if I can get it out in thenext couple of days, although one can argue about the timing and soforth. Okay, that's the way we'll do that. Do we have anything elseto do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement and decision about how to handle a report.


Passage number 450.
MR. BERNARD. No. We're scheduled to be in Dining Room E at1:00 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bernard simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 451.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Open Market Committee meeting is overthen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that the Open Market Committee meeting is over. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 452.
MR. PARTEE. How about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement as it is just a fragment of a sentence without any context or further information. It is not possible to assess the presence of contention or disagreement based on this fragment alone.


Passage number 453.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


