Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 21, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 21, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanBallesBlackForrestalGramleyKeehnMartinParteeRiceSegerWallichMessrs. Boykin, Guffey, Mrs. Horn, and Mr. Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, 1/ General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell,Scheld, Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting after action to ratify transactions in domesticoperations.-2-Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Garbarini, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof St. LouisMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, and Syron,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofSt. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia,and Boston, respectivelyMessrs. Pearce and Rolnick, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Dallas and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. McCurdy, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Meeting ofMay 21, 1985CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to approve the minutes.MR. MARTIN. Move approval.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. I have anextraordinary item this morning. We have had a request from theChairman of the Council of Economic Advisers to receive the weeklyreport of the Manager for Foreign Operations and the weekly report ofthe Manager for Domestic Operations.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Little does he know!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will say it is sent to the Treasury; ithas always been sent to them, historically. The question is whetherwe can change this rule and send it to the Chairman of the Council ofEconomic Advisers under our rules of confidentiality. Does anyonehave a strong opinion on this? Do we have to take a formal action?Does this have to appear in the record so we have to have a vote?MR. BERNARD. No, I don't think so.MR. PARTEE. There used to be projections in the New Yorkreport on domestic operations. I don't know; maybe they've been takenout. It was a source of leaks earlier. Peter, do you have anyprojections anymore in your report?MR. STERNLIGHT. No, in the Manager's weekly report we do notinclude the projections in what has been going to the Treasury. Iwould think if you approve this, we'd send the same [to the Chairmanof the Council].MR. PARTEE. I remember we had problems with that some yearsago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that we ever had a problem; Iknow we worried about it.MR. PARTEE. Well, you know, it was distributed widely in theTreasury to something like 150 people some years ago.MR. BLACK. 150?MR. PARTEE. It was a big number!MR. MARTIN. Mr. Sprinkel has not lobbied for this.MR. PARTEE. I don't think they have 150 people anymore!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not hearing any objection--MR. RICE. I have a question, though: Would this continue tobe sent to the Chairman ex officio or is it specific to the presentChairman?5/21/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think once you begin this--. Theproblem is: I don't know whether any subsequent Chairman will beinterested.MR. GRAMLEY. I would be inclined to sunset the decision atthe end of the present Chairman's term of office and, in effect, awaita new request. The individual who first requests information likethis may well understand the confidentiality with which to protect it.The next guy may not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's worth reviewing.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if we do send it, I thinkprobably we should add those few words to our present memorandum [onrules regarding confidentiality] because at the time of that GAOinvestigation, it was crucial whether the procedures we were followingwere consistent with the written documentation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume we are going to add it.MR. AXILROD. Then there's the question of sunsetting it.MR. BLACK. Can you take it out at the time you sunset it,Steve? That would be the only graceful way to do it.MR. AXILROD. I guess we could.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In the old days, the guy at the NewYork Fed who wrote the report could never read it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can add "upon request".MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, is there some sort of "need toknow" test?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not supposed to go to anyone elseother than those who receive it. But--how many people here read thisreport?[Secretary's note: Among those whose hands were raised, onlyMr. Wallich spoke.]MR. WALLICH. Well, not every report.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I have the sense of the meeting.Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments? Questions?MR. WALLICH. Sam, this kind of information, I think, issubstantially ignored by the people who are working on the exercise ofthe G-10 Deputies--the reform of the monetary system. The discussionof intervention there continues exactly along the old lines of whatwas said at the time of the study--we can do a little but not much andso forth. But there was no sense from any of the central bankers or5/21/85Treasury people there of a cumulative deterioration of markets, whichI take it to be the implication of what you say.MR. CROSS. Well, certainly the complaints about marketconditions have been much, much worse. And there's no doubt that theday-to-day volatility in the past two or three months has been fargreater than in earlier periods. We've been hearing for a long timefrom the banks regarding their concern about the market's conditionand we're beginning to hear more complaints from some of the corporaterepresentatives at this point. That's a new element in this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are the banks not making any money thesedays?MR. CROSS. Generally speaking, most are making money on theexchange market, if you look at their quarterly reports. With somenotable exceptions, they continue to make money.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Though less so in the first quartercompared to last year.MR. CROSS. Less so. It does vary; it moves up and down.But at least at the banks in New York that we keep an eye on, thenumber of quarters in which they had large losses was very few andthat was only at a very few institutions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To me it's astonishing, given whathas been going on in this market, that somebody hasn't taken one greatbig loss in foreign exchange operations. It's a miracle.MR. GRAMLEY. Is it a miracle or have they hedged theirpositions sufficiently so that they get by?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The logic of that can only take youso far. Somebody somewhere is absorbing the price risk associatedwith this volatility.MR. CROSS. I think the banks are withdrawing more and morefrom the market, so they are protecting themselves by being much moreunwilling to be market-makers except in limited conditions than theywere before.MR. MARTIN. Are they hedging or are they using some creativeaccounting?MR. CROSS. No, they're just not doing business.MR. MARTIN. No, I'm talking about the traders not the banks.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Everybody can't be hedged; that'sclear enough.MR. CROSS. It is a matter of considerable concern. Thevolatility did increase considerably, of course, after the operationsin late February. Now, that does not mean necessarily that peopleshould be unhappy about the heavy intervention in late February. Butthere is a question of whether there should be some follow up to thatkind of arrangement to provide for a little more structure in the5/21/85market and a little more effort to try and deal with this kind of veryshort-term variability.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's short-term variability, hourlyvariability, daily variability, and intra-daily variability.MR. CROSS. What I've been talking about here was intra-day--the amount during one 24-hour day--which, as I say, now averages about2 percent whereas in earlier periods it was much less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in the absence of a constructivesuggestion we'll turn to Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Discussion? If not, we'll ratify thetransactions. Motion?SPEAKER(?). So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Prell.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When I listen to you, I wonder how you getall those projected GNP increases. Well, what comments are there?Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mike, do you have the figures for gross domesticpurchases and domestic final purchases for the first quarter as apercentage increase?MR. PRELL. Yes, for brevity, I eliminated a sentence inwhich I was going to refer to gross domestic purchases.MR. BLACK. Well, you alluded to it.MR. PRELL. For the first quarter, it was 4 percent; andfinal sales to domestic purchasers was 3-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. In both cases, it was down by 1/2 percentagepoint.MR. PRELL. Yes, I believe so.MR. BLACK. Down by 0.4 on the first one and 0.8 on the[second].MR. PRELL. Ted tells me the 3-1/2 percent final sales todomestic purchasers is unchanged.MR. GRAMLEY. But the reduction of 4 [tenths] is primarily, Ithink, a consequence of governmental purchases rather than privatefinal purchases. That is, the private final purchases were actuallyrevised up somewhat from what they had been. That part does notsignify anything.5/21/85MR. BLACK. What were those figures, Lyle? Do you have them?MR. GRAMLEY. The domestic final demand was revised down from1673.2 to 1672.9 but the private component thereof was increased from1362.6 to 1363.8. I don't have the growth rate, but it is a tinylittle adjustment.MR. PARTEE. Mike, I thought I heard you suggest that therewould be less strength in state and local purchases looking ahead.That sort of surprises me; I had the impression that revenues werecoming in very well and I assumed that expenditures in the state andlocal sector would rise with more prosperous times.MR. PRELL. Well, it is certainly the case that theiroperating capital account budget surplus position has improved overthe past year, and we think it will stay reasonably positive. Lastyear there was some spurt in construction outlays, but on the wholethere was not a tremendous growth of state and local expenditures.The first quarter of this year doesn't look particularly strong. Andwhile there is a lot of talk about a backlog of repair and renovationwork that needs to be done, we just don't see the evidence of it. Ithink there is a great deal of caution on the part of many state andlocal government units about forging ahead with spending programspartly because, given taxpayer attitudes, they don't think they aregoing to be able to keep all those tax revenues that they got fromincreasing taxes in earlier years. Then there is the question of whatwill happen both with tax reform and federal spending. Both the Houseand Senate proposals spell the end of grants to state and localgovernment revenue sharing by 1987. So, I think there is a good dealof caution being exercised.MR. BOEHNE. Are we ready for comments or are we still in thequestion period?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're in the comment period.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I have been out travelling around theDistrict more than usual this spring and talking to lots of people indifferent kinds of businesses. It is a little hard to summarize thesituation because there is such great variability among industries.In general, what I find is that people are saying: "Well, thingsaren't great, but they aren't terrible either." In my District thereseems to be a changing economic mix more toward some of the fastergrowing sectors and away from the traditional manufacturing area. So,in general, I think the tone is probably a little better in myDistrict than it might be in some others.One thing that did strike me, as I was talking to lots ofpeople, is that the expectations about the economic outlook seem to mein a rather precarious zone right now. Earlier, around the start of arecovery when expectations are generally for expansion, if you get abearish statistic, it is greeted as an aberration and it doesn'treally have very much effect on expectations. When you get into arecession it is just the other way around: Everyone thinks things aregoing downhill and if you get a bullish statistic, that is viewed asan aberration. With this kind of bombardment of mixed signals that weare getting, I think we are in a period where expectations couldchange rather rapidly. Right now I think the predominant view is5/21/85still that the economy is going to continue to expand; but there arejust enough [negative] reports coming in, that people can shift over.It is almost like a teeter totter and the weight of opinion couldshift more toward the down side. A story that somebody told meillustrates this. A person who runs a medium size capital goods firm,a family business, told me that while they still expect a good secondhalf, what makes her nervous is that the salesmen, instead of buyingcars and boats, are now buying CDs in insured institutions. And thatgives her a great deal of pause about what might happen. So, I thinkwe are in a gray area where these expectations could change ratherrapidly.On the inflation front, I just don't sense any great concernabout inflation. Most people that I spoke to are talking about fairlymoderate wage increases. They find it difficult to pass on priceincreases and they find that the prices from their suppliers areholding fairly steady. So, whatever the statistics coming in, I justdon't find much out there on the inflation side. The influence of theinternational sector continues to strike me in a dramatic way. In thesmallest of businesses and the smallest of towns one keeps hearingmore about world markets and world trade. I have heard even moreconcern this spring about Korean imports than Japanese imports; thatseems to be the new kind of enemy, if you want to look at it that way.More and more business people are expressing concern about competitionfrom the Koreans.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. I would like to add some rail cars to thelocomotive of expectations already alluded to. I am struck by thecumulative nature of the vulnerabilities of markets and of thefinancial side of the economy. Notice that in our first two reportsthis morning there were some comments on the variability in foreignexchange markets. Think of the junk bond phenomenon, which continuesinto this year. The SEC indicated that they are not disposed tointervene in the merger and acquisition surge. You are talking about$80 or $90 billion at an annual rate of equity retirement replaced bydebt. In the commodity markets and the COMEX in New York, the threelargest traders failed to meet a margin call one day, though it wasonly a temporary phenomenon. As for the LDC debt deterioration, weget reports out of Argentina on a series of private bank failures; thegovernment steps in and this passes. Capital flight has resumed fromthe LDCs and various measures we're all familiar with are beingimplemented there. It is not all one-sided, of course. We have whatsounds like favorable news out of Venezuela and the Philippines, butstill there is the onus of this capital flight situation. Newspapersin the last few days have had the Coldwell Bankers survey, which talksabout $25 billion plus of nonresidential construction coming onstream--80 percent above 1980. I think there is a kind of frenzy ofoffice building and other kinds of activity. Sooner or later that isgoing to put pressure on major money funds around the country becausetens of billions of dollars are coming in there, resulting inoverbuilding. Multiple unit dwellings are hung on the revenue Mbonds, industrial revenue bonds--techniques that are a tax phenomenonin part. Vacancies are accumulating there. As for government bonddealers, obviously, we know the work that has been done in that areaby the New York Fed. But I wonder if we weren't so concerned with thecost and we weren't so concerned with the smooth running of this5/21/85enormous market, if maybe we might have come up with something alittle less voluntary and more like the rulemaking being extended inthe municipal securities market. But we have the vulnerabilities tocontend with and who wants to take that chance? Ed Gray has talkedabout $100 billion in savings and loan assets in savings and loansthat are essentially defunct. Well, that's $100 billion out of anindustry that is 10 times that large that he has found; and I wonderwhat else is out there that could come around to haunt us.The President is about to go on the road to present the so-called tax reform and simplification program. There is going to be agreat deal of attention to top bracket rates and a capital gainstreatment a little more favorable than the Treasury proposal. Is thatgoing to add to a speculative bubble that seems to be occurring inmarket after market after market? Where can we find a financialmarket that doesn't have this feeling of a kind of froth in it rightnow? And how many of these things need to go down in one day, oneweek, or one month before we talk about expectations and attitudes?Government securities and mortgage-backed securities markets areenormous markets trading hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollarsnow. And one day, Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, or Freddie Mac may decidethey are not going to settle. Well, all that [happened in the past]and there were negotiations and so forth and every one of thesepotential crises worked out fine. Everybody saluted and got in [line]and did what they had to do and it worked. But what are the dangersthat we are facing here?I am not so concerned about the tiny bit of evidence of priceincrease; I certainly am concerned about unemployment and the lack ofemployment growth and the 0.7 percent real growth figure that thatimplies. Think of the cumulative nature of financial vulnerabilitiesof the country right now. I think I voted for--maybe I even made themotion, I can't remember--the [recent] discount rate cut. I think weshould have done that. But my goodness, let us be aware of what we donext in terms of this tremendous pervasive, ubiquitous, financialvulnerability that we have here. That is my cheerful message.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether [that means] weshould tighten up or ease up.MR. GRAMLEY. The remedy for that is good old-fashionedmonetary discipline--make credit tight enough.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, I do think we are in a period when thesignals are decidedly mixed at best and are very conflicting. Thegood businesses are continuing to do pretty well and are continuing ata pretty good level; the automobile business is good even though ithas leveled off a bit. Those in the industry do say that the dip inthe early part of May should not be taken as a change in the trend.They view it rather as a comparative issue, given a very strong periodthe year before. Retail sales in our District, if you put March andApril together and adjust for Easter, are really very strong;commercial building is particularly strong--indeed I think perhaps toostrong; steel output is rising a bit; and the service sector isstrong. But on the negative side, I think the news is very serious.The capital goods people are experiencing a slowdown this year as5/21/85compared to last year, and last year certainly was not very strong.One CEO I talked to who has a very heavy commitment to the capitalgoods sector said that his company had a really dreadful month inApril and if they had another month or two like that, he would bevery, very worried about the outlook.The agricultural situation is deteriorating further. Landvalues are down. We had a good planting season this year and areconsiderably ahead of last year; some 83 percent of the farm plantingis done. Therefore, over the long time between now and harvest theoutlook is for higher levels of production, which will have adepressing effect on commodity prices. Anybody who has anything to dowith the agricultural sector is having a very tough time. Theimplement people are operating their plants at about 30 percent ofcapacity and there is a significant number of plants that have justsimply shut down. I commented last time that railroad shipping andcar-loadings were down; we have had another period here in which therailroad shippings are down. There's an interesting importimplication here that one man told me about. Whereas before they wereshipping [unintelligible], now the parts are coming in in a finishedstate and are by and large being shipped by truck.On the inflation front, I think the news is mixed. I agreewith Mike that many of the positive factors may be behind us and thatthere are some very significant increases taking place in the servicesside, in pretty steep amounts. But more positively, I am impressedwith the number of people I have talked to who are still renegotiatingcontracts for three years in the 3 to 4 percent area. And they arefinding their union negotiators to be very, very flexible with regardto work rules. They are getting very significant productivityincreases as a consequence of this. And the pricing out there isterribly competitive; the people I have talked to just simply can'tget price increases through in a full sense. If there are any trendsthat are persistent in all this, I think one is that expectations arebeing revised downward. I haven't talked with anybody who is revisinghis expectations upward. No one that I talked with suggests that weare on the edge of a recession; nonetheless, they do think that theoutlook for the rest of the year and next year is more modest.I think that the most significant trend is this export-importproblem and the dollar value. I have a couple of anecdotes. First,cement--and I have always had the feeling that cement was a commoditythat was very, very transportation sensitive in that beyond 200 miles[shipments] fell off the edge of the table. Fifteen percent of thecement consumption this year is going to be from imports, which I findrather staggering. Also, we had our first meeting of our smallbusiness advisory council, a group that I would have thought would beabsolutely insulated from this dollar problem. We had arepresentative from Indiana, and one from Iowaand both of them said that without a single doubt the most difficultproblem they are having is the export-import problem--the value of thedollar. Their industries and businesses are being very hard hit byimports. As I look at it, I think this high value of the dollar isthe most pervasive problem that we are dealing with. The economicnews is pretty mixed and the inflation news is pretty mixed, and Ithink that we are probably in a period where it is awfully difficultto tell how the future is going to unfold.5/21/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, the conditions in ourpart of the country pretty much mirror what is going on in the rest ofthe country in terms of mixed signals. The service industrythroughout the District seems to be doing pretty well. We have fairlygood news with respect to construction, real estate, tourism and soon; but the bad news is related to the manufacturing sector and thosesectors that are dependent on a lower dollar--particularly textiles,apparel, and agriculture to some extent. Energy is also a negative inthe economy. With respect to the apparel industry, you might beinterested in knowing that the protectionist sentiment is growing byleaps and bounds. Their latest slogan is "Take off your foreignclothes."I am also concerned about the overbuilding, particularly inoffices and multifamily structures, that seems to be going on in manycities in the Southeast. I think that is creating vacancy rates thatare going to be unsustainable in the long run. So, as we look atwhat's going on in our District and around the country, I think wewould now revise our forecast down somewhat. That seems to be thegeneral sentiment of people that I talked to. Expectations are beingcautiously revised downward. Like Si, I don't hear anybody talkingabout a recession; but on the other hand, I think there's a great dealof concern about where the economy may be going. On balance, we don'tdiffer significantly from the projections in the Greenbook. Ifanything, our expectations in the near term may be a little lower thansuggested in the Greenbook. Going out a little further, I think thereduction in the discount rate and other short-term interest ratesmight give a little push to the economy, but with a lag--later on inthe year. So as I look out over the horizon, I think the risk is onthe down side for the economy, and I think growth for the rest of theyear is going to be just barely acceptable.I would say one other thing about sentiments in the District,and that is that there is a great deal of concern now about thefinancial stability of the banking system. If you put together all ofthe various episodes that we have had, people are asking: Is this justthe tip of the iceberg or is there more? With these governmentsecurities dealers, firms like E.F. Hutton and so on, the list goes onand on. While there may not be any direct relationships among all ofthese, the psychological atmosphere that is being created is one ofmounting distrust in the financial system or concern about whether thestability of the system is what it should be. People are askingquestions very strongly about that. In summary, Mr. Chairman, my viewnow--and I haven't had this view before--is that the economy istottering a little and that our policy prescription needs to take thatinto account.MR. GUFFEY. How do you respond to that question?MR. FORRESTAL. Which question?MR. GUFFEY. About the financial stability.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, my stock answer, which I think is thecorrect one, is that the banking system is in good shape and thatthese are isolated incidents. I say that with my fingers crossed.5/21/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, reverting for a moment to thesimilarities and dissimilarities of the Board staff's forecast to ourstaff's forecast: We have similar views on the outlook going throughthe fourth quarter of this year in a number of major areas includingconsumption, capital spending, government spending, and inventories.Where we differ, and where our staff turns out to be somewhat lessoptimistic than the Board's staff, is with respect to our expectationthat imports will be up somewhat more because of the recent behaviorof the dollar and that housing will be up somewhat less than the Boardstaff's projection because of the weakness in disposable income. So,even though our two forecasts tend to converge, ours is up a littlefrom last month and the Board staff's outlook for real GNP has beenrevised downward this time from last month. We are stillsignificantly lower for the year as a whole, showing a 2 percent realGNP gain, fourth quarter to fourth quarter, versus the Board staff'sview of 2-1/2 percent. Whether it is 2 or 2-1/2 percent, it is stillgoing to be a pretty weak year. I share the view that we areexperiencing already--and are likely to see more of it as the yeargoes on--a pretty sluggish economy operating below its potential, inlarge part because of an enormous distortion and imbalance that hasalready been touched on, particularly relating to the impact of thehuge federal deficit and the high dollar and the import surge that hasresulted from all of that.Like Si, we recently had our meeting of our council on smallbusiness and agriculture in response to your suggestion. We got awhole earful of bad news and I, too, was surprised by some of theanecdotes that we heard. For example, one of the small business firmsrepresented was a very small manufacturer up inOregon, which is outside the Portland metropolitan area. It turns outthat they export a good deal of equipment all around the world;more than half of their business in fact is foreign. We really gotsome graphic illustrations of what the high dollar has done to thissmall little business. We found similar illustrations from otherrepresentatives of small concerns that were there. Contrary toconditions in your District, Si, or yours, Roger, where the familyfarm still predominates, as you know in the West it is the large scalefarm that predominates. And even representatives of those agri-businesses were singing the blues and gave some pretty graphicillustrations of how bad business was, not just because of the highinterest rates but also the strong dollar. Cotton is one of the majorproducts of our agriculture in California and traditionally about 80percent of it has been exported. You can imagine what the high dollarhas done to cotton exports; that particular business is in bigtrouble.Based on the latest information we have, nearly all of thenine states in our District experienced an increase in unemploymentfractionally; and in the latest month for which we have data for totalemployment, it actually dropped a bit. Electronics, which had beenone of our stronger growth industries for some years is now flat;manufacturing has been rather weak except for defense spending; andlumber is still a disaster. Aerospace is the one industry still goingfairly strong. On balance, adding up all these strong and weak areas,it is clear that the weaknesses predominate and that we are seeing inthe West what we are seeing in the national statistics: a pretty-10-5/21/85sluggish performance. Therefore, when we get around to the policydiscussion, that would be the reason I would like to err, if we aregoing to err at all, on the side of ease.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have long since abandoned anyhope that anybody can do very well in projecting the economic outlookover any extended period of time. I am particularly uncomfortable intrying to do that today because the signals are so mixed. But havingsaid that, my guess would be that if the staff forecast is wrong, itmay be a tad bit on the low side. As we see it, domestic demand isstill pretty strong and the sharp growth in M1 back in the winter islikely to keep it fairly strong. The real question is: What's goingto happen to imports? And I don't think we know the answer to that.I agree with the staff's assessment that the dollar probably haspeaked and will continue on down. When that will be felt by someslowing in the rate of increase of imports, I don't know; it may be in1986 as Mike suggested. We were thinking we probably would see someeffects before then. In any event, we think that by the last half ofthis year GNP might be somewhere around the 3.3 percent growth thatthe staff is projecting for the last half of this year.On the implicit assumption on velocity that the staff hasmade, if we had the kind of growth in M1 that they seem to be talkingabout--say, 6-1/2 percent from the fourth quarter of last year to thefourth quarter of this year--that implies a slight decline in M1velocity. If we get a more rapid rate of growth in Ml, that would ofcourse mean more than that, and that would be very unusual for thisstage of a business expansion. I certainly wouldn't say it can'thappen, but I don't think it is very likely. So in short, I don'tbelieve the general economic outlook provides any very compellingreasons at this point for any significant move toward ease. It istempting to think in terms of ease, as we see all these worries thatPres has outlined. But to me at this point that really wouldexacerbate most of these problems. It was excessively easy policy,coupled with some other things, that I think created most of these inthe past. To me it is time, even though the statistics seem to beflashing danger signals, to keep our eye on our long-run objective. Iwould try to keep the aggregates under control; specifically, I had inmind trying to get M1 back somewhere within these target bands that weset for ourselves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I want to applaud the Board for reducing thediscount rate, although the timing I found a little surprising. But--MR. GRAMLEY. You can't win!MR. MORRIS. I think [unintelligible] that the economy hasperformed in a much weaker fashion than I expected or than I thinkmost of us expected a few months ago. I am finding in the comments ofbusinessmen--right across the board regardless of the industry, againwith the exception of the defense industry--that they all tell me thatorders are coming in at lower rates than they had contemplated. Andthere is a very sobering mood developing. Another phenomenon--I don'tknow whether it is confined to the New England area and I would like-11-5/21/85to hear some other comments on this--is that a lot of businessmen aretelling me that they have been waiting for the dollar to go down sothat they can begin competing in world markets again. They have aboutgiven up on that, so they are planning in a great many industries toexpand their production facilities abroad. That is the only way thatthey can compete in world markets; they can't do it from a U.S. base.In the past few years, the decline in U.S. direct investment abroadhas been an element of strength in the dollar. But if we see a prettywidespread movement to build new production capacity abroad, thatcould very well put downward pressure on the dollar at some point ifthe movement got very far. Has anybody else run into this phenomenon?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hear the threat all the time. EverybodyI talk to--MR. MORRIS. But they are beginning to plan to do it now.That's the difference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the major concern iswhether the economy is going to rebound moderately in the second halfas projected in the staff forecast or whether it is going to continuealong the present sluggish path. Now, if one is convinced that theeconomy is going to perform along the lines of the forecast in thesecond half, I don't think we need to worry too much; the worry thenwould be about next year. While I think the staff forecast probablycaptures the most likely outcome, the factors supporting that outlookdo not seem to me to be very strong. While we probably can expectcontinued strength from residential construction, the rate of growthin business fixed investment and consumption expenditures will bedeclining. Yet, the 3 to 3-1/2 percent growth that we look to dependson some moderate strength in both these categories. So, it is veryhard to be confident that there is this basic strength in spendingthat's going to produce this outcome. With resource utilizationsignificantly below capacity, with capacity utilization most recentlyfalling--and even if it stabilizes from this point on, it will stillbe at a relatively low level--and with the outlook for unemploymentnot very reassuring in that it is not declining significantly, itseems to me that the economy is vulnerable on the down side. Thereseems to be very little risk of excessive growth in thesecircumstances. So, I would say that what we can reasonably expect isan economy that is, as Governor Martin put it, very vulnerable. Itcould go either way; I see no strong momentum in either direction.I think the inflation outlook is moderate. Most of therecent influences on the inflation rate are probably temporary; I amnot convinced that the recent spike in wage costs is more thantemporary. I would say, therefore, that with the inflation outlookmoderate we should not be satisfied with anything less than a 3 to3-1/2 percent rate of growth in the second half. And I think weshould make our policy judgments with that particular bias in mind.Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, looking at the economyfirst and taking a little longer perspective on it, I think the-12-5/21/85numbers would suggest that domestic final demand really has beenperforming more or less as expected for the third year of the recoveryand maybe even a little better than expected. But the wild card, ashas been amply reflected so far in the discussion, insofar as the GNPand production, etc., is the external side. Against that backdrop, Istill lean to the view that for the balance of the year real GNP islikely to be growing in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range. And I thinkthat this recent rather pronounced decline in interest rates providesa little further measure of insurance in that direction. At the sametime, that kind of forecast is one that assumes a much smaller dragcoming from the external sector over the balance of the year. Whileeconomists seem pretty comfortable as a group with that, I will bedarned if I can find a businessman--whether in small or largebusiness--who agrees with that. I think that remains, therefore, thewild card.I agree with those who say that the nonresidential sector--the construction sector in particular--looks very vulnerable at thispoint. On this question of financial shocks and disturbances, thepoint has to be made--whatever else one might want to say about them--that to the extent that they are being managed and contained, they arebeing managed and contained with a very high degree of governmentinvolvement. Whether it is front page news or not, that has been thecase. Indeed, what I see almost daily is the situation where "freemarkets will take care of things" is a slogan only until people thinkthey are on the hook. And then that slogan goes out the window in oneheck of a hurry. I would like to say that I can see some reemergenceof discipline growing out of this cumulation of problems, but I don'tsee it. The leaders in banking and investment banking institutions,foreign and domestic, have reached the point where I think they wantdiscipline. But in a setting in which all of the institutional sandhas been taken out of the wheels, they don't seem to know how to getit. I think that those vulnerabilities in that setting are somethingto be concerned about.On the inflation side, I keep coming out on the side of beinguneasy. I look at the numbers and I listen to what everybody says andI am tempted to reach the same conclusion that Governor Rice juststated: that these are all temporary things. But I can't quite getmyself comfortable with that. Even if these things are temporary, therate of inflation that we are seeing right now, against the backdropof the exchange rate that we are seeing right now, still strikes me ashigh. I am concerned that if the inflation rate were to start tocreep up from where it is now, even by a percentage point or so, andproduce the situation in which we felt at some point we had to moveagainst that, it would be a very, very difficult thing to engineer, toput it mildly. But more importantly, I think some of this financialmarket situation that we are seeing still reflects a kind of residualpoint of view that says somewhere down the road inflation is going tobail this situation out. So, I can't bring myself to be sanguineabout the inflationary situation, even though I certainly don't thinkit is something that has to be the number one priority for policy.But I think it has to be watched very, very closely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. First, in terms of our District economy, I wouldcharacterize that as simply more of the same. The split that we have-13-5/21/85had, which may be most easily described as urban versus rural,persists. The economy in the urban areas--from the city of Rochesterto Sioux Falls to Rapid City--continues to do reasonably well onbalance; the economy in the rural areas is very difficult at best.And that has been the situation for quite some time.On the national level, without wanting to belabor theobvious, the key word in my mind is uncertainty. As I look at theGreenbook forecast, my own view of the situation is that the economyis going to have to hustle just to get that 2.3 percent real growth inthe second quarter, given the monthly trajectory in the first quarter.But having said that, I expect that the economy may do a little betterthan the Greenbook suggests in the second half of the year, largelybecause I think the interest sensitive sectors of the economy may dosomewhat better. But I would re-emphasize the term uncertainty. I donot have a great deal of confidence in that particular scenario,although it is the one that, under the circumstances, I am inclined togo with.We too have had our first meeting of our advisory council onsmall business and agriculture, and we included labor as well. Mostof the news would have to be described as grim, particularly from thepeople associated with the agricultural sector. The focus of concernseems to have shifted a bit, however, in the last several months. Thefocus used to be on the producer--the farmer. I think now the focusis shifting to his or her lender, be it the Farm Credit System or theagricultural banks. There seems to be rather vague but mountingconcern about the status of some of those lenders.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. The war between the forces of the budget andthe trade balance seems to have moved increasingly in the direction ofthe trade balance prevailing, which pulls the economy down, over thestimulus that comes from the budget deficit. To some extent this willcontinue, as net exports are scheduled in our forecast to becomeincreasingly negative for several more quarters. But my impression isthat it is slowing down. On the other side, of course, if we succeedin bringing the budget deficit down, that expansionary forcediminishes as it ought to. It seems to me that there is a sort ofstand-off in the economy between these two forces. And they have verydrastic repercussions on various sectors: farmers, some parts of heavyindustry, and the import-competing sectors. So this is not a staticsituation; it is a situation full of great tension.Given that there is a [pause], as it were, this may be theopportunity to do something that in the long run is very important: totry to reduce the structure of interest rates--not in the sense ofstimulating the economy in trying to accomplish a short-run objective,but to bring interest rates down over time, as with inflation. If Ithought that a reduction in interest rates now would have the effectsimply of a brief stimulus, I would think that could be a greatmistake.Let me look for a moment at the mistakes that we might fallinto. We have always leaned toward fine tuning. When the economy isgoing down, immediately one sees what one could do by monetary policyif one doesn't think too much about the long lags. Long lags have5/21/85been mentioned and I think they are important. What we do now in Maymay have effects early next year, at which time the problems we facemay look quite different. There has been a proclivity at the FederalReserve to push harder late in the cycle, perhaps because the cycletends to peter out, the natural forces of expansion diminish. It'sthe nature of a business cycle. And one tries hard to postpone theevil day and push back the moment when the economy flattens out sothat we do not have to go into recession. One stacks up problems,financial problems and economic problems, for the future; and insteadof a mild growth recession, one may get a real recession a littlelater. So, I would not press very hard to keep the expansion alive ifwhat it wants to do is to slow down. But that does not seem to me avery clear description of the present situation. It may be more of alull before the current account ceases to drag it down while budgetimprovement and lower interest rates give a certain stimulation.Finally, as for the alternative of inflation and unemployment, I keeplooking at that myself and I arrive at a somewhat differentconclusion. I think that inflation is still much above where it oughtto be. And I don't see it coming down other than in a recession,which we want to avoid. So we do have to do something to bring itdown during a period of good activity. A 7.3 percent unemployment isnot good and 2-1/2 percent growth also isn't very good. I would stillpay a price to bring the inflation down. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is that price?MR. WALLICH. Well, 2-1/2 percent growth for a year andacceptance of 7.3 percent unemployment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you indicated earlier that thatwasn't going to bring it down, but I--MR. WALLICH. Well, the inflation should come down; theunemployment and the growth rate will be less satisfactory under that[scenario].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I don't really have anythingpositive to bring to the table today. The situation in the EleventhDistrict pretty well mirrors what has been going on [in otherDistricts]. We obviously had a slowing in the first quarter of 1985.In the fourth quarter of 1984 we were pretty well paralleling thenation in terms of economic growth but our rate of increase hasslipped below the pace of the nation in the first quarter, in partbecause of absolutely declining activity in energy, electronics, andconstruction. Reference already has been made to office buildingconstruction and that sort of thing. Of course, we have had an awfullot of construction in our area as I've reported in the past. Theproblems in Houston are very well known; they are not unforeseenproblems; they have been trying to live with their problems for acouple of years. We are getting reports that now there is concern inAustin, which has been a very strong boom area; that seems to beslowing very significantly. As an example, based on a recent survey,we had about 18 million square feet of office space sitting empty inDallas in March--a vacancy rate of a little over 21 percent. But ontop of that in March we had another 25 million square feet of officespace under construction. The conclusion of the survey was that we-15-5/21/85are now approaching the end of a real estate cycle. I think I canaccept that statement. Agriculture remains weak. Our preliminaryindication on our latest survey of agricultural land prices actuallyshowed a little increase in 1984 but the first quarter now isbeginning to show a little decline. So, it looks as though those whosaid we are about a year to a year and a half behind the Midwest mightbe right.Having said all that, I would also share the view expressedby a few others regarding a little concern about overreacting on theside of ease, despite all the gloomy reports. The uncertainty isvery, very great and I still think it remains to be seen which way theeconomy is going to turn.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have been very impressed with the size of thedownward revision in the official staff forecast since our Humphrey-Hawkins FOMC meeting in February. That shows a far more significantchange than just the change from the March meeting to this meeting. Imust say that I concur with those downward revisions because of theproblems with the manufacturing sector of this country and the importcompetition. The fact that imports are hurting not just the autoindustry and not just textiles but a broad spectrum of companies inmany, many different industries really depresses me. Also, I see thekinds of people who are aware of this: individuals I would expect tobe unsophisticated and not even know what exchange rates are. Butthey are tuned in to the super dollar; they also are tuned into whyit's super; and they know that it is hitting them very directly. Ithink that we have not seen the full extent of this yet.Also, I continue to be very concerned about the fragilitiesof the financial system. I got on this jag early; unfortunately, ithas been going on since '81 and '82 and I don't see it getting better.I see it getting a lot worse because it is not just a couple of statesthat have had specific problems, namely local depressions; it is now alot broader. Unlike Jerry, I don't think this is because free marketsdon't work. I think the problems with the financial system go back topoor public policy in the '70s: namely, a very inflationary policythat sent bad signals to financial institutions and participants infinancial markets. Then when the gears were shifted and we went intoa more moderate approach to public policy, i.e., fighting inflationand producing deflation in certain sectors of the economy, it was areal adjustment for those people to make. Also, I think we have to becandid and say we probably have not regulated them as well as we couldhave. Supervision has left a lot to be desired. That is the messagethat I think comes through from Ohio and Maryland. It isn't that freemarkets don't work but that the supervisor did a crummy job. I thinkfurther that if you really started to dig into the asset portfolios ofmany institutions that have not been looked at, you're going to find alot of water in there to squeeze out. We haven't seen it all yet.And when that squeezing takes place, I think we are going to see many,many more insolvencies. I am not just talking about thrifts; I amtalking about banks. This is, of course, a problem for thoseinstitutions themselves but I am more and more worried about how thatwill impact on consumer confidence in general and on businessconfidence--and particularly how it will impact on these little townsin rural areas. If you want to have some fun, go back and read about-16-5/21/85the 1920s and the problems in the agricultural community in thatdecade and what that did not just to agriculture but to whole sectionsof the country when the problems with farms brought down farm banksand the result was tremendous local recessions or depressions. Ithink this is one thing we have to take very, very seriously.Finally, I just want to mention that I talked to three of thehighest level economists in the auto industry and I'll just relay toyou a couple comments from them because I think they are ratherinteresting. In general, their sales forecasts are below what we aretalking about. One is using 10.5 million units or possibly slightlyabove that as total new car deliveries for calendar year 1985. Someof the sales that used to be in the form of autos are now going to befor small trucks, so there might be a little more in there; they thinktruck sales will be about 4.5 million. The big point this fellow madewas that it takes a lot more marketing money to move cars. In otherwords, consumers are not coming in and beating the doors down to buy;they are having to be dragged in to purchase. Interest rateincentives are being used very heavily. The customers are interestrate sensitive, and the special promotional rates of 8.5 to 8.8percent for slow moving cars have worked to move those specific cars.Auto makers are putting those incentives on some other cars--smallcars--because they want to help their "cafe" ratings with the U.S.government. The penalties are going to be severe if they don'taverage out okay for this year, so they want to move more of thesefuel economy cars to help that. Another chief economist is talkingabout 10.6 million deliveries for the year and truck deliveries of 4.4million. But again, he mentioned this interest rate incentive to movenew cars. It is substantial. He said that the going regular rate fornew car loans would be about 14.5 percent and they are using 8.8percent on selected lines. The third fellow says that the market atthe moment is the strongest in this recovery if you just look at salesvolume, year-to-date. According to his numbers they are coming outwith 10.9 million [currently] but for the whole year he still thinksdeliveries will be down somewhere around 10.6 to 10.7 million. Andthey're having to buy the business. He said the incentives providedon some of the big car purchases are $2,000. He also mentioned thecompetition from imports, such as Mercedes Benz, on the big car lines,and he brought up the matter of the strong dollar. In his view, wehave not seen the full impact of the rise in the dollar in lower autoprices and, therefore, they have a lot of room to cut prices if theywant to go after sales because this has just been going into theirpockets in the form of profits. If they really wanted to go aftersales more aggressively, he thinks they could. Anyway, [theseeconomists] are not complacent about the economy as a whole and theysee a slowdown being something that would cool off their numbers stillmore.MR. GARBARINI. Since my District is contiguous in small partto Mr. Boykin's, I'm glad that they have found they are at the end ofthe building cycle. We have had space for lease in three of ouroffices for some time and have found that the overbuilding in thoseareas was recognized, at least by us, somewhat earlier. Ourdiscussions with business folks in our District reinforce some of thecomments Jerry made about their lack of optimism and what Frank saidabout firms giving some serious consideration to moving manufacturingfacilities. However, I would say that in such discussions in the past-17-5/21/85generally those folks were the most pessimistic right before thingsgot a little better.The lack of any what might be called "meaningful" growth inthe first half wasn't too much of a surprise to us and was fairlyconsistent with the projections that we had made. As I recall, at theFebruary meeting--and you testified about the central tendency [offorecasts] expressed around this table--we were somewhat of an outlierboth on real output and inflation. On real output we were 1/2 to 3/4of a point [lower] and on the inflation side about 3/4 to 1 percentagepoint higher. For the second half, even though there is that lack ofoptimism in the business community in our District, and in spite ofthe mitigating factors such as the strength in the dollar, I believethat the stimulation that we gave to the economy in the last half of1984 and the first half of this year and the impetus of current ratesand promise of a reduction in the budget deficit could give usstronger growth, perhaps even above that 3 percent plus level. Iwould echo Bob Black's and Governor Wallich's comments that at thispoint in time surely we are looking at uncertainty but not a disaster,and that keeping our eyes on our long-term goals is certainlyappropriate.MR. GUFFEY. Let me focus just briefly on the Tenth Districteconomy. The major sectors in that economy are agriculture, energy--which includes both petroleum and mining [unintelligible]--aircraft,auto, and high-tech, including semiconductors. In that array, onlyone is doing very well and that's the automobile industry. Theremainder are all in a depressed state. In agriculture the situationis basically the same that has been well publicized and that we'vetalked about around the table. I would note that, based on theresults of a quarterly survey just completed, the land values in theTenth District--that would be dry land, irrigated, and pasture land--are down another 6 percent from the end of 1984. In the aggregate forthe District as a whole, land values are down 38 percent from the highof 1981. Now, that means that in some of those states it's down 30percent, depending upon the kind of agricultural land, and in somestates it's down 40 to 45 percent; on average, it is down 38 percent.But the important fact, I think, is that land continues to drop invalue, showing a 6 percent decline from the end of 1984.Energy, both the petroleum and mining, is just rocking alongwith no great hope of any resurgence in the period ahead. Aircraftmanufacturers just can't sell commercial or private aircraft overseasas a result of the dollar. And with high interest rates and theuncertainty about what the future state of the tax law will be,corporations are just laying back in the woods and not committingthemselves to aircraft. As a result the industry is struggling. Theauto industry in the District, which is a very big employer and a bigcomponent of the economy, is going full out and that's the realpositive aspect. In the high-tech area, which is in Kansas City,essentially, and in New Mexico and the eastern range of the Rockies,we find that the competition from overseas together with the [strengthof the] dollar [has put] the semiconductor part of that industry atgreat risk. As a matter of fact, we had the second closing of a high-tech firm in Colorado this past week. They just are not able tocompete with the overseas markets.-18-5/21/85Having said all that, I would like to turn momentarily to thenational economy. I take some encouragement from the comments thathave come from around the table. There is very little concern about arecession. That is to say, the staff's forecast of 2 to 3 percentgrowth for the year as a whole suggests that we will be in thepositive figures and perhaps not working against the high unemploymentrate. Nonetheless, there is no concern about recession, and I findthat true in talking to people in the Tenth District; recession is noton their minds. Our staff, looking at the outlook for the periodahead, would forecast just a bit more expansion in the second andthird quarters than the Board staff's forecast, but on balance wewould come out for the year as a whole about where the Board staffcomes out, with slightly more growth in the latter part of the yearbecause of the interest rate action that was taken most recently.There are two parts to that expectation of a bit more expansion thanin the Board staff's forecast: one would be inventories in the secondquarter and the other would be domestic consumption remaining verystrong through the second and third quarters. My own view, however,would be a bit more optimistic than the Board's staff or even my ownstaff. Given the money growth in late 1984 and the early part of thisyear, I think the chances are that we will see some real strengthbeginning to emerge in the third quarter and maybe on through theremainder of 1985.Having said all that, I also have met with the small businessand agricultural group as well as people around the District and,clearly, the focus in their minds is the strength of the U.S. dollar.That touches each of the areas that I mentioned that the TenthDistrict is involved in. It is becoming very [apparent] that they tiein the federal budget deficit with the dollar and they see that astheir enemy at the moment. The most recent decrease in the interestrates is looked upon very favorably, and I should think the reductionof the discount rate will fall in that category. I would just note,if I heard the Vice Chairman right that he could not [identify] anyfinancial markets that didn't have froth in them, that I can tell youthat the agricultural financial markets don't have froth in them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No new froth.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we are hearing a lot of gloomy reportstoday and that's understandable. There is a lot to be gloomy about.When that sort of thing happens I think it's worthwhile at least toremind ourselves that there are some positive signs developing.Housing has been moving up for four or five months now. I agree withJerry that we have had enough reduction in interest rates, given thelag in the way they affect spending and credit sensitive sectors ofthe economy, that we should expect to see some results from that astime goes on. I would regard auto sales as a positive; they may godown but they certainly have been quite strong recently. Consumersremain quite confident. And I take some comfort in the fact that,although investment spending intentions for 1985 are a lot moresubdued than they were at this time last year, we don't seem to haveseen any further deterioration from the fall to the spring. Thatrather surprises me, but maybe it will turn out that that won't holdup. We should remind ourselves also, I think, that periods ofslowdown during an economic expansion are the rule, not the exception.If I remember my business cycle history correctly, Wesley Mitchell andArthur Burns used to talk about a mid-cycle retardation, which-19-5/21/85occurred about 3/4ths of the time. The problem is that we don't knowwhether we are in the 3/4ths now or in the 1/4th. I am not a wildoptimist by any means. I agree with the staff's forecast that we willhave some pickup in economic activity. I have a hard time assessingwhether the risks are a little on the minus or the plus side, but Ithink I would assign a probability of .001 to an outcome of moregrowth over the next year than I would be comfortable living with.Now, I would like to put that in a longer-run context. Ithink we ought to take into account the fact that what we are lookingat now is an economy that is being severely depressed by competitionfrom the international side. It's a consequence of a horrendousincrease in the value of the dollar and the dollar is eventually goingto decline. When? I don't know whether it is going to be next weekor next month or next year; but when the dollar goes back down, wecould find the economy as severely stimulated as it is now beingdepressed. And if that occurs in the context of a federal structuralbudget deficit that is still rising, we are in big trouble. That maynot happen, but I think one has to remember that the problem we may beworried about on average over the next three years is not too littlegrowth but too much, and not too little demand, but too much. We needto keep that in mind as we think about the course of monetary policyunder present circumstances.MR. PARTEE. Well, Lyle said a good deal of what I was goingto say. This has been such a gloomy go-around today that I thoughtmaybe I couldn't even survive it! I didn't get any sense as I waslistening to everybody that in the first four months of the yearnonfarm payrolls rose by more than 1 million workers. That's atremendous rate of addition to our employment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Want to be gloomy? Look at how lousy thatmeans productivity grew.MR. PARTEE. Well, we don't even measure productivity inservices or trade and, of course, that is where the employment gainswere. They weren't in manufacturing. I think that we tend to bebemused by manufacturing, because historically it was the cyclicallyvolatile sector and historically where we thought we got our oomph.And, of course, we are not getting any now with the importcompetition. I agree with Lyle that that is a temporary phenomenon,although temporary in terms of years, perhaps, rather than months.But we really have had a very buoyant domestic economy in my view,with the strength being sapped by the import competition. And I thinkwe ought to keep that in context.Now, I'm as concerned as anyone here--even Pres--about thecondition of the financial markets. I think that they are in terribleshape. In fact, I can't even bring myself anymore, Bob, to say whatyou say about the banking [system]. I don't know that it is sound orthat banks are in good condition. I am very much taken by the factthat we are 2-1/2 years into the recovery and that we are stilltalking about all of these problems. We have a thousand problembanks, [the ones rated] fours and fives. We have failures movingalong and we are 2-1/2 years into the recovery. What happens come arecession--which will come? I don't know. There may be no way out ofthis box. But I do believe that the worst conceivable thing thatcould happen--the thing I have nightmares about--is a situation that-20-5/21/85brings about the necessity of a substantial increase in interestrates. By substantial I don't mean a point; I mean a substantialincrease in interest rates because of, let's say, a very sharp drop inthe dollar or a sudden strengthening in the economy because of lessimport competition or an inflation rate that accelerates. I remindall of you that all the research shows that inflation starts withprices, not wages. And then when prices move up, wages follow. Theywill do it this time too--that is, if we have another rise in prices.But an increase of 3 or 4 percentage points in interest rates wouldabsolutely sink most of our financial institutions--certainly most ofour thrifts and a good many of our other financial institutions. So,I think the big thing to guard against is getting ourselves into asituation where perforce we have to tolerate or accept, and maybe evenencourage, a substantial increase in interest rates six months fromnow, a year from now, or a year and a half from now, as the case maybe.So, I find myself a little timid on this business ofstimulating the economy at this point through monetary expansion.Some fluctuation in rates is all right, certainly. One has torecognize that we are not anywhere close to our potential, that wevery easily could accommodate in the near term more growth than isforecast, and that we may not have as much growth as is beingforecast, because quarter after quarter we have had shortfalls in ourprojections. But I wouldn't want to do that in any kind of gung howay because I think that would raise the odds that a subsequentsizable fall in the dollar and a subsequent increase in observedprices would bring higher rates that would give us really seriousfinancial troubles in our system. So, I come out on the side ofcaution and moderation in what we do today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, why don't you pronounce aninvocation.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.][Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of very briefcomments. In terms of the business situation and outlook, I myselfwould be quite surprised if we have seen the end of the importpenetration at anything like the current exchange rate. I think thatprocess is maybe not in midstream--it's beyond the midstream--but weare not to the other shore by a long shot in my own appraisal. Mr.Morris expressed a bit of surprise at the timing of the discount ratechange. I am not quite sure what you had in mind. You may have hadin mind the timing relative to this meeting.MR. MORRIS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a factor that we considered andwe thought on balance that it was better to get it out of the waybefore the meeting--kind of as a benchmark--rather than leaving somequestion as to how it would fit in connection with open marketoperations. I would simply say that I did not have in mind that wewould be reversing direction of that action by tightening up on openmarket operations. With that much preliminary, who would like tocomment?-21-5/21/85MR. MORRIS. We have observed in Boston that the only thingin the economy that is very strong is M1. I have distributed to allof you a chart that I thought was rather interesting entitled "SuperNOW Account Yields." In the last six months more than a third of thegrowth of M1 has been in Super NOW accounts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In Super NOWs as opposed to NOW accounts?MR. MORRIS. Ten billion dollars out of the $26 billiongrowth in M1 has been in Super NOW accounts. In the prior 6 months,instead of growing at a $10 billion rate, they grew at less than $2billion. I think the answer to why M1 exhibited slow growth in themiddle of the year and very rapid growth in recent months is shown onthis chart. The interest rates on Super NOWs as administered by thebanks tend to be rather sluggish relative to market rates. When rateswent up sharply in the spring and summer, the opportunity cost ofholding Super NOWs relative to money market mutual funds rosesubstantially, so we had a very slow rate of growth in Super NOWs. Asthe opportunity cost dropped--there's now only a one percentdifferential and I suspect in the weeks ahead it may drop below theone percent level--you would expect people to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before you say that, let me just ask: Aone percent differential between what and what? That's not what itlooks like.MR. MORRIS. The difference between the [yields on] moneymarket mutual funds and the Super NOW accounts is about 1 percentagepoint. In the original that bottom chart was colored; thedifferential was about 1 percentage point as of April. I suspect nowit is probably down lower than that. As the opportunity cost changesI think you would expect that the public's willingness to hold SuperNOWs relative to money market funds would change; and it changes inprecisely the direction that you would expect. So, I think thisexplains a part of the acceleration in M1 growth--not all of it, but apart of it. It also raises again the question that I have beenraising for several years: If a large, and the fastest growing,component of M1 is paying a rate very close to the money market mutualfunds rate, should you expect the aggregate that contains that rapidlygrowing component to behave the same way as it has in the past? Quiteclearly, it seems to me, the new M1 is going to be more interestsensitive than the old M1 as long as the stickiness of the Super NOWaccount rate persists; and the relationship between the new M1 and thenominal GNP is going to be as unpredictable as it has been during thepast few years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It all sounds very plausible to me. Iasked a similar question to the staff recently and they told me therewas nothing to it, so I will let them respond. I may havemisinterpreted their answer.MR. AXILROD. I think what you're observing is the interestsensitivity of M1. This is why the models have been predicting largegrowth in M1. This was somewhat of a phenomenon in earlier periods.Part of the growth of the Super NOWs, of course, is related to theswitching out of NOWs when the minimum went down from $2500 to $1000at the beginning of this year. But if you go back for six months,there has been a $10 or $11 billion increase in regular NOW accounts,-22-5/21/85including Super NOWs, so that they have been--as they have been in thepast--a large part of the increase in M1. That is the reason we havebeen contending that M1 cannot have the same degree of weight it hadin 1979-1982. There are a lot of reasons for that, but one is thatone cannot be certain how M1 velocity is going to behave underdifferent circumstances. I think President Morris rightly points outthat the interest sensitivity has increased with the Super NOWs andNOWs in M1 and the sluggish behavior of their rates was indeed quite aphenomenon in 1982 and early 1983. But after a while we are not surewhat is going to happen to that interest sensitivity. If theinstitutions begin moving their rates with the market rates, then to adegree that interest sensitivity will diminish. Our own uncertaintyin that respect is one of the reasons that we are a little reluctantto advocate M1 strongly at this point. We just haven't had experiencein varying kinds of circumstances as we go through all of thesetransitions.MR. MORRIS. But it does suggest to me that with rates comingdown and the differential narrowing, if anything, we could very wellsee sustained strong growth in M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what I asked you, [Mr. Axilrod],explicitly the other day was: Does it look different if you look atthe old M1 and M1A? You told me no, but this would seem to imply thatit should look different.MR. AXILROD. Well, on other figures they don't behavedifferently--the velocity behavior and the growth rates behave verysimilarly. Give me a second and I can round those figures up here.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. While Mr. Axilrod is looking, I willgive you a sample of one.MR. AXILROD. In the first quarter, growth in M1 was 10-1/2percent and growth in the old M1A was 6.8 percent. In the secondquarter, growth in M1--this is with certain assumptions--would bearound 6.7 percent and M1A would be 5.3 percent. If you look backsince 1981--omit the year 1981--in 1982, 1983, and 1984 growth in M1Awas running anywhere from 1-1/2 to 5 percentage points below growth inM1. So the relationships that have emerged in the first and secondquarters are not that different. The velocity of M1A declined 0.3 ofa percent in the first quarter when velocity of M1 declined about 0.4;in the second quarter the velocity of old M1A was about unchanged, ordown a little now given our revisions, and it was down 0.2 percent onold M1. So they are behaving roughly the same. But the greatergrowth in M1 relative to M1A is a function of the greater growth inthe NOW account component. But the structural relationship--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What were the fourth-quarter figures?MR. AXILROD. Fourth quarter of 1984? M1 grew 3.2 percentand M1A 1.4 percent; the velocity [growth rate] was around 3-3/4percent for M1 and 5-1/2 percent for M1A. M1A has had a steadilyhigher velocity [growth] for several years now. The reason is thatNOW accounts have low velocity [growth].MR. GRAMLEY. There is another way you can get basically thesame conclusion. One of my favorite ways--nobody else likes it but-23-5/21/85me, I guess--is to look at those old money demand functions and ask:What would money have done if the relationship between GNP andinterest rates and the growth of money had been what it used to be?If you do that, you find that over the past year the predicted growthof M1 on those old money demand models was 6.9 percent compared withan actual of 6.2 percent; for the past two quarters predicted growthwas 7.0 percent compared with an actual of 6.8 percent. I think thereally big question is not so much whether money is behaving in apeculiar way relative to what might have happened in the past if oldmoney demand models prevailed, but rather whether money growth has thesame kind of meaning when you have an exchange rate that is way, wayout of line. We used to think that money was related to aggregatedemand not to output. That in itself makes a difference. But maybeeven the relationship between money growth and aggregate demand is notthe same in a world of wildly volatile and fluctuating exchange rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's another thing you can look at--thatthis money growth may not look all that odd compared to demand.[Unintelligible] 4 percent in the first quarter.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I did ask some people to runsome--Mr. Garbarini will excuse the words "simple-type"--simple-typeSt. Louis model predictions from M1. That had been something wetested back in 1982-1983 to see if there indeed had been some sort ofdemand shift. In that period. M1 had been predicting a lot highernominal GNP than actually developed. We were in a discussion withmonetarists [unintelligible] would be needing, and indeed the nominalGNP came in lower than the monetarist-type models would predict. M1Ain those days was not predicting so badly for 1983. Now, simplepredictions on M1 underpredicted in the first half of 1984 andoverpredicted in the second half. Looking into 1985, they wouldpredict in the first quarter a 9-1/2 percent nominal GNP, which isalmost 3 points or so higher than we got; and they are predictingdouble-digit nominal GNP, of course, in the second and third quarters.The old M1A is also predicting nominal GNP higher than our staff ispredicting, although not as high as the M1. So, if the nominal GNPcomes out about as our staff predicts, it looks as if we are going tosee a pattern somewhat similar to what happened in 1983 in terms ofthese predictions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what I conclude from all thisdiscussion is that we better have a little more orderly analysis ofthis before the next meeting when we have to look at those [long-run]targets.MR. AXILROD. We will provide some.MR. MORRIS. It does suggest that if M1 keeps rising veryrapidly between now and July that we might have to rebase it for 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can face that issue then.Meanwhile, who would like to make a suggestion? In the absence of anyother suggestions, I will make a suggestion: Keep the reservepressures about where they are.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As long as we know where they are.I will make a suggestion which really does involve keeping reservepressures about where they are. In terms of the monetary aggregate-24-5/21/85specifications, I can easily live with those specified in alternativeB. I personally would shade the borrowings level a bit higher thanthe staff's suggestion of $300 to $350 million. This is reallysplitting [hairs], but I would rather see it $350 to $375 millionbecause I think that is compatible with existing money marketconditions, as I understand them.MR. PARTEE. Now, what are you doing with the thrift[borrowings]? Is that--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The thrifts are out as described byMr. Axilrod in his [briefing] a few minutes ago.MR. PARTEE. Totally out, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, that's what I was assuming.MR. PARTEE. You regard them as a functional equivalent ofextended credit?MR. AXILROD. The Ohio thrifts are on extended credit and thebulk of those in the Richmond District are on extended credit at themoment. Some additional ones may be put on.MR. PARTEE. Oh, is that right?MR. BLACK. We would be glad to put them all in there, if youwill take it out of that figure, because it is like extended credit onthose that [unintelligible] for a short time; [the institutions are]not feeling the adjustment pressure that is ordinarily felt inadjustment credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think you could [unintelligible]out of extended credit as you do out of adjustment credit.MR. BLACK. The rate is higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those institutions are under somepressure.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, I would take alternative Bwith borrowings of $350 to $375 million. We have this awkward problemof having set monetary growth paths for the quarter in March that,especially in the case of M2 and M3, just are now so far out of linewith what we were talking about then that I think we have to consider--although no one likes it--finessing the language of the directive toacknowledge that situation at least as it pertains to M2 and M3. Ithink M1 we can finesse without any great problems. That's aboutwhere I am.MR. PARTEE. You are prepared to accept those low M2 and M3numbers, though?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. PARTEE. You don't think that there is any informationcontent in them?-25-5/21/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I do not.MR. MARTIN. Picking up on Governor Rice's comments withregard to the economy growing under its potential, I would certainlysubscribe to that comment. I don't know whether it's 3 or 3-1/2percent or more, but certainly [2.7] percent and a range of 2 to 2-1/2percent are under potential. It seems to me, though, that thatquestion is properly addressed in the July review rather than in thisshort-run situation we face. Secondly, I would like to address thesuggestion that M1 be brought down to the band--I think it was theband, not the cone. I won't get too methodical with you here. Itseems to me that the growth in GNP right now is too low, and thatthere is a downside risk. The 7.3 percent potential growth rate [forM1] that Steve mentioned earlier--if that is the case for the year--Idon't find all that disturbing, considering the discussions that wehave had with regard to V1. It seems to me that in the usual model itwould take a federal funds rate--what would it be: 8-1/2 or 9 cent?--to bring M1 down within that band. And it seems to me that that isnot called for under these circumstances.As far as alternatives are concerned, the point I was tryingto make by reviewing the horror stories that unfortunately are realand not in the movies anymore is that I think we made the correct movein reducing the discount rate but that there is enough speculativefever out there that if we were observed doing anything further in thedirection of ease, we would run a risk that I don't believe isnecessary of aiding and abetting that fever. So it seems to me thatthis is a wonderful time for the Chairman--as only the Chairman cando--to make that representation that we are central bankers and we areconcerned with orderly markets and inflation and we are going to holdthe line, as it were. That gets me certainly to voting foralternative B as the closest thing to the status quo I can read out oftoday's confusing events and the description thereof. If the marketexpects a nudge further in the direction of ease, our failure tosatisfy that expectation might be the best thing we could do rightnow, when I feel there is so much potential panic out there. As faras the borrowing is concerned, I go along with Jerry's suggestion of$350-$375 million, partly because I cannot understand how the thrifts'borrowing [fits], and secondly because I don't know how much borrowingwill occur as unfortunate events unfold and how that will affect theborrowing level. It seems to me that results in a federal funds rate,perhaps as was indicated, between 7-1/2 and 8 percent; and I thinkthat is appropriate in terms of market pressures and the discount ratereduction.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my wife tells me I'm hard to pleaseand if she were here today she would say that my actions would provethat because I don't like any of the alternatives. I am mindful ofthe risks involved in this, but all of these alternatives would put usabove the upper band and also above the upper cone for M1. And I justdon't think anything would be gained by pushing M1 above the long-runtarget range; on the contrary, I think we have a lot to lose. Thefinancial market participants are well aware of these parallel bandsand if they see us running short-run targets above those bands, Ithink they are going to question our anti-inflationary resolve.Therefore, I couldn't accept anything above 5-1/2 percent, which wouldput us about at the top of the band. Actually I prefer 5 percent,which would give us a little breathing room. I don't know what kind-26-5/21/85of federal funds rate it would take to do that--it might take a littlebit of an uptick from where we are now--maybe where we were rightbefore the discount rate was cut. But if that had to be, I wouldrather see that than encounter the kind of scenario that Chuckoutlined earlier, where later we find that we were wrong and have topush it up still more. And if an increase is necessary, I think thatmight be some indication that the economy is really stronger than theGreenbook suggests.On this matter of not changing policy: If the Committee doesadopt alternative B, as I suppose it will, I think most people wouldregard that as a clear easing of the short-run policy stance that weadopted at the March meeting. Now, there is nothing in the directivelanguage to indicate that any easing has occurred but we have taken asmall step in that way. And in particular the term "maintain" in thefirst sentence of alternative B would be somewhat confusing. Irecognize the system we use and that the term "degree of reservepressures" refers to the level of borrowing. But I don't think thatthe outside world looks at it quite that narrowly, so they might notunderstand it. So, I think that's at least a question we ought toaddress if we go with "B" as I would guess the Committee probably isgoing to do.MR. RICE. I would just like to respond very briefly to someof the observations that have been made. First, if I thought we werefacing an inflation rate of 5 percent, I certainly would be much moreconcerned and that would be reflected in my view of appropriate policyin that I'd probably want to be more restrictive. I don't think weare. Secondly, if I thought we could get the inflation rate downunder 2 percent by keeping the economy growing at 2 percent and theunemployment rate at 7.3 percent, I would be willing to do that too.I would be willing to pay that price, but I don't think we can getinflation down below 2 percent by holding the economy down at such alow rate of growth. I don't see any beneficial effects to be achievedfrom such a slow stagnating rate of growth and that is why I said thatwe ought not to be satisfied with anything less than 3 to 3-1/2percent. Having said that, I would favor alternative B with a tilttoward "A." By that I mean that I would be willing to relax borrowinga little below Jerry's recommendation and more in accord with theborrowing that we would expect to be compatible with alternative B--inthe $300 to $350 million range.MR. KEEHN. Well, I do think we are probably at a time wheremaintaining the existing degree of reserve pressure is appropriate. Iam a little unclear as to whether that is "B" or "C" at this point. Iam a bit uncertain about the thrift aspect of the borrowing level, soI think I would favor alternative B. If I were going to vary fromthat, I would have a slight tendency toward "C," which maybe suggestsraising the borrowing level a bit from the earlier recommendations tothe area of $400 million. That seems to me probably about where weare, adjusting for the thrift borrowing.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I earlier indicated that I think we haveto be thinking about where we are going over the longer run indeciding on policy today. By that I mean that I don't think we oughtto dump in reserves in buckets. We shouldn't act panicky. Weshouldn't let rates drop a ton. We should be ready to take backwhatever additional stimulus we put in now, if it turns out that the-27-5/21/85economy gets a bit more robust as the year goes along than we now areforecasting. I do think that what we need to worry about most withrespect to M1 is not so much how fast it is presently growing, butwhether or not there is going to be an impression out there that theFed is throwing in the towel on inflation. If that impression werewidespread, I would be deeply concerned. I don't sense that now and Ido want to make sure that we don't give that impression. But I amperfectly happy to go along with the specifications of "B" and theborrowing range specified by Jerry of $350 to $375 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Just a word on this matter of M1 showing growthabove the band: I think we're all aware of the fact that there hasbeen a change in the pattern of velocity here, probably stemming fromderegulation and what that has done to the interest elasticity of thedemand for money. In any event, our staff felt at the time of ourFebruary meeting, and still feels now, that we're likely to see adecline in V1 of approximately 1 percentage point for 1985 as a whole.So that influences my view of what the appropriate growth rate of M1is. Because of that decline in velocity that seems to be going on,I'm not concerned that we are courting inflation or a reigniting ofinflation in the near term.With respect to the specifications, I would be in favor ofthe federal funds rate associated with alternative B of about 7-3/4percent and borrowing in the neighborhood of $300 to $350 million.The San Francisco money model, given those and other inputs, wouldexpect the growth rate of M1 to be more like that shown in alternativeA. If it were 7 percent or a bit higher, that would be all right withme in view of the losses in the economy and the view I expressedearlier today about tilting in the direction of ease until we get somebetter balance back in the economy. So, as I mentioned, I would favoralternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Given the sluggishness of the economy and thefact that inflation is at a moderate rate and the dollar--in spite ofits recent declines--is still at high levels, I think the Committeeshould appropriately confirm or ratify the accommodative stance thathas been taken over the last couple of weeks. I'm not particularlydisturbed about M1 being over its band at the present time, given therelative weakness of the broader aggregates and what I sense is goingto be a continued weakness in the second quarter. So I would think,Mr. Chairman, that we ought to maintain the current reserve pressures,if "pressures" if the right word to use at this point. I would optfor alternative B with the borrowing specification given in theBluebook which would translate in my mind to a federal funds rate ofabout 7-3/4 or 7-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I generally would supportalternative B. I must admit to being a little concerned aboutselecting a target that leaves M1 above its channel. But it seems tome that at this point in time that is a relatively low-cost insurancepolicy, if you will, that may at the margin help economic performance.-28-5/21/85That seems appropriate to me under the circumstances and, therefore, Idon't have any problems with the general specifications of B. I don'thave a conviction on the borrowing level, in part because of some ofthe noise that's affecting those numbers. But it seems to me thatmaybe a borrowing target centering on $350 million would beappropriate under the circumstances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think last week was anhistoric week in the evolution of the thinking of the Federal Reserve.On Thursday we announced a $2-1/2 billion rise in M1 and on Friday weannounced a discount rate cut, which shows that we're really learningfrom experience.MR. PARTEE. Or that we didn't know what the money supplywas.MR. MORRIS. As I read the numbers, it's clear to me that theU.S. economy--and I think the world economy--needs a lower level ofinterest rates in the United States to the extent that that can beproduced without jeopardizing our determination to control inflation.It seems to me, therefore, that it's appropriate for us to probe alittle on interest rates. I'm not completely persuaded that what hashappened already will be enough. But I think we ought to sit back andassess things before we move any further. So, I would support "B"with Jerry Corrigan's $350-$375 million on borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I favor alternative B, but I think we ought torecognize that alternative B in the context of a 7-1/2 percentdiscount rate is an easier policy than in the context of an 8 percentdiscount rate. I think it's technically correct to say that we'remaintaining the same policy. But for the world at large that's onlygoing to be a technicality. I would think we would be better off inthe wording to use the words "maintain the existing degree of pressureon reserve positions" but that we might add the phrase "in the contextof the recent decline in the discount rate." Otherwise, I think we'regoing to let something that is technically correct in a very narrowsense lead us into a communication problem. The other point is thatthe M1 specification of 6-3/4 percent strikes me as being overlyprecise; perhaps we ought to round that to something that looks alittle more even, like 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I have some sympathy with Bob Black'sposition. It makes me uneasy to be running above track on M1.There's no magic in it, of course. But we specified it and it is arelatively high number historically. We're at the time in the cyclewhen it's conceivable that we're seeing weaknesses here and there thatcould do the kind of thing that would lead people to say, as they doabout the '70s, that we acted in an inflationary manner. It is asensitive time to overrun the objectives that we have set before. Iam impressed, however, by the fact that the M1 target ranges were setin the context of a higher interest rate structure than we now have.And interest rates, as Frank has pointed out, do now very much affect5/21/85the behavior of M1. So, that may be somewhat of a temporaryexplanation at least. I think we need to review this all quitethoroughly for the next meeting, including what NOW accounts aredoing, particularly Super NOWs. You remember when the minimums werereduced on all of them in January that we said we were going to watchcarefully to see what happened. I'm not sure that we have watchedthat carefully since then, having decided that nothing was going tohappen. So that all ought to be reviewed. I'm also impressed by theextreme weakness in M2 and M3. I've asked about that several timesand I'm always told that it's a technical thing that will soon reverseitself. But, in fact, if you look at the family of aggregates--andyou remember that the Committee has a family of aggregates so that itwon't be misled by some exotic movement in one of them--we're inpretty good shape. M2 and M3 have declined down not only within theparallel lines but are now within the cones. And seeing that gives mea little more comfort. So, I would accept alternative B. And if Iwere going to err, I'd err on the side of tightness rather than ease.MR. MORRIS. I just wonder whether the weakness in M2 and M3is--and we saw this at the same time last year--an IRA accountphenomenon.MR. PARTEE. Well, it could be that. It could be theTreasury refund situation and the big Treasury balance. I think wejust have to look at it.MR. MORRIS. Well, as I recall, didn't we have a similar kindof weakness last spring, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Not that dramatic. If you put in all of theIRA increase seasonally unadjusted, that would add 4 percentage pointsto the growth rate. And assuming that our seasonal on thenontransactions component--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 4 percentage points for one month?MR. AXILROD. Yes, at an annual rate, for one month. If youassume that our seasonal on the nontransactions component caught atleast half of that--which strikes me as a reasonable assumption--you'dadd a couple of points, which would leave growth still very weak.You'd need other explanations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These M2 and M3 numbers are quite lowhowever you look at them. If they were really that low for thequarter, I'd worry a bit. It allows much room for increases. Mrs.Horn.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to show some progress inmoving the monetary aggregates--M1 in particular--toward where we wantto be at year-end. Because of the uncertainties in the economy andthe uncertainties with respect to velocity, where I personally wouldlike to come out at year-end is in the top part of the ranges,particularly for M1. I'm not in favor of bringing it back too fastfor a number of reasons, including the uncertainties. But I'm alsonot sure it's the appropriate time to be active on the other sideeither. So, I would favor alternative C, but I would favor changingthe borrowing number upward slowly as things develop.-30-5/21/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would favor theaggregates specifications of alternative B. It doesn't bother megreatly that we are at, or near, or above the top of the parallel line[for M1], given the weakness we've had. I think it's an appropriateresponse, with the velocity [growth] being negative for what wouldappear to be two quarters. But what I am bothered about is theborrowing level suggested in the Bluebook: the $300 to $350 millionrange, which will achieve a 7-3/4 percent federal funds rate. If I'mcorrect in my thinking about that, if we maintain the same pressureson reserves that we've had in the past and have dropped the discountrate 1/2 percentage point, then that would suggest that in order toget a funds rate of 7-3/4 percent we would need to have the sameborrowing level that we had before we dropped the discount rate. Andif I understand the numbers right, that level is closer to $400million than it is to $300 to $350 million. I think borrowingaveraged $380 million over the intermeeting period. The point thatI'd like to make is that $300 to $350 million seems a little low and Iwould be a little more cautious so as to get to the 7-3/4 percent overtime. As a result, I would opt for a borrowing level of $375 to $425million with a target, obviously, of $400 million starting out. And Ishould think that if we're looking ultimately to move to 7-3/4 percentthat we can do it gradually.The other point that I would make, and I've made it before,is that seasonal borrowings are now running about $170 million, whichis half of the $300 to $350 million, and they will continue to buildover the upcoming intermeeting period. Therefore, with a $300-$350million borrowing objective, we're really getting very close toturning loose and actually pegging the federal funds rate, which Iwould oppose. Therefore, I would accept "B" and recommend a borrowingrange of $375 to $425 million, centering on $400 million for the startof the intermeeting period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. As I reviewed the table here and the charts onthe various monetary aggregates, it seemed to me that what I saw forM2 and M3 was, as Chuck said, that as of April we were already notonly within the parallel lines but within the cones. Also, as I lookat where the various alternatives A, B, and C are plotted for the endof the quarter, they are not really that far apart. They are withinthe cones at that point. For M1 I see that as of April we're a touchabove but with each alternative--A, B, or C--we are going to be abovethe parallel line. So if we're concerned about how the financialmarket participants would view this, I don't see that it makes morethan about a nickel's worth of difference. I don't think that theyjust look at M1 to begin with; and secondly, I don't think that theywould be that sensitive to these short-range positions we are taking.So I guess I could practically roll the dice here and say that ifeveryone is going with alternative B, I certainly can. But I hope ifthere is a way to lean that we would lean toward alternative A ratherthan toward tightening, particularly because I think we have to bevery careful about what our actions do to the fed funds rate and whatmessage that sends to market participants about what we did today. Interms of the borrowing target, frankly, I'm so confused about how thethrift numbers come in here that I really don't know exactly what-31-5/21/85number to pick up. But I think I would rather have it lower thanhigher, which is a very vague way to put it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Garbarini.MR. GARBARINI. Mr. Chairman, I strongly endorse yourrecommendation that monetary policy be consistent with what we've beendoing recently. I'm concerned that, while monetary policy might workwith lags, monetary messages work somewhat quicker. And it seems tome that anything other than "C" gives a message of a move toward ease.If we had to go with "B," I'd agree with Roger that at least we shouldincrease the borrowing level.MR. PARTEE. I wonder, Paul, whether the staff has any viewon this seasonal borrowing point that Roger made. I had sort offorgotten about the fact that it would be moving up--I presumesignificantly--in weeks to come.MR. AXILROD. Well, it may. It looks like it would tend torise a little in May naturally, although in 1984 the spread betweenthe funds rate and the discount rate was about the same as in April--maybe a tad higher. It looks to me at least that if the spreadbetween the funds rate and the discount rate is unchanged, that itprobably would be running, say, $30 or $40 million or so or maybe alittle more above what is "normal" for seasonal borrowing given thisspread and this time of year. So, implicitly, the $350 million wasallowing for that. And that probably would give you a funds rate of7-3/4 percent shaded on the down side I would guess rather than shadedabove. I don't know if Mr. Sternlight agrees or disagrees with that.MR. STERNLIGHT. No, I'd agree with that--shaded to the downside.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would find alternative B acceptable. In myview the borrowing assumption as a minimum should be $350 to $375million. I would not go below that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich hasn't been heard from.MR. WALLICH. Well, as I said before, the chief monetaryobjective that I envisage is to overcome the stickiness of the long-term rate and to bring about more reasonable real long-term rates.This can be done by steepening the yield curve--that is pulling theshort-term rate down--provided that it doesn't lead to an excessiveacceleration of M1 or the other aggregates. Fortunately, that seemsto be what is happening now, so our range of maneuver is very limited.We have already reduced the funds rate, the short-term end of theyield spectrum. And I think we've probably done as much as we dareright now. One has to observe what the market does. If the marketaccepts it and brings down the long-term end so that the yield curvedoesn't steepen, well, then one has made a step forward and oneshouldn't take any risks of the market rejecting the maneuver. Inpractical terms I'm concerned also by how quickly one moves from thecone to the band. The main virtue of the band that I see is that itseems to give us in writing a lot of leeway; it doesn't matter whetherthe money supply overshoots quite sharply in the short run; we don't-32-5/21/85have to bring it back immediately. But other than that, the band isnot a good guide. It's the cone that is the right guide. So giventhe constraints, I can go with "B" and I can go with $350-$375 millionon the borrowing and a funds rate to match, which would be 7-3/4percent or a little more perhaps.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd just make one quick technicalcomment on M2. In March and especially in April there has been a verysubstantial runoff of RPs, which we think is associated with theanomaly of the Treasury balance and the refund problem. That itselfis a major factor in terms of abnormally slow growth of M2 in thisperiod.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's right. But I'm hearing alsothat April was the lowest M2 growth since 1970. That goes back a longway. It may be strictly technical, but it gives me pause so long as Isee it there.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree. But the runoff of RPs,Peter, was how much in April?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that was the main factor in theweakness in M2 but I don't know how many percentage points.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It was big dollars.MR. PARTEE. One of the things is that thrifts are getting tobe a part of these numbers and we know that FCA is still in trouble.And as a matter of fact the whole savings and loan industry seems tobe much less aggressive in terms of expansion--I guess because of theHome Loan Bank Board rule on incremental net capital. So I'mwondering whether there might be something more there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may well be. It's probably undulyoptimistic to think that they decided not to make so many bad loans.MR. PARTEE. No, they're going to make as many bad loans butthey're going to make fewer good ones!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, there seems to be somemisunderstanding as to what the level of borrowing is that we setforth with respect to the different alternatives, especially with "B."I would ask Steve--and I think the rest of you might be interested inthe answer--whether, as I understood it, the level of borrowing he wastalking about in the Bluebook assumed that all the so-called specialsituation borrowing with respect to thrifts would be treated as otherextended credit. So, that is not as fluky a number or asunpredictable a number as it might otherwise be. That is theunderstanding, is it not?MR. AXILROD. Well, that's how we wrote the Bluebook. Ithink what's unpredictable, essentially, is the relationship [ofborrowing] to the funds rate. There has been a lot of looseness inthat relationship. And I don't think any of us can guarantee anyparticular funds rate for any particular level of borrowing. We canguarantee sort of an area, but not any particular level.-33-5/21/85MR. GUFFEY. As a follow-up on that: Your $380 millionborrowing level that you averaged out over the period excludedeverything, right?MR. AXILROD. I excluded it. That's right; I took out all ofthe special situation borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which is clearly wrong at the extreme, itseems to me.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. AXILROD. In the same sense that it was wrong to take outall the borrowing by Continental last summer. Some fraction probablyshould have been left in there; I assume that some of it was notextended credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Small or large. Well, there's no greatdesire to change things aggressively. That is a point with which Iagree, but let me just make a couple of supplementary comments. Idon't know where we are on the economy; it's not looking very good. Ido know the exchange rate is awfully high and I surely wouldn't wantto push it higher. I would rather do the reverse. I don't know whatis going on with M1 or M2 or M3. I know they are giving out differentsignals, but I don't feel very religious about M1 at this point. Ifthe economy shows further signs of softening and the dollar is goinghigher and financial strains in a number of directions continue or getaggravated, as they well might, I think we're running some financial[risks] in the financial system, clearly. There are financial strainsacross a large part of the structure of the American manufacturingindustry at least. One is partly related to the other. And I thinkwe have to maintain some flexibility on the easier side, although Iwouldn't [move in that direction] right now. I think that's a muchmore likely hypothesis than the opposite, although I don't mindmaintaining flexibility on the opposite side either. This alternativeB/alternative C business never appears in anything [we publish]; maybewe ought to look at the [draft] directive language, which I don't likemuch in the sense that it doesn't change anything from last time.There have been a number of comments that we ought to mention thediscount rate someplace. I think that would be wise. Let's putsomething in the first sentence there. I'm not quite sure why wewould say "uncertainties in the business outlook." It seems to mewhat we ought to be saying is "relatively slow growth."VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can't really say "taking accountof progress against inflation" anymore either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's long term. Another thing on theinflation front, as we said in our announcement [about the discountrate], is that the commodity prices are just continuing to fall. Theaverages for the most part, except for the very low level at thebottom of the recession, are as low as they have been in two years andthe level is about where it was in '79 or '80.MR. MARTIN. Yes.-34-5/21/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is a real reduction in commodityprices of 30 or 40 percent, I suppose. And it's just about across theboard: in agricultural prices, industrial, mining--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's another reason why it'sdisturbing that the general price level is rising as much as it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's rising and it's mainly in theprices of services. But there has been a little bulge in gasolineprices recently, which we may have for another month in thestatistics, but that seems to be over in the commodities prices.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Car prices.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Car prices went down last month.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In the latest consumer [pricereport]? I haven't seen that.MR. MARTIN. The Japanese premium ought to start coming in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just read it. Used car priceswere down slightly and the new car prices were unchanged. It's a rarething for used car prices to come down.MR. PARTEE. It's all those trade-ins, with this high levelof new sales.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the easy thing to do, and maybe it'ssufficient, is just to mention in the first sentence that the discountrate went down.MR. PARTEE. Well, there are three items mentioned--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest something radical: take outall this business about progress against inflation, uncertainties, andthe exchange value of the dollar.MR. PARTEE. Yes, they really are all very difficult.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Say: "In the implementation of policy forthe immediate future, against the background of the recent decline inthe discount rate." We mentioned all these things [in ourannouncement of the discount rate action.] Put a footnote on it thatsays "See the statement on the--"MR. PARTEE. Well, these are mentioned elsewhere too I think.This is just somewhat--okay.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's a good idea.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future and against the background of the recent reduction inthe discount rate"--is it worth mentioning market rates in there?SPEAKER(?). You don't need it.-35-5/21/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we say "The Committee seeks tomaintain the existing--." Does it sound a little more accurate to say"The Committee seeks to maintain the range--"?MR. BALLES. How about "the recent"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The recent"? Borrowing is going to bevery high this week isn't it? How about "in the period"?MR. AXILROD. Well, yes, with this particular week'ssituation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Mr. Axilrod,] you had a rather selectiverecitation, I think, of the average borrowing.MR. AXILROD. No, no. It's going to be high with the--MR. STERNLIGHT. Just yesterday there were--MR. AXILROD. It was high with all the thrifts in. They arenot all in extended credit yet. So we're running high with them in.MR. STERNLIGHT. That would only take out about $200 millionin the period average. I would say that what we'll publish this weekwill be high because most of them are in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's going to be high without all thethrifts, isn't it?MR. AXILROD. Well, I calculated that average--MR. STERNLIGHT. My feeling is that without thrifts thisperiod's average will be at something like $600 million.SPEAKER(?). We could still get some borrowing in New Yorktoday.MR. AXILROD. For the period, but the week will be a littlehigh.MR. PARTEE. Did you say $600 million without the thrifts?MS. SEGER. Yes, that's high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess "recent" is better than "existing"in that connection. When I say it, it doesn't sound very good; but Iguess "recent" is better than "existing."MR. AXILROD. Maybe you could say "prevailed over recentweeks" or something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In most recent weeks."MR. PARTEE. "Selected recent weeks"!MR. BOEHNE. "As interpreted in recent weeks"?-36-5/21/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. The more we try to explainit the more difficulty we get in. "The Committee seeks to maintainabout the same degree of pressure on bank reserve positions." Let'sgo on to the next sentence, having resolved that one. I think thisbracketed suggestion may be better; what do you think? M2 and M3 areawfully low looking.MR. MARTIN. 4 percent and 5-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just put it in there baldly. Look at thealternative: "This action is expected to be consistent with growth inM1 at an annual rate of around--." We can say "6 percent or a littlehigher."MR. MARTIN. It's likely to be 6-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, but those differences are so fine.I don't mean to sound--MR. PARTEE. That's a two-month rate for the two of them?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. The way this is written the M1 is athree-month rate.MR. MARTIN. March to June.MR. PARTEE. Yes, but the other two are two-month rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right.MR. PARTEE. Well, I guess that's 6-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.MR. BOEHNE. We could put M1 on a 6 to 7 percent basis andkeep the timeframe the same for all the aggregates. It's a littlepeculiar, isn't it, to have one aggregate over one time period and theother two over different periods? If we said 6 to 7 percent, it'smuch--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, everything is a little peculiarbecause they are not ordinarily that far off.MR. BOEHNE. 6 to 7 percent kind of gets them all. But if weuse April to June--MR. KEEHN. But is 6 to 7 percent consistent with "maintainthe existing"? It seems to me that that doesn't line up.MR. MARTIN. It does April to June.MR. GUFFEY. April to June it does.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to put two-month growth rates inthere, but we could do that--roughly 6 to 7 percent--for all of themfor April to June.MR. MARTIN. It gives us a little more flexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M3 is actually higher than that I think.5/21/85MR. AXILROD. Another alternative, Mr. Chairman, would be touse the three months for M2 and M3 and maybe lower the number a littlefrom the 7 to 8 percent or lower it a lot and indicate the possibilitythat it might be more because of the shortfall in the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose we could just say something morevague such as "expected to be consistent with growth of M1 at anannual rate of around 6 percent or a little higher, while M2 and M3would be expected to increase at a slower rate of speed than impliedearlier, due to the sluggish growth in the--"MR. AXILROD. That would do it. That would be in the spiritof the last--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the neatest thing to do isto say April to June rates of 6 to 7 percent for all of them and justwink at that 7-1/2 percent on M3.SPEAKER(?). Yes, I think that--MR. BALLES. Even better might be to say 6 to 7 percent forM1 and M2 April to June and 7 to 8 percent for M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My only trouble with that is that I don'tlike two-month growth rates and if M2 and M3 turned out to have alittle bulge on the other side--well within what we thought earlier--it wouldn't bother me. But I don't know that it makes a lot ofdifference.MR. AXILROD. You could say "M2 and M3 may grow slower thanthe 7 to 8 percent rates expected earlier because of..." to allow forthat possibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mind that. Let me try somethinglike that. The alternative, I guess, is giving a two-month growthrate but say "expected to be consistent with growth of M1 at an annualrate of around 6 percent or a little higher, while M2 and M3 areexpected to grow more slowly over the quarter than anticipated earlierin the light of the--." One of them was actually minus wasn't it?MR. AXILROD. Yes, "in light of that--"SPEAKER(?). "April performance."SPEAKER(?). "In light of April."MR. PARTEE. "The sluggish April performance."MR. AXILROD. "The sluggish April."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Their sluggish April performance" or"their weakness" maybe.MR. GRAMLEY. If we separate M1 and M2 and M3, does thatperhaps convey the notion that only M1 is the target now and that forM2 and M3 we have expectations but not targets?-38-5/21/85MR. PARTEE. You used the word "expected" in both casesdidn't you, Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way this would read is: "This actionis expected to be consistent with growth in M1 at an annual rate ofaround 6 percent or a little higher while M2 and M3 are expected togrow more slowly over the quarter than anticipated earlier in thelight of their weakness in April". The advantage of this is that ithas M1 a tad higher than what we said we envisaged before and it'simmediately balanced by saying M2 and M3 are considerably lower. Thealternative is just using the two-month growth rates. Or we can dowhat we have here. Which do you prefer? I guess I slightly preferthis.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's fine with me.MR. PARTEE. Me too.MR. MARTIN. I prefer your recent language.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's assume that for the moment.[The next sentence is]: "Somewhat lesser reserve restraint--"MR. MARTIN. "Would be acceptable."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm perfectly happy to have it "would" inthe first part and "might" in the second part.MR. PARTEE. That's a shift.MR. MARTIN. [Unintelligible].MR. WALLICH. [Unintelligible.]MR. PARTEE. That's noticeable.MR. WALLICH. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Under a magnifying glass!MR. PARTEE. Well, that's where [markets] put the directivelanguage.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This isn't going to come out until twomonths from now.MR. PARTEE. I think they have to be "woulds" in both casesor "mights" in both cases; I don't care which it is.SPEAKER(?) Well, in both cases it ought to be "might" sothat we don't get trapped.MR. PARTEE. I can go with "might."MR. MARTIN. I'd prefer "would/might."MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] you'd prefer "woulds."-39-5/21/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I prefer too, but what do youall want to do? It doesn't make that much difference.MR. PARTEE. "Might" and "would."MR. BLACK. No, I prefer "would/would;" I always prefer thatso that we don't make a mistake.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many members of the Committee prefer"might/would"? The alternative is going to be "might/might."MR. MARTIN. What happened to "would/might"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right: "would/might." Did I say itwrong?MR. MARTIN. Yes sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought that's what I gave first. Whoprefers "would/might"? Wait a minute; let me see. How many"might/mights" do we have? Five. Somebody didn't vote.SPEAKER(?). Probably you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I picked the "would/might."MR. RICE. He counted himself.MR. BLACK. "Would/mights." That sounds infectious!MR. PARTEE. You wouldn't mind some company.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I count one vote [more] for "would/might"at this point.MR. BOEHNE. We can have a softball game: the Mights and theWoulds!MR. BLACK. That's what it sounds like!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's this federal funds rate range? Wehave it at 6 to 10 percent and that still seems to be ample to coverall contingencies.MR. MARTIN. In "B" it's 5-1/2 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, where do you want the federal fundsrate? I don't think it's worth changing to get it to 5-1/2--MS. SEGER. Zero to 12 percent.MR. BLACK. 6 to 10-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're left with this borrowingfigure. The center point seems to be $350 million.MR. MARTIN. And all the thrift borrowing out.5/21/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, all the emergency thrift borrowing.SPEAKER(?). Only emergency thrift borrowing.MR. AXILROD. The bulk of it is now extended credit andperhaps more of it will be. But I would say that Mr. Sternlight hasmade a mental adjustment even for some of it that might not yet beclassified as extended credit, at least recently.MR. STERNLIGHT. It would still be around $100 million now[unintelligible] extended credit when we make some allowance--MR. MARTIN. [Unintelligible] adjustments.MR. PARTEE. Now we're talking!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't like to get in a position ofsplitting hairs about this borrowing. But it seems to me that $350million taken by itself is kind of a threshold because if it goes downand stays down at $350 million or falls below that, there is a realdanger: I think we'd find ourselves again in a situation where itwould start pushing on the current level of the discount rate. And atthis juncture, I at least would not want us to fall into a situationwhere the behavior of the federal funds rate starts to give rise tomarket expectations of a further discount rate reduction. I hadmentioned $350 to $375 million, but I think the $350 million number atthis point is more than symbolically significant because I think itdoes get you into that range where I would start to get veryuncomfortable.MR. PARTEE. Why don't we make it $350 to $400 million andallow some discretion to be exercised here? I think we all expressedthe view that we didn't want it to threaten the discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether the discount rate is threatened ornot will depend upon what goes on in the economy or the exchange rate,I suspect.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But that would take place in thenormal course [of events], and I wouldn't want to kind of fall intothat independent of the economy.MR. BALLES. I'd be concerned, Mr. Chairman, about moving upto $400 million. I'm afraid that might push the funds rate up. Iwould not like to see that happen.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's why it is discretionary.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leaving a little margin here is fine,obviously. We can leave a little margin by saying $325 to $375million.MR. RICE. I would support that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think nobody is talking about trying toforce the federal funds rate down at this point below where it wouldnaturally lie, which is a little above the discount rate.-41-5/21/85MR. GRAMLEY. I would feel much more comfortable if we stayedabove $350 million. I like Jerry's formulation of $350 to $375million. It just seems to me that if the funds rate gets down belowthe 7-3/4 percent range, then it raises questions again about whetheror not we're going to have another cut in the discount rate. We'vesent some very strong signals to the markets with this cut in thediscount rate. And I really wouldn't want to send any more messageslike that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we sent a very strongmessage; they were anticipating it for two weeks before it happened.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, given what's happened to market interestrates and stock prices, it seems to me that the markets weren'texpecting it all that confidently.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The bond market was down 1/2 of a pointthis morning; I don't know where it is now.MR. PARTEE. 20 points in the stock market yesterday.MR. BOEHNE. Well, it sent a signal to the market that theythink that at this meeting we are really going to go toward ease.That's one of the things I think it conveyed to the markets.MR. AXILROD. As a technical point, Mr. Chairman--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did the stock market do this morning?MR. AXILROD. Well, the first half-hour it was down 2 points,[so] it may be down [now]. I might mention a technical point: If,because of a wire failure, a large bank borrows $1-1/2 billion orsomething like that on a Friday--which often happens to us--the levelof borrowing can easily be $600 to $700 million with money marketconditions very little different from a borrowing level of $300 to$350 million. So there has to be--I hope--some sense from theCommittee that there can be wide swings here in borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've learned that fromexperience.MR. MARTIN. $325 to $375 million.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, the target that I think you'relooking at is $350 to $375 million. If I understand, that wouldresult in the federal funds rate quite likely moving to the 7-3/4percent area immediately. Is that a correct interpretation?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you ask this question every time,Roger, and I'm not a prophet.MR. GUFFEY. I understand that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would assume it's somewhere in thatneighborhood, give or take 50 basis points.MR. GUFFEY. Well, if there's 50 basis points down to 7-1/4percent then I would oppose it, obviously. I understand you're not a-42-5/21/85prophet; but I think the staff's projection suggests that it will bemoving immediately to 7-3/4 percent as a result of the discount ratecut with a $350 million borrowing level.MR. AXILROD. Yes. There may be slight differences injudgment among the staff here. I had $300 to $350 million; there areother people, and I think Mr. Sternlight is one, who would say $350million or maybe a shade above for that. I don't know how one couldpossibly be certain on this.MR. PARTEE. That certainly does seem to suggest $325 to $375million then, doesn't it? It encompasses both views.MR. GRAMLEY. But it really suggests that we ought to have anagreed upon target for the federal funds rate. I would think that's--MR. MARTIN. Oh, shame on you, Governor Gramley!MR. GRAMLEY. Not a written one. Let Steve translate that towhatever borrowing level is appropriate.MR. AXILROD. The stock market, Mr. Chairman, is unchanged at1:00 p.m.MR. PARTEE. And that means it kept all its gain.SPEAKER(?). So it is pretty good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that we need to lingerover this point forever. I assume we will start--and probably miss itby $100 million plus or minus--somewhere around $350 million orslightly above with a bit of flexibility on either side.MR. GRAMLEY. What was that again?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We start at $350 or a little above andhave some flexibility either way as we move along.MR. RICE. I don't see how anybody could have a problem withthat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you want to express that noblethought?MR. RICE. Just the way you did it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just say $350 for the moment with anunderstanding that there's a little flexibility. All right.MR. BERNARD. Did you settle the [language] for this earlierpart?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think so. We more or less settled itbut various people are unhappy. It reads: "In the implementation ofpolicy for the immediate future, and against the background of therecent reduction in the discount rate, the Committee seeks to maintainabout the same degree of pressure on bank reserve positions. Thisaction is expected to be consistent with growth in M1 at an annual-43-5/21/85rate of around 6 percent or a little higher during the period fromMarch to June, while M2 and M3 are expected to grow more slowly overthe quarter than anticipated earlier in the light of their weakness inApril. Somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theevent of substantially slower growth of the monetary aggregates whilesomewhat greater restraint might be acceptable in the event ofsubstantially higher growth." All the rest of it is the same with 6to 10 percent [for the funds rate range].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We ended up with "would" and "might"on the second page?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By one vote as I understood it, with oneperson not voting.MR. PARTEE. Where you said that there would be less growththan earlier anticipated for M2 and M3, don't you think we ought toput in the percentages earlier anticipated? There's no base thereunless somebody goes back and looks at--SPEAKER(?). Yes, that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever they were. What were they?MR. AXILROD. 7 to 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For both?MR. AXILROD. It was 7 percent for M2 and 8 percent for M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Add "the 7 to 8 percent range anticipatedearlier." Would you want to say "grow significantly more slowly"? Itwas 7 to 8 percent for both?MR. AXILROD. No; it was 7 percent for M2 and 8 percent forM3. And more slowly--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So it should say the "7 and 8 percentanticipated, respectively."MR. AXILROD. "Anticipated for M2 and M3, respectively."MR. BERNARD. "Anticipated earlier for M2 and M3,respectively."MR. PARTEE. I would just say "less rapidly" instead of"substantially less rapidly" because, as you say, if we should happento get a snap-back, it would be acceptable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Well, if that's all right andnobody wants to raise any further points, [we can vote].MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black NoPresident Forrestal Yes-44-5/21/85 -45-Governor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.END OF MEETING