Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 9-10, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 9, 1985, at 3:00 p.m., and continuingon Wednesday, July 10, 1985, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanBallesBlackForrestalKeehnMartinParteeRiceSegerWallichMr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, 1/ General CounselMr. Oltman, 2/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell,Scheld, Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting after action to approve minutes for the May meeting.2/ Attended Wednesday session only.Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Greene,Messrs. Lang, Rolnick, and Syron, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Cleveland, Kansas City, New York, Philadelphia,Minneapolis, and Boston, respectivelyMessrs. Judd, Pearce, and Scadding, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Dallas, andSan Francisco, respectivelyMs. Lovett, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMeeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 20, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 20, 1985, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanBallesBlackForrestalKeehnMartinParteeRiceSegerWallichMr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretarySteele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryBradfield, 1/ General CounselKichline, EconomistTruman, Economist (International)Messrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, Prell,Scheld, and Siegman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting after action to approve minutes for the July meeting.-2-Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Jack Guynn, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of AtlantaMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, and Lang, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Kansas City, and Philadelphia, respectivelyMessrs. McNees, Miller, Pearce, and Beebe, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Minneapolis, Dallasand San Francisco, respectivelyMr. Stevens, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ClevelandMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 9-10, 1985July 9, 1985--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes.MR. MARTIN. So moved.MR. PARTEE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll turn to foreign currency operations.MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions?MR. WALLICH. Gretchen, when you say that people holdingdollars have many alternative techniques to protect themselves and soare encouraged, is it to be understood that the cost of that does notfully account for the difference in interest rates?MS. GREENE. Well, they can manage this hedging quiteaggressively and they can select, if you will, the term of theirinsurance protection against an adverse exchange rate move. So, theycan pay the price of this insurance for relatively short periods oftime. We believe, or at least we have heard, that in many casesduring the spring money was made on these so-called protective hedgingoperations when the dollar came down earlier in the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other comments, observations? Youprovoked nobody! Domestic operations, Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments?MR. MARTIN. Move approval, Mr. Chairman.MR. PARTEE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We'll see whether theeconomy sparks any more [comment].MESSRS. KICHLINE, PRELL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any comments or questions?MR. FORRESTAL. Could I ask a question about these consumerand mortgage delinquencies? While we have had some better experiencerecently, they are still very high on balance. Does that conflictwith what we are seeing in higher net wealth or is there anexplanation due to distribution of income? How do you explain thatapparent conflict?MR. PRELL. Well, it is very, very difficult. In a sense itconflicts with the wealth figures; on the other hand, one of the7/9-10/85things that has prevented wealth from growing so fast has been themild increase in housing prices, which had been a significantingredient earlier in wealth growth. It appears that there is acombination of factors involved in mortgage delinquencies. One isthat unemployment is still quite high in an historical sense, andconsiderably higher than the average in some locales. Income growthobviously varies across individuals, so those who took on mortgagesearlier perhaps with adjustable rates or with very aggressiveunderwriting terms--graduated payments or whatever--may findthemselves with a greater burden than they can handle readily. Thefact that the equity in their homes has not built up appreciably orcould even be negative, where there is negative amortization, has ledthem not to fight too hard to hang onto their homes. So it is a verycomplex matter, but those all seem to be ingredients in this picture.On the consumer side, the ratio is still fairly low historically butit could easily move higher, given what appears to be ratheraggressive lending and very aggressive borrowing in many cases.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My impression is that it is moving higherquite rapidly. You have the first-quarter figure here, right?MR. PRELL. That's right. We don't have any anecdotalevidence that would suggest that the second quarter is going to lookworse. We polled the senior loan officers at commercial banks lastmonth and they suggested that the first quarter run-up had a bit of aseasonal in it and that they weren't seeing a further deterioration.In fact, they did not seem to be very concerned about delinquencyrates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the trouble with senior banklending officers!MR. PRELL. We talked to the auto finance companies and theysuggested that the next figures may look a little better than the lastfigures. So, we don't see a reversal of the upturn, but there doesn'tseem to be a continuing deterioration.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. You gave passing mention to the consumerinstallment debt burden which, as I recall, is high cyclically and ishigh over a much longer period of time. Has that not been a fairlyreliable indicator not only of consumer spending but of the length ofbusiness expansions? I guess I was a bit surprised that you did notspend a little more time on it. Or is it not all that important inthe flow of the business cycle?MR. KICHLINE. Do you want two opposing answers? If Mikeanswers, you'll hear something very different from what you will hearfrom me. I would be concerned about it. Mike and a number of otherpeople are less concerned about it. It has been a topic of greatdebate among the staff looking at this. At least two things are a bitdifferent now, allegedly. One is that a portion of the increase isassociated with a supposedly growing use of credit cards forconvenience purposes; those balances get built into the numbers but,indeed, are paid off monthly and are presumed not to be a problem--just a shift in means of payment. The second argument is that theoutstandings were so depressed in 1980, 1981, and 1982 that,7/9-10/85basically, repayments have been lagging. And if that view is correct,with the strong debt taken on in 1983-84 and so far this year,repayments ought to be rising and, therefore, we ought to be seeingvery limited further growth. If you go back historically, I thinkit's hard to isolate that factor as one element, but it did peak inlate 1978 or early 1979 and things got worse from there on. But lotsof things were going on in that period of time. I would say thatthere are really differing views on this whole issue--certainly amongthe staff.MR. PRELL. I might say, as a cyclical indicator, that manytimes in the past one of the elements in the downturn of consumerborrowing and of activity in general was a constraint on the supply ofcredit. As rates went up, usury ceilings began to bite and the supplyof consumer credit began to diminish. So it is a very complex issue,looking at the cyclical history.MR. BOEHNE. I might just comment on your comment. There issome merit to the argument that credit cards are being used more as aconvenience. The actual numbers escape me at the moment but intalking with several bankers I was told that a very, very highpercentage--an overwhelmingly high percentage of people--do not payoff their credit cards in full when the bill comes. So that wouldsuggest that, yes, there may be some convenience; but there is alsosome debt in the true sense of the word there. So, I would not put awhole lot of weight on that as a reason to downplay the importance ofthe numbers.MR. PRELL. We felt it was sufficiently important to mentionit.MR. BOEHNE. But not have a chart.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mike, I have a question with regard to laborproductivity and unit labor costs. With productivity continuing toincrease and with compensation continuing to be fairly level through'86 [in your forecast], I am a little surprised that the unit laborcost doesn't show more improvement than it does or, in fact, come downa bit. If these numbers are right, I'm also a bit surprised that yourexpectation regarding inflation isn't a little higher. Can yourationalize that?MR. PRELL. The arithmetic is that we have compensation perhour rising a fraction over 4 percent from here on and we haveproductivity growing at something over one percent on average over thenext six quarters. So, net, you come out with unit labor costs risingsomething over 3 percent on average. It's conceivable that pricemovements would move closer to that of unit labor costs and thus giveus a bit better inflation performance. On the other hand, to theextent that the depreciation of the dollar permits businesses toimprove their margins a bit, that will tend to maintain some spreadover that period. In general, we have things moving fairly closelytogether--a fairly normal cyclical path.MR. PARTEE. Could I just add on here? That is a very sharprise in non-oil import prices on that chart, Mike. Is that an 87/9-10/85percent rate of depreciation of the dollar plus a rate of inflationfor imported prices in foreign currency terms? It seems an awfullysharp increase to me.MR. TRUMAN. It is in fact somewhat less. It is an annualrate of something like 4 percent over the four quarters of 1985 andabout 9 percent as it [unintelligible] over the four quarters of 1986.MR. KICHLINE. It is 3 percent in 1985 and 9 percent in 1986.MR. TRUMAN. But it is the combination of the dollar--MR. PRELL. The dollar is depreciating at an 8 percent rateand you are getting an additional price effect. You are gettingsomething less than that reflected in import prices.MR. PARTEE. Something less than that?MR. TRUMAN. We assume that only half of the depreciationshows through, in and of itself, to the level of inflation. Looked atanother way: you have an 8 percent decline of the dollar but only 4percent added on to inflation.MR. PARTEE. You have about a 12 percent rise [in importprices] over this forecast period?MR. PRELL. About 12 to 13 percent.MR. TRUMAN. But on a quarterly rate [basis] it is about a 2to 2-1/2 percent rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd be surprised if there were 4 percentinflation abroad in the kinds of things they export to the UnitedStates.MR. PARTEE. A lot of people say profit margins are going todecline on shipments to the United States and this does not seem toallow much for that as the dollar drops.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think at this point you can make apretty good case that that could happen, even to the extent ofneutralizing a small 8 percent change in the exchange rate completelyon domestic prices.MR. MARTIN. It would still leave margins very, very wide forthose sellers into the U.S. market--into the most exciting market theycould have market share in. They'd absorb it all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Going back to this chart that Mr. Keehnreferred to: Is that a 1 or 1-1/4 percent difference between the redline and the compensation line?MR. KEEHN. That is the question that I asked.MR. PRELL. Between compensation and labor costs? Yes,approximately.7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we had a 10 percent decline in oilprices--you have more than that in here--how much does that lower GNPprices? What is oil, 5 percent of the GNP?MR. PRELL. A 10 percent decline in oil prices beyond what wehave already built in?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no--a 10 percent decline.MR. PRELL. We estimated that a $2 to $3 a barrel decline inthe oil price could have an effect, over a couple of years, of aboutone-half percent on the consumer price level.MR. KICHLINE. In this forecast, if you were to excludeenergy prices, for example--there are some lags in this--in 1986 youwould get a fixed-weight price index that would rise three-tenthsfaster. So what we have built in amounts to about a quarter of apercent or more impact on prices in the GNP accounting sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excluding energy.MR. KICHLINE. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what Mr. Prell just told me isthat if the energy price goes down that much you would have a slowerrate of increase.MR. PRELL. We have a decline in the oil price of $2.75 abarrel. That is worth three-tenths of a percent in the inflation ratenext year. That's not inconsistent with what I was saying, given thelag structure--about one-half percent for two years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have a question, if I could, toask Jim. With respect to this overall forecast, Jim, how do you thinkit will be affected by the threat--or the prospect, as the case maybe, depending on the standpoint of the viewer--of tax reform?MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have not made an explicit assumptionin terms of passage of a tax reform proposal. We tried to capture asbest we could in a variety of sectors the expectational effects thatmight be there. Our sense is that in the business fixed investmentarea--and this certainly is supported by the results of the ReserveBanks' poll of corporate executives--they are probably offsetting.There is some incentive for firms perhaps to speed up their plans inthe hopes of being grandfathered, given existing depreciation rules.On the other side, the general issue of uncertainty about a change indepreciation laws might well hold some back. So, net, we don't thinkmuch is going on there. In housing we have a sense that theAdministration's proposal is on balance a negative feature and that itis probably not a large issue in the short term. I would think onaverage uncertainty about changing taxes is probably a small negative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Mike, you made some reference to pent-up demandon the part of the consumer and I think indicated that this probably7/9-10/85was largely behind us. I would like some elaboration on that because,as I recall the [staff's] February presentation, there was someconsiderable discussion about the continuation of pent-up demands--theaverage age of cars on the road, household formation and homeownership, and those kinds of things.MR. PRELL. I guess I nailed myself! I think we are beingfairly consistent. I showed last time, for example, that the stock ofnon-auto durables for households had fallen off during the early 1980sand had come back considerably through 1984. And in the first half ofthis year we had continued very strong durables spending. So, wethink we're pretty near the historical trend line, if that's anyindicator of those pent-up demands. On the auto side, it is very hardto read. It looks like the age of the auto stock has leveled off.The level of auto sales that we have in the forecast is historicallyquite high. We have almost 11 million units in total this year and wehave it going down to about 10-3/4 million units next year. Whilethat does not imply growth in consumer durables spending, it does meanthat some of the aging of the auto stock will be reversed probably toa slight degree. But we are not seeing any likelihood that suppliesare going to be such that we could have very much stronger autodemand. And given the income growth that we are projecting, we don'tsee the basis for projecting very much stronger spending on consumerdurables. But it is simply a question of how much is behind us. Ourjudgment is that a good bit of that durables pent-up demand is behindus now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to return to this price issue for amoment. I cannot resist giving you this little background--and I mayas well do it now--on the record of the Federal Open MarketCommittee's price forecasts over the last three years. In thebeginning of 1983--just taking the central tendency--we estimatedprices at 4-1/2 percent, and we continued with that in July; they cameout at 3-3/4 percent. We started out [in July 1983] projecting pricesfor 1984 at 4-3/4 percent and maintained them there in February; theycame out at 3.6 percent. We started out in July 1984, in our firstforecast [for 1985], projecting 5-3/8 percent and then we lowered itsubstantially [in February].MR. BLACK. It's about time for us to miss in the otherdirection!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I am struck not only by the usualdifficulties of forecasting but by the degree of uncertainty--not totake away from any of the work of our colleagues on the staff here andat the banks. It seemed to me that as you worked through thepresentation and the graphics today the theme could be uncertaintyabout non-oil imports and real GNP. Mr. Truman, in an attempt to bereassuring, said that even if we hit the higher imports--therefore thelower line relative to the GNP--it won't put us in a recession. Thatwas an attempt to be reassuring, which I appreciate. But if youtranslate that into the projection of consumer spending, which overthe last nine quarters has represented about 60 percent of the realGNP chain, you note the uncertainty that the import segment of thatspending presents. I noted in the presentation that that was areasonable comment: that the consumer spending element of the GNP7/9-10/85assumes that the domestic segment of that spending will be somewhathigher. There will be a bigger domestic share. But there again, itseems to me that the uncertainty presents itself.In the business investment area, I have no problem with theinventory projection; but when we get to business fixed investment, Iwonder whether or not the computer and the telecommunications spendingare indeed going to revive or hold, or whether [such spending] reallyhas topped out and the catch-up in that has occurred. It seems to methat there is uncertainty there. There certainly is uncertainty as towhen the nonresidential building industry is going to collapse--notwhether, but when. That certainly applies to the industrialbuildings, which haven't gone anywhere. There are closed plants allover the United States and there is overbuilding of office buildingsand shopping centers. So, that is a question of when, not whether. Idon't have any problem with the rather optimistic housing projectionsbut we certainly can have difficulties in the business fixedinvestment. It just seems to me that uncertainty is practically thetheme of our forecast, necessarily. I am struck by the range [ofuncertainty] that we have to have around any of these lines we'relooking at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. In the Greenbook you note that the capacityutilization has fallen by more than 2 percent. Labor capacityutilization--that is, the rate of unemployment--has remained almostflat. Can one put these two things together and say that there isincreasing pressure against price increases: constant pressure againstwage increases and more pressure against industrial price increases?MR. KICHLINE. It is very clear that there has been adownward trend in capacity utilization and that would continue in thisforecast. Basically, it reflects the strains that are being placedupon manufacturing and mining; there firms have been workingaggressively to cut costs and we have been seeing declines inemployment. Employment is down almost one-quarter million over thelast six months in the manufacturing sector. As you know, we havecontinued to see further growth in service employment. Put together,we have an unemployment rate that has been stuck for virtually thelast year at 7-1/4 percent. Now, we think that 7-1/4 percent is highenough to continue to exert some downward influence on price increasesand we think that would persist over the projection horizon. I thinkit is the case that industrial prices are being constrained in part byimport competition in many areas where firms are experiencingpressure. If they had the opportunity and felt they could get awaywith it and not lose market share, they would try to push some priceincreases through. But they can't. And I don't think in thisprojection horizon that that will change very much. So, both capacityutilization and the aggregate unemployment rate seem to me to be atlevels that would be exerting some downward pressures on priceincreases.MR. WALLICH. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.7/9-10/85MR. BOEHNE. I would like to pick up on the uncertainty themethat Governor Martin raised. I think there is uncertainty here; butas I look through the presentation and think about the varioussectors, I can visualize this forecast materializing. I can visualizesomething slower than this; I can even visualize a recession over thistime horizon. But I find it very difficult to visualize sufficientlymore rapid growth than is in this forecast that would jeopardize theoutlook for inflation. As one goes through this, sector by sector,one could make a case for slower consumer growth but it's hard to makea case for booming consumer growth. In the investment sector, I thinkit's the same kind of outlook and it's the same in the governmentsector. The foreign sector may be less of a drag, but it is stillgoing to continue to be a major drag. Even if we got somewhat fastergrowth, it's hard to see that bringing about a significant increase ininflation above this forecast. The major source of inflation in herecomes from the foreign side. Someone made the point earlier, withwhich I agree, that those margins are big and fat in terms of what'sbeing imported into this country. And this is a very lucrativemarket. So I am much less fearful of that kind of import inflationbeing as serious as is [suggested] here.The other point I would make is about the tone that I senseout there. My District has been, I think, one of the most upbeatDistricts in recent quarters. I think that has been true up and downthe Atlantic coast. That area has been more upbeat than other partsof the country. I have sensed a change in that tone. I sensed thebeginning of a change the last time we met; but I sense it even morestrongly now that there is a definite scaling down of the outlook forthe rest of the year and in 1986 by a whole range of businesses. Theonly strong sector in my District now is real estate and construction,and I think that has a definite time limit. Like every place else,there has been weakness in manufacturing, but it has now spread toretailing and to some of the services. So, if you look at theobjective evidence that is here and at the change in the tone--evengranted the uncertainty that is present--it seems to me that there ismore chance that we are going to end up on the softer side of thisforecast than on the too strong side of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make another comment about theseforecasts [by Committee members]. If that is true, it is notreflected in the forecasts given in preparation for this meeting.They are almost invariably higher than what the staff is forecasting,sometimes substantially.MR. BOEHNE. Well, Mr. Chairman, sometimes those forecastshave a lot more staff input than other input.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd just make that observation. Also,they are [unintelligible]. Now, one thing may be that the staff isassuming a lower second quarter than other people may have beenassuming.MR. PARTEE. Well, I fall into that camp that you justdescribed, and it wasn't staff input. I put in a rather higherforecast, but this chart show gives me the uneasy feeling that we areabout to stall. The problem, as I see it, is in these charts thattend to be toward the bottom of the page. As I go through theforecast here, for example, you have a very sizable rise in the7/9-10/85multifamily vacancy rate and an increase in the mortgage delinquencyrate; and I think that starts to raise some questions about whetherresidential construction will be all that high. I agree with Pres; Iam surprised that your vacancy rate for office buildings is only alittle over ten percent since I think there is hardly a place in theColdwell Bankers survey that that's low. Maybe New York City is soheavily weighted that it brings it down. In any event, it is just aquestion of when there will be a collapse in office building ratherthan whether.MR. KICHLINE. Governor Partee, the scale is on the left.It's the red line and the red scale, so it's about 15 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am going to make a modest proceduralsuggestion. In the future, when you present a set of charts, youmight number them so that we can refind them.MR. PRELL. It probably has risen considerably further.MR. PARTEE. I should have, I suppose, done the colorcoordination and gone to the left, but I didn't. So I see that youhave a vacancy rate of more like 15 or 16 percent, which is a veryhigh vacancy rate. One hears of concessions occurring all over thecountry. I am somewhat inclined to agree that consumers have beenoverspending; their debt has risen sharply and delinquency rates areup some in that area. You considerably restock the car inventoriesand durable goods inventories and, therefore, that looks sort of high.Even for the poor state and local governments, who have been spendingat a very modest rate, your chart at the bottom shows their surplusdropping off to nothing in the projection period. So I tend to getthe impression looking through this--and I realize it is verydangerous--that a stall is quite conceivable, particularly if onetakes Mr. Truman's adverse line on imports, which is closer to what Iwould have expected than the one that the staff projected as theircentral tendency. I tend to be persuaded by this presentation thatthe economy is really pretty weak.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, you may rule this next comment outof order; I'm experienced in that. But I would like to raise aquestion about the principal assumptions. I am aware that it isnecessary for the staff in its presentation of materials to make anassumption about [money growth for] the rest of 1985 and for 1986.And it is quite understandable to use an M1 growth of 8-1/2 percentfor the first period and 5-1/2 percent for 1986 to hit some kind ofmiddle point. Likewise, it is very understandable to use theassumption of level interest rates out through 1986. But given thoseassumptions and the others, all of which seem to be internallyconsistent, that produces then 2-1/2 percent real growth. As to theChairman's comment that the numbers in the FOMC's projections tend tobe a bit higher, I think that goes back to the Chairman's informalpoll here in March, in which as I remember the question he asked was:Is 3 percent real growth adequate? As I recall the results--I have arather fuzzy memory--there wasn't anyone here, among the voting ornon-voting participants, who felt that 3 percent was an adequate realrate of growth. Well, if 3 percent wasn't, is 2-1/2 percent adequatefor this period? Or shouldn't we in subsequent deliberations--the7/9-10/85Chairman hasn't ruled me out of order yet--consider the rate of growthand the level interest rates as something that needs to be debated andsome decisions made, which normally would be made in our procedureshere?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that we will inevitably get tothat. You are talking about the assumptions. I would have wishedearlier that $50 billion [in deficit cuts] might turn out to bereasonable, or in my wildest thoughts, low. I must say right now thatI think it is much too high for an assumption as to how much thebudget is going to be cut in 1986. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think there is one element ofuncertainty that possibly overshadows these other uncertainties thatothers have mentioned and that is the issue that Steve outlined in hisvery fine paper: the question as to whether we have had this permanentone-time drop in velocity of money or not. The truth of the matter isthat none of us knows. I am inclined to think that we have had someof that; but if we have not, then I think there is a definite riskthat with this much money, we could have more growth than is beingprojected. I think that's the key to the uncertainty to all of thisand I don't know how to find an answer to that one.MR. PARTEE. A permanent one-time drop in velocity would bethe second occasion.MR. BLACK. The second permanent one in very few years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any other comments on thebusiness situation?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The forecast that I put in--I haveto say it was my own and not my staff's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the way it's supposed to be.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Like Governor Partee's, it is verymuch on the high side in terms of what I see as the consensus for1986.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My comparison was for 1985, but I guessit's also true--well, less so, for 1986.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In looking at the six quartersahead, my forecast is on the high side. Arithmetically, it has thatresult because of a bunch of small differences in net exports andgovernment purchases. But the big difference is in housing where Ihave basically gone with about 2 million units in housing starts, andthat accounts for about 3/4 to almost a full percentage pointdifference in real growth. I came to that view with some considerablehesitation; nevertheless, I do think that there is something to theview that pent-up demand for conventional owner-occupied housing--notsecond residences such as Vail, Colorado condominiums--is still prettystrong in a framework within which financing opportunities lookdistinctly better.On the investment side, I don't have any real insight exceptto say that in recent weeks I have spoken to three CEOs of major-10-7/9-10/85computer electronics companies about this question: Do we see a realturnaround in high-tech investment or some kind of short-run glitch?Their opinion is that it is more likely a short-run glitch than anykind of real weakness of a permanent nature that is setting in. Idon't think it is going to make a great upside difference, but I thinkit does say something about the relative downside risks to theinvestment sector itself.I am influenced in the outlook also by the fall in interestrates that we have seen; and while I am certainly by no stretch of theimagination a monetarist, we sure as heck have a lot of liquidity inthe economy by any definition that I can think of. Having said allthat, I would have to say in terms of my own forecast that I wouldquickly recognize that the risks are on the down side. I think thefinancial sector presents its own risks; the commercial real estatesector that Chuck mentioned is one that worries me enormously at thispoint. Indeed, when you really look through the problem of thedynamics in trying to reverse the trade balance in any significantway, it is really tough sledding. We did a little exercise thatprobably isn't much better than the little exercises other people do--this is not built into the forecast--but even if we quickly gotsomething as large as a 15 percent one-time downward change in theexchange rate, the implications of that for the trade balance overthis six-quarter period are really quite modest, to put it mildly.So, while one can perhaps argue with some conviction that the rate ofdeterioration in the trade balance should moderate and might even comeclose to stabilizing, producing any meaningful reversal--particularlyin the face of these very, very large profit margins of foreignsuppliers--is going to be enormously difficult. The long-runimplications of that in terms of the current account, in terms of thecapital flows from abroad, and in terms of the ultimate vulnerabilityto a big shock in the exchange rate, seem to be that it will get a lotworse as time goes on. I certainly don't have an answer as to what todo; but I am more impressed with how difficult it is to get ourselvesout of the quagmire.On the price side, my own forecast is somewhere around themiddle or a shade on the low side. I basically have not assumed thata modest decline in the dollar will produce any further pricepressures. In the face of that, the reason I have a somewhat higherforecast of price increases relative to, say, unit labor costs, isthat I do have a larger spread between unit labor costs and pricesbuilt into my own mental arithmetic than the Board staff does. Andthat simply is a recognition of my own view that the pressure ondomestic producers to seize every little opportunity, every littlecrack in the window, to pass along cost increases in the form of priceincreases, even in the current labor market capacity utilizationsetting, is just so powerful. That is about where I am, Mr. Chairman.MR. RICE. You see the risks on the down side of the staffforecast or the down side of your own forecast?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the down side of my ownforecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.7/9-10/85MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I am the optimist inthis crowd. The degree of pessimism I have heard around the tablesurprises me. I think that what we have been seeing in recent monthsis fairly typical of what we see toward the end of the second year ofexpansion: housing has run out of gas, insofar as an upturn, and wehave had an inventory adjustment. Go back to years like 1962, forexample. I remember; I was at the Treasury. There was real concernthat we were going into recession. For some reason, after the Cubanmissile crisis, consumers decided to up their spending. Maybe theywere happy to be still alive. I don't know what the connection was,but the recession of '62 disappeared very rapidly. I am encouraged bysigns that I see in the financial markets in response to what we havedone already. There is strength in the stock market; I am veryimpressed at the response in the long-term bond market, where we havegotten more bang than I expected we would get. And so far as theconsumer sector is concerned, the Michigan Survey of consumerconfidence, which had been tending to show some deterioration in thelast six months, turned up again pretty substantially in the month ofJune. So, it just seems to me that the level of pessimism around hereis a little beyond what the situation merits, and that is one reasonour forecast is significantly higher than the Board staff's forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, without getting into the issue of whetheror not 2-1/2 percent growth is enough or whether or not we can doanything about it, our forecast is quite parallel to the Boardstaff's--a touch on the higher side. The unevenness that we have hadin the District continues, and at this point there is no reason toexpect any fundamental change in that between now and the end of thecurrent cycle, particularly in light of the high value of the dollar.Many of the companies that are in the heavy capital area really don'tthink that they are going to get back to the levels of 1978 and 1979.But there are other parts of the economy--autos, for example--that aredoing well and as I talk to people about next year they continue tothink they are going to have a good year next year. Residentialbuilding is going to be strong. Many retail people think that thisyear will continue to be good and that next year will be good. Thereare some risks out there. I won't belabor the agricultural problem,at least at this point. But I do think that as we look at it, theopportunity for a continued expansion at about the rate that isforecast is entirely reasonable. We are doing this against thebackground of a highly stimulative fiscal policy and a monetary policythat I think is at least accommodative and, as a consequence, at thispoint the risk of a recession or any significant downside run from theforecast is somewhat unlikely. Therefore, I agree with Mr. Morristhat the opportunity is for a continued expansion, perhaps at aboutthe rate that is suggested.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a forecast very close to thestaff's on real GNP; you're quite a lot higher on prices.MR. KEEHN. Right. If we have any bias, it's that theinflation rate will be higher than the staff is suggesting. Our GNPnumber in terms of real growth is just a touch on the higher side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why are you pessimistic on prices?-12-7/9-10/85MR. KEEHN. Well, I think the exchange rate situation islikely to turn around a little; it seems to me that there are someunderlying pressures there that will add to prices. And, frankly, itdoes seem to me that we have a monetary policy that provides abackground in which the opportunity for price increases is reallythere. Over the last two or three months we have put a lot of moneyinto the system and, if history is any guide, that ultimately ought toresult in a higher level of prices.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I agree with the more positive tone thatseems to be developing. Our forecast is for more rapid growth thanthe staff has for both this year and next. While it differs invarious bits and pieces, I think the critical difference is in theconsumer sector, in consumer spending. Underlying that is the factthat I am impressed by some of the things that we have already talkedabout: the wealth effect stemming largely from the run-up of stockprices; the effect stemming from declines in interest rates; the pent-up demand that may or may not be satisfied. My own view is that Idoubt that the last couple quarters have gone all that far ineliminating a lot of that [demand]. So I come out on the morepositive side, largely because of those things and because I thinkthat we have been reasonably accommodative as well.In the District, there seems to be very little that's new.The two-tiered economy continues with a vengeance. The one thing thatis new, and does concern me, is that the preponderance of theanecdotal evidence does seem to be becoming more negative, and it'snot confined entirely to agriculture and mining. If it were confinedto those sectors, I would certainly expect it and believe it. Butsome of that negative tone in the anecdotal evidence, I think, is abit of something that feeds on itself. You hear about layoffs inhigh-tech companies or one or two of the computer firms and you getthe impression that employment is dropping, net; and yet you look atthe data and [don't see it]. I know of at least one firm where, yes,they have laid off some people in their peripheral operations buttheir total employment is up because they have a main-frame operationthat is doing very well. What gets covered and what gets commented onare the layoffs; and what gets lost is the growth that is occurringelsewhere. So I am inclined to temper that somewhat more negativetone to the anecdotal evidence a bit, based on the numbers. Theunemployment rate in the Twin Cities is 3.8 percent. Everywhere yougo there are help wanted signs up. That [area] accounts for about 1/4of the people in the entire District and certainly more than that interms of non-agricultural economic activity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, with regard to the outlook, our staff isalso somewhat more optimistic than the Board staff, starting with thesecond half of this year and running all through 1986. We wouldexpect, starting with the quarter we are now in, that the growth rateof real GNP would be something over 3 percent and that 1986 would comein at 3.4 percent. Certainly, we are not great optimists becausesomewhat over 3 percent isn't exactly something to write home about interms of rates of growth, but at least it is not quite as bearish asthe Board staff's forecast, which may still turn out to be correct. I-13-7/9-10/85am just giving you what our staff thinks. The differences, with whichI concur, seem to be that our staff is expecting a somewhat strongerpicture both in consumption as well as in business capital spending,in large part because of the lagged effects of lower interest ratesand greater availability of money and credit. Time will tell whetherthis modestly more optimistic view is right or not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, our forecast is prettymuch the same as the Board staff's; I don't know whether that puts mein the optimistic or the pessimistic camp. I guess I am a littleconfused because I think that there is more uncertainty in the economynow than we have seen in a while. Talking to people around myDistrict, I sense that while the situation continues to be pretty goodin everything except the manufacturing and agricultural areas, thereis a perceptible change of attitude toward more uncertainty and moreapprehension of a downturn. I cannot quantify why that is takingplace, but that is clearly a sentiment that is coming through to me.If anything, as I indicated before, I am concerned about the growth ofdebt and delinquencies. I also think, if we are going to face lowercapacity utilization in the economy, that we could very well get lessbusiness-fixed investment than has been forecast. So I think the riskis perhaps on the down side. I would be surprised if economic growthturned out to be much higher than my forecast and the Board staff'sforecast. On the inflation side, again, we are not terribly far off.Frankly, I don't see--outside of an abrupt change in the exchangevalue of the dollar--where inflation is going to come from in the nearterm; so my concern about inflation has abated to some extent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad to be at ornear the end of the ones to speak because I was a little depressedwith the earlier conversations, and I was delighted to hear FrankMorris and others come forth with a little more optimistic view. Ourforecast is very close to the staff's forecast. My staff wouldsuggest that the risks are more on the down side than the up side andI guess I don't totally share that view. It seems to me that the two-tiered economy that has been spoken about--not only in Gary Stern'sDistrict but in mine and others that are predominantly agriculturaland mining-related--is certainly there. But looking on a nationallevel, I am more inclined to believe that we have experienced a pausein the first and second quarters. With what the Federal Reserve hasdone in conjunction with the very stimulative fiscal package, it wouldseem to me that we could look forward to some better growth in thelatter half of this year and well into 1986.But I don't want to minimize the impact of the two-tieredeconomy. It seems to me that one of the greatest risks that we mayface is the instability in the financial system. As Jerry has noted,there is a lot of liquidity; but when you look at agriculture andmining and the prospects for a further drop in oil prices, whichimpacts the producers in the United States largely in the Texas,Oklahoma, and Wyoming areas, the prospects for financial instabilitythat can throw this forecast askew seem to me to be very great. Andthat is one of my greater concerns--not whether 3 percent is right or2-1/2 percent is satisfactory, but what may happen in these other-14-7/9-10/85areas, particularly in the financial area. I am not at all convincedthat what we have done up to now isn't about enough to stabilize thesituation; to do more may translate into prices rather than stabilityto that system. In other words, I am not sure that the Committee cando a lot to fend off those kinds of uncertainty.MR. PARTEE. Would you think things are still deterioratingin agriculture?MR. GUFFEY. Indeed they are, Chuck. As a matter of fact, ifI may, let me give you some facts. As far as the crops, wheat isbeing harvested now and is largely out in the mid-section, going onnorth. But the commodity prices are falling. For example, thecommodity price of corn was some 21 percent below the price of a yearago; the price of soy beans is down 15 percent from a year earlier;winter wheat, which is just now being harvested, is down 9 to 10percent from a year earlier; fat cattle are down 18 percent from ayear earlier. It's these falling commodity prices that are worseningwhat has happened in the farm credit area, which has been fairlystable over the last month or two. You haven't heard much about it.It's simply because they are in the field and the real crisis isn'tgoing to surface until the fall. But my own view is that that crisishasn't passed and is indeed going to worsen as fall and winterapproach. We are going to find that growing back in spades in thefinancial sector, particularly in agricultural banks and the FarmCredit System.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin, you can tell us about theenergy business.MR. BOYKIN. Well, [when Roger] was talking aboutcommodities, he didn't mention cotton. We grow a lot of cotton downour way, but the price of cotton is down from 70.6 cents a pound inMay of last year to 49 cents a pound.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All those inflationary pressures!MR. PARTEE. That's a big drop.MR. BOYKIN. That is a big drop. On the energy side, the rigcount numbers were down about 25 percent from a year ago, which isfairly significant. I noticed in the staff's forecast [an oil pricedrop from] $26 to $24 a barrel. The talk among the bankers--those whoare lending in the energy business--is that they think they couldmanage fairly well down to $25 a barrel or possibly $24 a barrel.Now, last year they were saying that was extreme--that they'd have ahard time going down that far. Now they have decided that they couldmanage a little better going down there. But the energy side is very,very uncertain. My own view is probably a little more optimistic thanthe Board staff's. I am inclined to line up more with Frank Morris; Idon't know whether it's just out of habit! Our problem is that we areadjusting mentally--or I am adjusting--to what's happening in the restof the country. We are about where the rest of the country is, whichputs us in a rather unusual position--at least for the last ten yearsor so.I think a lot has been done in terms of interest rates and interms of money growth. I personally don't have a great deal of-15-7/9-10/85concern that we are going to fall into a recession. What is anacceptable rate of growth? I know we are not debating that, but 3percent or so certainly by historical standards has been close to thelong-run trend. It seems to me that, given where policy has been, theBoard staff's forecast is reasonable. As I say, I'd probably put itslightly higher and I think most of the reasons already have beenstated, one way or another. I still have some confidence in theconsumer; I have confidence on the housing side.Now, commercial real estate construction I obviously have alot of concerns about. All I know is that I still see holes beingdug--figuratively speaking, probably. I hear about the concessionsthat are being made in real estate. We have been sampling the localmarket because we are going to have to lease some more space. Atleast on the first go-round, it doesn't seem that optimistic when wetalk to them. Now, we haven't gotten down to horse trading, so that'sprobably different. I remember we were looking for space this timelast year and we will be for a number of years! [Laughter.] Lasttime, I made three final decisions! When you talk the first time,everybody tells you what their deal is; then when you tell them youare not going to take it and you are ready to take another deal all ofa sudden they say: "Yes, but you haven't heard the best deal." Wefinally had to shut it off because we had to go ahead and make acommitment. I do agree that there are going to be some seriousproblems. But at least in terms of construction activity, it iscontinuing to show some strength. If you talk to an individualdeveloper, he will tell you his project is all right: There is a lotof equity in it and his firm is prepared for the long term and he isworried about the fellow down the street. And I haven't run into thefellow down the street yet!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What equity in it? The equity is a loanfrom the bank! We have a strategy for you, Mr. Boykin: You are goingto take one of those deals where you get three years called "freerent" and then we'll let you build a building three years from now!MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree that there seems to besome conflict between the anecdotal evidence and the figures as youtry to make some sense out of them. On the anecdotal side, most ofthe people I talk to and most of what I read suggest that the economyis a lot weaker than one would expect. On the other hand, trying tomake some sense out of the figures, one gets the impression of lessweakness and some improvement, at least in the short run. While myforecast is on the weak side of the range, I should explain that itdoes hide what I see going on between [now and year-end]. My forecastwas influenced by what happened in the first part of this year: thefirst two quarters of the year came in very low. But in the secondhalf of the year, I see the economy expanding at least at a 3 percentrate and maybe as high as 3-1/2 percent. The reason for that is that,looking at the numbers, it appears to me that it is hard to find anylarge component that is going to be weak for the next six months. Thebusiness fixed investment outlook is pretty good for the rest of theyear. Business plans seem to be pretty firm, from 9 to 10 percentnominal. Despite the overbuilding in office buildings, the numbersfor non-residential construction are strong and contracts for non-residential construction seem to be holding up their strength. Soapparently growth in that area is going to continue at least foranother six months. And I am not at all convinced that consumption-16-7/9-10/85expenditures are going to slow down to the extent that the staffforecasts; I am not entirely convinced that the pent-up demand hasbeen entirely satisfied. There has been a very strong increase inemployment in the first half of this year and that may well influenceconsumption expenditures through the rest of the year, so consumptionmay well hold up higher than the staff forecasts. So, my forecast isupbeat for the second half of the year. Averaging it with the firsthalf of the year brings it out on the low side. And this strength inthe second half, in my view, carries over into the first half of 1986.But then as 1986 proceeds, I [would expect] increasing weaknessbecause (1) the expansion matures, and (2) as time goes on consumptionexpenditures are more likely to fall in line with disposable income,which has been declining and probably will continue [to decline].Eventually, non-residential construction is going to peter out as wemove toward the second half of 1986. And in the absence of anystimulus--and of course the net new fiscal stimulus gets weaker andweaker as time goes on--it is hard to see where stimulus for continuedgrowth along a 3-1/2 percent path will come from, especially in thelast half of 1986. So, I would expect the economy to be expanding inthe 3 percent range in the first half of 1986 and petering out verynoticeably in the second half. Again, averaging the two halves, 1986comes out low as well. So, my overall forecast for 1985 and 1986looks low, but it does mask fairly credible performance for the secondhalf of this year and the first half of next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to suggest that everybody hasto defend their differences in forecasts here; they are all in a verynarrow range.MR. WALLICH. Having listened to the forecasts, which is theprincipal function, I do think that we haven't done a great deal interms of evaluation of what these forecasts mean. The rate of growth,at 2-1/2 to 3 percent, is not great. It's not going to get us back tofull employment. But it's at about our long-term potential; at thatrate we are going to continue to expand more or less with a constantrate of unemployment. The rate of unemployment of a little over 7percent is not good, but it is not very far from what most peoplethink is the so-called natural rate of unemployment, the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment. We can gain maybe 1/2 or3/4 of a point to 6-1/2 percent or so, but that is all. Now, the onenumber that I think is totally unsatisfactory is a 3-1/2 to 4 percentrate of inflation. That is quite abnormal in terms of the historicalinflation level of the American economy. It's abnormal in terms ofthe inflation levels that are tolerated in industrial economiesabroad, if they regard themselves successful in this respect. I thinkthe inflation rate cannot be accepted as satisfactory--inflationsimply defined as a continuation of a going rate with the going ratebeing, in effect, acceptable. I think the main shortfall in thesethree variables we are looking at--the rate of growth, the level ofunemployment, and the rate of inflation--is the rate of inflation.MR. PARTEE. A lot of people would say unemployment, Henry.MR. WALLICH. There isn't much to be gained; unemployment ishigh in structural terms.MR. PARTEE. Well, if it came down to 6-1/2 percent, we wouldhave a very considerable increase in the number of employed.-17-7/9-10/85MR. RICE. I agree with you, Henry, but what do you do aboutit?MR. WALLICH. Well, we're evaluating risks. The risks on thedown side seem rather impressive; the possibility of a breaking-out onthe up side in real terms doesn't strike me as very likely.Nevertheless, given the unsatisfactory inflation rate, I think weshould not back away from the risks on the down side in order to get alower rate of inflation--or particularly avoid getting a higher rate[of inflation], which is likely to be the consequence of aiming for ahigher rate of growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The comment made about the budget earlieris reinforced by the fact that I now read that Mr. Stockman hasresigned as Director of the Office of Management and Budget. It's notencouraging to think that we'll have striking new vigor toward budgetcuts. We are going to have a difficult arithmetic job, if nothingelse, to explore everybody's ideas and where all of these targetsshould be. There are umpteen different variations; I am a bitconcerned about the time. I think perhaps we ought to spend time thisevening having Mr. Axilrod explain to us all about the money supply.MR. AXILROD. I'm afraid I may not shed any more light thanwas in the 40 or so pages of various documents dealing with thisproblem that were circulated to the Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Your report] might be more condensed.MR. AXILROD. It will be more condensed. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that we should not try to get intoa discussion of just where to set these targets for the short-runpolicy at the moment, given the time [of day]. But I think we have alittle more time for any questions or comments people want to makeabout the kinds of issues that were raised in the paper that Stevedistributed and touched upon in his comments as a kind of aphilosophic background to the discussion.MR. WALLICH. Could I ask a question, not having read thepaper as carefully as I should have, because I just came back? Theprincipal conclusion seems to be that we have had another shift in thedemand function for money, that we have no strong reason to think thatit will move back, and that we should in a sense let by-gones be by-gones. My question is: How likely is it that this was an episode suchas we have had at times in the past and that from here on out therewill be a higher degree of stability in the relationship of M1 to theeconomy--not necessarily at the old velocity, but maybe at a velocitythat is rising less rapidly than before? Is it likely that we mighthave that so that we could go back to targeting M1 at moderate rates,or would we have to anticipate continued or repeated incidents of thiskind that would make the variable quite useless?MR. AXILROD. Well, as a minor point, I think you have toanticipate it in the third quarter, given what has happened. It's notimpossible to have it, but it would take a very sharp drop in demanddeposits in July or August to produce a third quarter that isn't ashigh as the roughly 10 percent that we are projecting. That assumes 57/9-10/85or 5-1/2 percent growth, month by month. So I think you have toanticipate an unusual looking third quarter in terms of velocityunless the GNP comes roaring back. Over the long run, GovernorWallich, it is true that the paper implies that this could be a one-time drop in velocity. It didn't say for certain, obviously. Andthat was really on the assumption that the present level of nominalinterest rates would not be reversed and that inflation wouldn'toccur, which would bring them up--or in effect that the economy wasn'tso strong that that would drive them up either way. In that case,there would be no reason to reverse this velocity. We would go backto trend and not to 5 or 6 or 7 percent velocity to offset that. Idon't think that the trend will occur if you did that until the fourthor first quarter or some time like that; it wouldn't occur right away.But there are two other points I would make, one on bothsides. One is that it is not absolutely clear that this present levelof real and nominal rates will be sustained on the high side. Itcould very well drop; it is hard to think of real rates of return ashigh as these present real market rates seem to be. On the otherside, however, we have done various charts using various lags relatingmoney to GNP showing that they correspond reasonably well; and we havehad times of large money growth followed by large GNP growth. Thatdid happen in the 1982-1983 period, but we were operating at such alow level of the economy that we had more in real GNP and very littlein price. Now we are operating at a much higher level of capacity, asyou mentioned or implied. If this were going to be followed by aburst, one would expect it to have a little real effect but a littlemore price effect. So having looked at those charts, I felt somewhatambivalent. I would not in any way want to think that it was anabsolute dead certainty that we had a one-time drop in velocity thatwas not going to be at least somewhat reversed. I just don't feelthat certain about it in my own mind.MR. BLACK. Just a question of clarification, Steve. Ithought at first that you were referring to a shift in the demand formoney, but as I read it more I thought you were talking about amovement on the existing demand curve for money, weren't you?MR. AXILROD. That right. The models don't explaineverything. In fact, if you read the residuals, you could say toyourself that there's a 2 or 3 percentage point upward shift in demandfor money. But I wasn't stressing that. I was stressing the impactof the interest rate decline itself in relation to the elasticity.MR. BOEHNE. I have just a few comments. One is that Ithought the paper was excellent; it was very thought provoking. Ihave a couple of questions. As I read it, I came away feeling thatyour conclusions were more tentative than Henry implied--that you hada feeling and a fair amount of circumstantial evidence that there issomething wrong with the relationship of M1 and the economy, but thatis was fairly difficult to prove that with any great certainty.MR. AXILROD. That's what I was trying to say.MR. BOEHNE. My other comment is that you based a good bit ofwhat you are thinking [on the view] that we are moving from one levelof real interest rates down to another level and that that isaffecting velocity, which is quite plausible. Is there some symmetry-19-7/9-10/85to this on the other side? In other words, in the 1970s and early1980s when real interest rates were rising did we also see movementsin the opposite direction in velocity?MR. AXILROD. Well, I am not sure it looked that dramatic. Ireally haven't checked it out in the detail that you are suggesting.We saw it to a minor degree in late 1983: the movement in velocity wassomewhat higher because of the interest rate increase, and it wasrather consistent with what our models were saying. If you look overthe whole postwar period, where I feel a little more secure than themodels, we tend to believe that about a point or more of the trendvelocity over that period of 3 points or so is explained by the risein interest rates over that period. They enter the model with thosesorts of effects. In any particular period we'd be off because of themodel misses and the shifts. But I can't really respond to the veryparticular period of the 1970s and early 1980s.MR. BOEHNE. Well, my main point is not such a specificquestion. It is that it would strengthen the argument, I think, ifthere were some symmetry to it.MR. AXILROD. I think there probably is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The model is symmetrical.MR. AXILROD. Yes, the model is symmetrical. I was trying tothink of history. The basic issue is that if you go from 10 percentprice inflation to zero and the interest rates go from 13 to 3 percentconsistently, you would expect a big increase in the willingness tohold cash. The question is how to satisfy those cash holders who nowfeel that the opportunity cost is such--3 points instead of [13]--thatthey might as well hold cash. It seems to be happening lumpily as wephase down. So, if we ever get to price stability--it may not happenbut if we ever did--I would expect another instance or two of thiskind as the nominal rates dropped down, unless in 1986 when we free upthe ceiling rates on NOWs and super NOWs we get just parallelmovements in those rates. They won't ever be just exactly parallelrates because of reserve requirements. But if you had actuallyparallel movements in the offering rates and the market rates, youmight not get this phenomenon. It's that possibility that makes usthink the interest elasticity will become less as you go on, so thatthis phenomenon might not be so pronounced when you get into thatperiod.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer, first I would like to take theopportunity to welcome you to these deliberations. We look forward tosome clarification of all these doubts that others have expressed.MR. MELZER. Thank you. Steve, I had a question in terms ofcomparing the present situation to the 1983 period--where we not onlyhad a decline in rates but also had the account innovation--whetherthat represents a substantive difference in terms of the analysis. Iwould think, certainly in terms of the perceptions of a rebasing, thatit might be more difficult at least from a layman's point of view torationalize a rebasing at this juncture than it was at that point.MR. AXILROD. Well, we were closer to the account innovationthat affected M1 at that time but it had gone on for some time. In-20-7/9-10/85any event, now we are a little further away except for the drop from$2500 to $1000 in the minimum balance, which we don't think had asignificant effect. I think the economics of it are roughly the same;whether the public relations of it are the same is [another question].I am not sure that it is all that different, even though you probablycan--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We claimed at that time when there was alot of innovation that it affected M2 and M3 more than M1.MR. AXILROD. We had that February-March base for M2 and M3and we said that we now had a build-up of nationwide NOW accounts andit was beginning to have this effect. This wasn't the introductoryperiod; it already had been built up and, being there, it was havingthis effect. But, of course, the very latest strength in M1 is incurrency and demand deposits.MR. PARTEE. There is not much innovation to refer to thisyear.MR. AXILROD. That is the point of this paper: it wasn't the[current] innovation per se that might have increased the elasticity;it was the impact [of declining interest rates] on the elasticity thatcould do it.MR. PARTEE. Yes. It could just be an argument that with therate of inflation down and inflation expectations declining, why, itis a better bet to hold money.MR. MARTIN. And interest rates [down].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Steve said a minute ago that thesemodels don't explain everything. I think of that as an understatementof some proportion! I am not sure that they explain anything to meanymore. But looking at M1 right now, it seems to me, abstracting atleast a little from all the models, that one can draw one of severalconclusions. One is that history is history and down the road we'regoing to get more nominal GNP or more inflation or both; but none ofus seems to see that. The second conclusion is one that Pres justmentioned: that what we are seeing is an adjustment taking place,reflecting fundamentally the shift going on in the economy to lowernominal interest rates and lower rates of inflation, which could quiteconceivably be very plausible in the context that it leads to somelower secular growth of velocity. That, in turn, would mean thatwhatever we thought to be an optimal growth in M1 is now higher insome permanent way than it once was. The third explanation is thatthere is something to these technical shifts, whether due toinnovation, or to changes in spread relationships, or even tosomething like this E.F. Hutton situation. I personally do not ruleout the possibility that the Hutton situation has had an impact. Iwon't say that other firms' practices are exactly parallel to Hutton,but anyone who thinks that those types of cash management practices asa general thing are limited to one or two firms is being quite naive.And anybody who thinks that those firms who might have been doing thesame general kind of thing are going to tell you about it is verynaive. But I think that one has to allow for those types of-21-7/9-10/85possibilities, whether due to financial innovation or other types ofphenomena. Of course, the difficulty with those things, if they arethere, is that we can't quantify them; we can never be sure what theymean. And in the short run they certainly do mean that velocity anddemand for money, neither of which is quite the same thing, are goingto bounce around. And at the extreme, the conclusion that you have todraw is that this velocity or money demand relationship is just shotand money is no longer any good as a policy variable. As a practicalmatter, I don't think we can afford that conclusion even though someof us may like it. Because if you don't like money, you have to findsomething else to use as a policy variable. Where I come out is thatboth for practical and what I at least would consider to betheoretically attractive reasons we have to work with some combinationof the second and third things that I mentioned. And within thatframework I agree with Tom that it may be more difficult today than itwas in 1983 to make the case for jiggling around ranges or bases orsomething. But as a practical matter, I come out to the view that wedon't have any choice but to be thinking in that broad direction,without prejudging exactly how that should be done.MR. PARTEE. It's potentially dangerous to change the base,isn't it? If I understood Steve, we don't know that this--whatever itis that is occurring--is over. If it is occurring, it may continue;and in fact it seems likely to reflect itself in the third quarter.What is [M1 growth for the quarter], 10 percent?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that is in large part a carry-over of thesecond quarter.MR. PARTEE. I understand that. And then it could be muchhigher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get too deeply into thoseprecise questions now. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to set forth the casefor rebasing--and I think there is a pretty good case for it--and thenask Steve a question. Admittedly, the circumstances are different nowthan they were in 1983 and the technical justifications for therebasing may be somewhat different, but I think it is still prettysolid. We have had extraordinary circumstances here; in part, therapid growth that we had in the first half of this year in M1 could beviewed as a catch-up from unusually low growth in the second half of1984. Certainly, in the case of the San Francisco analysis, the dragon the economy caused by the net imports was much bigger than we hadanticipated. That, in turn, has depressed activity and required, Ithink, an extra surge of money to take care of it. But given that setof biases or set of preconceptions that I have and given the tough jobthat you have--you would have to explain to the Congress and hence tothe whole world why we are rebasing or raising the range--I would liketo put a question to Steve. If it is putting you on the spot, Steve,just say so. In terms of the adverse risk of either raising the rangeor rebasing--adverse in the sense that it might cause some people inthe country such as savers, investors, and so forth, to view the Fedas now off on a kick of monetizing the federal debt or giving upsomewhat on its battle against inflation--which would you view ashaving the least risky impact?-22-7/9-10/85MR. AXILROD. I found it impossible to try to discern a bigdifference in public psychology. I think the main risk is in doingeither and not hitting it. Just to remind the Committee: In 1983, the[range] at the beginning of the year was 4 to 8 percent; growth in thefirst half was 11.9 percent; it was rebased to QII to QIV to a 5 to 9percent growth rate and that was hit. By the time we reseasonalizedand everything, the growth in the second half was 8.4 percent and forthe year was 10.4 percent. Then, the next year, the range of 4 to 8percent was hit. So, the Committee wasn't repeating the experienceafter the mid-1970s where it was rebasing every quarter and the rangewas missed every quarter. To me, the main problem wouldn't be whetherto raise the range or rebase; the problem would be that it would bevery desirable to hit it if you do [either], so that it does not setin motion--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We said that was only a monitoring range.MR. AXILROD. Yes, but it was hit nonetheless.MR. MARTIN. I think it has been very well said by Tom andothers that we do not have quite the rationale in this period of timethat we had in 1982-83 with regard to the number of new instruments,new minima, new rates, and less rate control. On the other hand, wehave had the passage of time and we are aware that cash managementtechniques continue to be employed--perhaps some ways outside thethree sigma limit, as in Hutton's case. At any rate, thoseinstitutional commentators who are likely to react to a rebasing, Iargue, are themselves cash managers, and they themselves are shiftingfunds, even as individuals, between and among their firms' interest-bearing or noninterest-bearing accounts. So, I think there is achance to appeal to the day-to-day experiences of the financialmanagers and the financial commentators that there is indeed thisrelationship between the holding of assets with varied degrees ofliquidity as a characteristic and the changes in the levels ofinterest rates. Furthermore, I think there is the Hutton phenomenonthat is more widespread than perhaps is obvious. I agree with Jerryin that regard. Furthermore, we rebased to take into account changesin institutions and interest rates once before, in very recentexperience. This rebasing was not followed by an augmentation ofinflation; indeed, if anything, there has been a little--I'm agreeingwith Henry that it's unsatisfactorily little--disinflation thatfollowed. So it seems to me that there can be an appeal made to whatpeople and institutions and financial managers are doing themselvesfollowing changes in interest rates. There is a common sense kind of[case] that can be made to justify and explain and communicate therebasing that I think is necessary here. And I think it is importantthat that be done because I am hopeful that there will be additionalchanges in the interest rates. While the elasticity may diminish--Ihave no problems with that as the spreads and the increments getsmaller--nevertheless, there may well be an additional impact upon V1and the other velocities, which we will be able to explain if we aresuccessful in this rebasing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have someone distributing some prettylittle charts here; I keep expecting someone to comment on them.MR. MORRIS. That's me. You didn't call on me. Norm wassupposed to tell you.-23-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps I can call upon you and we canpronounce the benediction.MR. MORRIS. I'd like to refer first to the table at therear.MR. PARTEE. When I first saw that table, I figured thesewere your charts.MR. MORRIS. We have been trying to describe the deviation ofthe aggregates from their traditional historical behavior in terms oftwo things: one, financial innovations; and two, the decline in theinterest rates. This table suggests to me that there are otherfactors of major consequence involved in this situation that we don'tunderstand. I refer you to total liquid assets, L, and call yourattention to the fact that the behavior--the deviation from the 1970-1980 trend--is very similar for total liquid assets as it is for themonetary aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't understand what these numbers are;perhaps you can explain.MR. MORRIS. This is a cumulative deviation of the velocityof these various aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Cumulative deviation from the trend lineestablished earlier?MR. MORRIS. Right, from the 1970-1980 trend line. Now,total liquid assets should not be affected by financial innovationbecause all of these new instruments are presumably included in theaggregate and switches among them really don't have any effect.Secondly, I have not been able to figure out any reason why a declinein interest rates should lead people to want to hold more liquidassets relative to nominal income. In fact, I think you could argue--thinking back to my investment days--that you would get the oppositeeffect; that is, the decline in short-term rates should lead people topush into longer-dated assets in order to try to maintain theiryields. But the fact is that the movement of M1 velocity, althoughthe amplitude is greater, is year to year very similar. We have, Ithink, in the case of total liquid assets a deviation from historicalexperience that cannot be explained by anything that I have been ableto think of, which suggests to me that from a philosophical point ofview, something is going on here that we don't know much about. Thisshould lead us to conclude two things. One, I think, is to try toexplain to the public that we can't run a sensible monetary policy byblindly following any of these [monetary aggregates] because we don'tknow what rate of growth in them is going to be compatible with areasonable economic performance. The second is, that if we have topublish ranges, we should have a propensity to broaden the ranges,because I think quite clearly that we have a problem in trying to useany of these, blindly, as a guide to monetary policy.Now, my second point: Steve's paper--and I thought the paperwas very well done--argues that super NOW accounts have tended toreduce the interest elasticity of M1. My conclusion is quite theopposite: that the way the banks have priced them in fact has led tosuper NOW accounts increasing the interest elasticity of M1. The-24-7/9-10/85first graph shows that the banks have been fairly responsive inadjusting the money market deposit account rates to changes in themarket rate. I'm comparing them here to the money market mutual fundrate. Therefore, I think you can conclude that M2 is now much lessinterest sensitive than it used to be. And I think the behavior of M2recently has suggested that. If you look at the way the banks havepriced super NOW accounts, you would have thought there was aRegulation Q ceiling of 7-1/2 percent on super NOWs because there wasno response to this big run-up in interest rates. Now, if the banksare going to continue to price super NOW accounts in this fashion,then you can expect that the super NOW is going to increase interestelasticity of M1. If you look at the last chart, the top shows theinterest rate spread between super NOW accounts and money marketmutual funds and the bottom shows the growth rates of super NOWaccounts. During the summer of last year the spread had reachedaround 3 percent against the super NOW; super NOWs were priced about 3percent below money market mutual funds and the rate of growth ofsuper NOWs dropped to a 3 percent annual rate. These are over threemonth spans. When the spread closed up again, with a decline inmarket rates, the rate of growth of super NOWs moved from a 3 percentto a 45 percent annual rate. I submit that, at least until the banksstart pricing their products differently, the super NOW account isgoing to increase the interest elasticity of M1 rather than reduce it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're permitted a brief rebuttal, Mr.Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Well, we're in some sense talking about thelong-run not the very short-run elasticity. In the very short run,there are obviously lags. Secondly, they have been adjusting the ratedownward even though they don't adjust it upward and I don't know whatpoint they are going to get. Thirdly, they are adjusting it and thatis different from the NOW account ceiling rate, which isn't adjusted,so you get a bigger impact on that, which compares to super NOWs.MR. MORRIS. But if they were only adjusted downward, theeffect is going to be much like the old Regulation Q ceiling. If theydon't respond when market rates rise, we should expect that theregular super NOW will drop very sharply.MR. AXILROD. I do not know what would happen if market ratesbegan rising from the current level. I suspect that might be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are permitted to discuss that betweenyou men. I would like to make one observation in closing for theevening: What we are struggling with is not exactly unique in thecentral banking world these days, or recently. In many ways oursituation resembles what the Swiss had in 1978 when they said theSwiss franc, in their judgment, was getting way overvalued. Andfinally they said: The heck with monetary targets; we will operateunder the exchange rate. M1 went up 21 or 23 percent that year; I amnot sure whether they are happy in retrospect or not. They still havea pretty good inflation record relative to others. I am sure there isno cause and effect but the Bank of Canada, for the inverse reason Iguess, gave up monetary targeting a couple of years ago and theirinflation rate promptly sank for the first time in 10 years. TheEnglish are apparently debating right now whether to abandon themonetary targets or not, again in favor of the exchange rate. This-25-7/9-10/85 -26-debate is proceeding on an international scale. We will see you at 9o'clock in the morning.MR. BERNARD. 9:30 a.m.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we better make it 9 a.m.[Meeting recessed]7/9-10/85July 10, 1985--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I sat here and listened yesterday, Idid not detect enormous differences about the short-run outlook,although I think there are a lot of uncertainties. I do think that wesomewhat neglected in our discussion the rather large problems of why,as a practical matter, we have some enormous disequilibria in theeconomy that we are dealing with. We can't save enough to finance allof our investment and we have a government deficit; we are buyingabroad much more than we sell. I don't think either of thosephenomena can last forever, and all of these nice projections that wehave assume that the expansion is going to go along rather smoothlywithout any great discontinuity. That may be right for the next yearand it may be right for the next 18 months. I don't think it'll beright forever and I wouldn't count on it for the next year.We face a very sluggish picture abroad, as near as I can see,with no great growth. I think we will see some growth, but not enoughto reduce appreciably their unemployment or increase appreciably ourexports. I don't see many signs of change in policy there. We have alot of financial strains around, whether internally or externally, andthey are going to take a long time to cure. We may even break an axleas we proceed in the financial markets. Henry Wallich tells us westill have an inflation problem. People from the farms tell us wehave deflationary problems. In the oil area, we have a deflationaryproblem. Mr. Corrigan tells us we have lots of liquidity. When Ilook around at all the figures, it looks to me like we have a lot ofbankruptcies, which isn't exactly consistent with overflowingliquidity in the economy.MR. PARTEE. Bad distribution.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wild distribution; I think that's right.Everybody, seat of their pants, was telling me that the economy isn'tgoing anyplace. The M1 figure tells you it is going to zoom, if youbelieve M1. So, we have a lot of questions and I don't know how wecontribute to the answer to all of these problems. I think the answeris that we don't. We can't magically deal with the budget problem,the trade problem, and the financial problems and cure them all veryeasily. We can maybe avoid aggravating them. But when I look aroundand think about what to do in the short run for the moment, I am notsure that we can do much differently than what we have been doing.And I approach the long-run targeting from that standpoint. I wouldsuspect, from what I heard yesterday--you tell me if I'm wrong--thatI am not going to be hearing any proposals for radical changes inoperations in the short run.MR. BLACK. How do you define radical, Mr. Chairman? I wouldlike to see that M1 slow down a little.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would all like to see it slow down.The question is whether anybody wants a tightening action to slow itdown. These long-term ranges all depend upon the unknowns of M1 inthe short run. If we had one month of zero [M1 growth], it would lookbetter. But we are entering [the third quarter], as you know, at avery high trajectory off of June; and any number we put down is goingto be above [the long-run range] in the short run. Well, that's afact we face. So long as we don't have the base as June--we could do-27-7/9-10/85that, I suppose--we wouldn't be above in the short run. I don't knowas anyone proposes that. We could have a base of two months, I guess.MR. WALLICH. The logic of Steve Axilrod's paper--that theremay be successive future bursts of M1--suggests that even if wesomehow got around the recent bulge by rebasing, the same thing mayhappen again. That suggests that we should put M1 back where it was ayear or two ago, on sort of a probation status.MR. MARTIN. A probation status after rebasing as we did justa couple of years ago?MR. WALLICH. I would just suspend it, so to speak, becausethere is no point in rebasing M2 and M3 and we are almost forced togive those more weight, even though we don't think very highly ofthem, because of the failure of M1.MR. MARTIN. I think if we put M1 in the penalty box now, wewill have difficulty getting the door open to extricate it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am a little uncertain as towhether we should discuss the short run or long run first becauseobviously they are interrelated. Let me just test my assumption thatnobody wants any radical changes in the short run--maybe Mr. Black isan exception. A radical change I assume is a change in the borrowingtarget by more than $50 or $100 million.MR. BLACK. I could probably live with $100 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will have you on the other side;you want a change. Does anyone else want a change of that magnitude?MR. RICE. I would like to see the borrowing number raised.I could live with less than $100 million, but I would like to see itgo up.MR. KEEHN. I would like to see it up.MR. PARTEE. I think it ought to be higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You all want to tighten policy right now?MR. MARTIN. I think it should be the same.MR. RICE. Whether the policy is tightened depends upon whathappens.MR. PARTEE. Well, my observation is that we are getting fartoo much money with the borrowing number we have and, therefore, weought to nudge it up a little.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You don't like to talk about thesethings, but in some ways the best of all worlds would be to find anopportunity to lower the discount rate and then raise the borrowing upa little.MR. PARTEE. There almost would have to be an announcement onthat--that would be such an extraordinary thing to do.-28-7/9-10/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wouldn't do it quite as boldly asI just stated it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You really don't want to tighten.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right.MR. RICE. Well, I don't want to tighten either. I want toslow down the rate of growth of M1. I don't want to tighten in thesense of raising interest rates. I don't think raising the borrowinglevel somewhat at this time actually would have much effect on marketrates in the short term.MR. BLACK. Actually, the level has been above our target forsome time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The actual level has been way above thetarget a good part of the time. So have free reserves. Who could saythat wouldn't happen if we did the same thing again? I've heard fromthree people saying that they would like to tighten. Does that meanthat the other nine don't want to?MR. MARTIN. I don't want to.MR. FORRESTAL. I certainly wouldn't want to tighten at thispoint. In fact, I would tilt a little on the other side.MS. SEGER. I would too. I would tilt toward something toreduce rates below where they are now.MR. MORRIS. I think we are in a situation similar to 1982where we looked around the economy and the only thing that we couldfind that was really strong was M1. We concluded at that time that M1was not giving a proper signal and it seems to me that we ought todraw that same conclusion today.MR. PARTEE. We have had a very considerable increase inbusiness activity [since] then.MR. MORRIS. We wouldn't have if we had followed the M1target.MR. PARTEE. That's true.MR. MORRIS. We would have had a world depression.MR. PARTEE. That's true. But the question is: Can we affordthat much of an increase in business activity now?MR. MORRIS. I think we can afford quite a bit.MR. MARTIN. With 2 percent real growth, we could affordsomething, surely.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's certainly true. Can we afford 10percent?-29-7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. A 10 percent increase over the two percent?Sure. That gets you to 2.2 percent!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would not have thought anyone wouldthink 10 percent was likely.MR. PARTEE. I don't think it's likely. It's very difficult.One would have to disregard M1 altogether.MS. SEGER. That's a good idea.MR. PARTEE. No, I don't think it is a good idea. I don'tthink the experience of the postwar period suggests that it is a goodidea.MR. MORRIS. I question the relevance of the experience ofthe postwar period. I think the experience of recent years shows thatit has taken more money, more liquid assets, and more debt to generateone dollar of nominal GNP. The old relationships are not holding up,and at some point in time we've got to recognize that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, I would say that I don'tknow what the answer is. Obviously, we went off course in May andJune from what was expected. Maybe that will continue and maybe itwon't. The best staff input that we have says that roughly unchangedreserve paths will be reflected in a markedly lower M1 growth rate.MR. RICE. It's still unacceptably high.MR. MARTIN. I think we have to be very careful with May andJune, particularly June. We go back and revise, revise, and revise.My goodness, that June could be like May or whatever it was last year:it could come down when we revise.MR. PARTEE. What's the first six months: 11 percent?MR. AXILROD. 11-1/2 percent from December to June.MR. KEEHN. What's the outlook for, say, July?MR. AXILROD. Well, our estimate--and it is subject to quitean instant revision because we are getting more data here veryquickly--is on the order of 7 percent. A range of 6 to 7-1/2 percentor something like that is a good way to think about it, given what Iknow about the very first week. But I will know more shortly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is that we don't know; we neverknow. But it would not be unlike all experience if we had a monthhere of something [near] zero at some point. I don't know why demanddeposits are so high; it's the most intriguing part. Good ole demanddeposits seldom jump around that much. I don't know whether it hasanything to do with E. F. Hutton or not. There is no evidence for it,but one wonders a little. If it does, we ought to allow for it. Ifit doesn't, past experience would suggest that it is going to go downat some point.MR. RICE. Didn't that happen in 1980?-30-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Didn't what happen?MR. RICE. Well, we had this big jump in the money supply andthen we said it couldn't possibly slow down enough. I may be wrong onthis but, as I recall, money started expanding very rapidly.MR. GUFFEY. That was when we had credit controls--in thespring of 1980, I think.MR. RICE. Yes, we did have credit controls.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The latter part of 1980 was certainly aperiod where we kept underprojecting the money supply; it kept risingmore rapidly in the latter part of the year than we anticipated.There's no question about that.MR. RICE. That's right. It was the opposite. We said thatit couldn't possibly increase at the rate it turned out to increase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. Last fall it keptincreasing less than we anticipated. So you can take your pick ofexperiences.MR. BOEHNE. One prudent way to move forward, if we reallydon't know quite what to do, is to go forward staying about where weare, keeping a very open mind about what we do three, four, five weeksfrom now, depending on how the economy comes in and the money numberscome in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's about the way I would read it, yes.MR. MARTIN. I'd certainly concur.MR. WALLICH. I would agree with that. It seems to me it's amistake to chase half-heartedly after M1. If we really believed init, we would have to do something very drastic. If we don't believein it, it makes no sense responding to it at all. The other two[aggregates] and debt are still high, so maybe a little firmness isjustified; but I think that it would be a mistake to subject ourselvesto the need to work off the overshoot at a time when the economy isclearly not very strong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't hear any suggestion yesterday--now, I'm just reading into the comments--that anybody was talkingabout working off the overshoot.MR. BLACK. I think the best solution, Mr. Chairman, is torebase this. It probably surprises a lot of people that I say that.But I'd rebase, in a sense forgiving part of this on the basis thatthere is probably some substance in what Steve is saying. If we wereto rebase, for example, and keep the 4 to 7 percent range and hit thetop of that, that would result in an 8.9 percent rate of growth in M1for the year, which seems adequate even if M1 has changed in meaning.I would think that would be enough liquidity to keep the economy goingpretty well.MR. PARTEE. My problem with rebasing is that we don't knowthat we have run the end of this string.7/9-10/85MR. BLACK. No, we don't.MR. PARTEE. If we could rebase on the third quarter--.MR. BLACK. That's one thing--delayed rebasing--that wehaven't considered.MR. PARTEE. But I think there is a very great danger that ifyou rebase, it sounds as if you are serious.MR. BLACK. Of course, that's part of my motive.MR. PARTEE. And it very well may be that we'll start rightout on the high side of any rebased numbers, assuming we rebase on thesecond quarter.MR. WALLICH. That is why I think we not only have to rebase,but in some sense qualify [M1] or suspend it because this may repeatitself.MR. STERN. Yes, why not put M1 back on a monitoring status?In a sense, I would argue that that is where it has been the lastcouple of months anyway, looking at the directive and the way we havenot responded. It's already there, essentially, in my mind; and Isuspect market participants have reached that conclusion as well.MR. BLACK. It would be hard not to; it grew over twice asfast as our target. Of course, they don't know what the target was.MS. HORN. I would support the point of view also that we putM1 on a monitoring basis. That may come as a surprise to some of youwho know that I believe in targeting M1 and in its relation to pricesand in its usefulness in the past. I also think it will be veryuseful to us in the future in the long run in the fight againstinflation. But I do think that rebasing or revising the currenttargets is an indication that we are serious about pursuing thosetargets. Or at least I believe that when we do set targets for M1, weought to be serious about them because I think it's that important.And at this point, at least speaking for myself, I don't know where Iwould like M1 to be in the fourth quarter of this year. It is tooearly, I think. We don't have the kind of information I would like tohave to set the serious M1 target that I would like to set. So, itseems to me that it is most appropriate to say M1 is a monitoringvariable right now. The rest of what I would like said is that we areserious about the long-term battle against inflation and about comingback to M1 as soon as practicable. Our experience the last time wedid this was that it was after something like a year that we found wecould indeed reemphasize M1. We could indicate that we would hopethat at least by the fourth quarter of this year we might have enoughinformation to then reemphasize M1 and conclude on that. For thatreason, I would not do anything with the 1985 targets but for 1986 Iwould reduce the target for M1 to a range of 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent,slightly below the 1985 range, to indicate our seriousness in comingback to this kind of strategy as soon as we have some moreinformation.MR. BALLES. Before we go too far down the road onmonitoring, I would just like to raise the question: What do we do-32-7/9-10/85instead? What kind of guides do we have? Are we going to startfollowing M2? Or are we going back to taking the funds rate orrelying on money market conditions or--going back 30 years--the toneand feel of the market? We have to have something in lieu of M1, andI think that question needs to be answered before we make a decisionon just monitoring M1.MS. HORN. Isn't the answer "All of the above," John?MR. BALLES. I'm not sure.MR. BLACK. Of course, we are not going to know whether M1really has lost its meaning until several quarters down the roadanyway. I think there's a good possibility that it has lost a goodpart of it, so my inclination is to hedge the bets and assume it haslost some but not all of it. That gets me to this rebasing. But ifwe are wrong and it means what it used to mean, then we are in for alot of trouble. I hope it has lost a lot of its meaning.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's do the easy part first. What do wedo with M2, M3, and debt? The obvious thing is not to change theranges for this year. The argument, I guess, revolves around M2 andwhether we give ourselves a little more room on M2. We're a fewtenths above the range now.MR. MARTIN. We are not above the parallel lines. We areabove the cone. We are something like $11 billion under the parallellines.MS. SEGER. But our forecasts are running 1 to 1-1/2percentage points below what we were talking about back in February.If we thought then that these targets were appropriate, then don'tthey look sort of out of line?MR. MARTIN. My only comment about February is that I thinkthe Greenbook had the federal funds rate rising to 9-1/2 percent bythe end of the year. And 200 basis points does make a bit ofdifference in growth rates of the aggregates. Was the funds rate 9 or9-1/2 percent by the end of the year in our February Greenbook? Wehad the federal funds rising over the year.MR. KICHLINE. In February, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, six months ago! You're not assumingthat now.MR. KICHLINE. We are assuming interest rates are about flatat current levels. That's the current assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then that's theoretically consistent withM2 being within the target and M3 being within the target.MR. MARTIN. My only point is--given the high level of realrates and the difficulty of forecasting the rates and a caveat fromSteve's excellent paper--that from time to time there is at least theprospect of real and nominal rates coming down. I think that arguesfor more flexibility--that is, rebasing to, let's say, a 4 to 8percent range rather than a 4 to 7 percent range.-33-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm on M2 and M3 and debt at this point.MR. MARTIN. Okay. Sorry.MR. PARTEE. If we are giving any serious thought to puttingM1 on standby, I think it would be a serious error to raise thetargets on the rest of the aggregates, which have been reasonably wellbehaved. Dropping M1 and then raising M2 and M3 would certainly givethe impression that we are letting [monetary policy] go to the winds.I think the only way we could possibly say that we are going to watchM1 carefully and do that credibly--and we don't know what all that hasbeen going on means--would be to hold to the [ranges for the] otheraggregates that have been expanding reasonably. It's true that creditis above its range; I believe it hasn't increased its excess above therange. And the projection has it generally coming down in the nextyear.MR. AXILROD. Our point estimate for credit for the year is12.1 percent. The range is 9 to 12 percent.MR. PARTEE. And about 1 point of that is the merger--MR. AXILROD. Whatever it turns out to be by the time theyear is over; it may be less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're having a little more of that, Ithink, than we assumed at the beginning of the year. Does anyonestrongly object to that conclusion?MR. MARTIN. I certainly don't object strongly to that.MR. WALLICH. No.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.MS. SEGER. Can we ignore, though, the changed forecast forthis year? The staff has cut its estimate of real growth from 3.6percent down to 2-1/4 percent for 1985 and has cut it slightly for1986 from 2.7 percent to 2.5 percent. And comparing the estimates ofthe Board members and the Presidents in February to today, those alsowere cut rather significantly. It would seem to me that we would haveto take that into account: that what was appropriate for monetarytargets back in February ought to be reexamined if we are perkingalong that much more slowly and the expectation is for continuedsluggishness, using our own numbers here.MR. WALLICH. In my numbers I took the first quarter as aloss but then pretty much went on with the old quarterly figures Ihad; I think that is what the staff did too. You could argue that,even so, the economy is somewhat smaller because it did not grow inthe first quarter and, therefore, with regard to the money supply thatthere is more money relative to economic activity. That doesn't seemto me to argue that we should further increase the amount of money--M2, M3, debt, etc.--relative to this smaller activity.MR. PARTEE. With the same amounts of the aggregates, Martha,and the smaller GNP, one would expect lower interest rates.-34-7/9-10/85MR. WALLICH. Which is what we got.MR. PARTEE. And that could continue. You could argue thatif we have smaller GNP growth, we don't need as much credit as we didbefore. We get these lower rates, which brings the GNP back up andbrings the aggregates up to our previous ranges.One other comment I would like to make, if I could, Paul: Iknow we haven't talked much about 1986, but I do want to remindeveryone that Reg. Q goes off entirely in the spring of 1986. Thestaff has said that they do not think it will have much effect. But,boy, it is a pretty wild environment out there when you don't have anylimits on anything! All NOW accounts would become super NOWs, bydefinition. Savings accounts would come back into their own. Whoknows what might happen to savings accounts? So, I think we have tohave a certain amount of diffidence in talking about what might happenin the aggregates in 1986 because of that event.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's very tentatively assume thatwe are not going to change M2 and M3 and debt--we'll go back to lookat them--as background to the discussion of M1. Does anybody want tochange the range for the year? I haven't heard any sentiment of thatsort: to go back to the beginning of the year and just raise the rangefor M1 for '85.MR. RICE. Yes, rather than rebasing. I wouldn't want torebase at the present time for reasons that Chuck stated. I wouldprefer, if we are going to ignore M1, to just ignore it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying that now. That is anotheroption.MR. RICE. Another option--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Change the range through the year.MR. RICE. Yes, change the range for the year.MR. MARTIN. Without rebasing.MR. RICE. Without rebasing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not ignoring it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, there's still the question ofhow much weight to give it.MR. PARTEE. I think I would agree with that. I would liketo raise the range on the basis of the experience that we have had.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Steve, I want to make sure that Iunderstand. I know these numbers are very slippery, but in light ofyour best estimate for July--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Subject to change in an hour.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If you were thinking in terms ofchanging the ranges and not rebasing, what kind of growth would you-35-7/9-10/85have in M1 over the balance of the year, taking account of July asbest you know it? Would it come in, say, within 9 percent or 8percent?MR. AXILROD. What would the growth for the year be?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The second half of the year.MR. AXILROD. The second half would be close to 7 percent--6-3/4 to 7 percent.MR. BLACK. 7.1 percent is the way I figured it.MR. AXILROD. What we have here is Q2 to Q4, assuming a 5-1/2percent growth from June to September--and we think that is consistentwith July coming in around 7 percent and growth phasing down fromthere. Then growth goes down from September to December to 3-1/2percent, and that would only be if interest rates didn't go down anymore and the effects of the drop since May had worn out. Then thegrowth for the year, Q4 to Q4, would be 8.8 percent; and the growthfor the second half, Q2 to Q4--on that kind of averaging basis--wouldbe 6.9 percent. That then assumes that the average growth, month bymonth, is roughly 4 percent over the balance of the year.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In June and July you are usingsomething like 7 percent?MR. AXILROD. Yes, something like 7 percent for July. Now,if we had a very weak July like we did last year when we had almostzero [M1 growth] in July, and these demand deposits came running off--we have no evidence that that's occurring yet, except a little in thevery first week of July--then you could get a more favorable picture,in a sense. You would get a much weaker third quarter than we areassuming, as the demand deposits unwind, which would make the fourthquarter look a bit better. But we have no basis for that yet. So ourmedian assumption is the one I just gave you.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In the end, I might be agnostic; butI guess I have some sympathy for changing the ranges rather thanrebasing.MR. AXILROD. I might add, Mr. Chairman, that all the modelsthat we look at would say that growth in the third quarter, month tomonth, will be more like 7 percent. We have taken 1-1/2 points offthat because of the thought that this bulge of demand deposits in Mayand June simply has to unwind. So if that doesn't happen, there'smore danger of greater growth.MR. WALLICH. I don't quite see the consistency of sayingthat we suspend M1 in some sense and then we fiddle around with theupper margin by 1 percentage point. I think it is better to leave itand say it was a bad job.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I blow a little hot and cold too,Henry. But the other side of it is that rebasing carries with it thisimplication that the problem is behind us.-36-7/9-10/85MR. WALLICH. I wouldn't rebase it either; I would just giveup on it for the time being. When we reinstate it, which I hope we dosomeday, then it ought to be on a rebased basis--after proving itself.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That scares me a little.MR. BLACK. You get very different conclusions because of thearithmetic in this too. If we did raise the upper limit to 9 percent,if I figured right, from the second quarter to the fourth quarter thegrowth rate would be around 7 percent; I think Steve's [estimate] wasslightly different. If you look at June to December, you are lookingat the 5 percent; but if you look at the growth on a quarterly basis,it does not look like that much deceleration from the 10-1/2 percentor whatever it was in the first half. The arithmetic can always be sotroublesome on this; I don't know whether it's better to look at it ona quarterly basis or not. I guess I would like to look at it in achart and put least squares to it; that's the way I tend to think.MR. PARTEE. I wasn't thinking of raising the upper limit 2points.MR. BLACK. No.MR. PARTEE. You said 9 percent; I was thinking of 4 to 8percent. And I would do it on the grounds that there is a great dealof uncertainty about what may happen. Zero is not the onlypossibility for a month; we may have a month that is negative. Wemight find ourselves back within [the range] but running high becausewe have had a cumulation of such high numbers. It seems to me thatsimply a recognition of the fact that it has run so strong thus farthis year and that there seems to be a changed relationship would leadus to say that we would raise the limit because of that. As Henrysaid, we have M1 on probation because we really don't understand whatis going on here. It could come down within the ranges--and it couldin August, say. I don't think July is a likely month, but August is apossibility. If that should happen--MR. BALLES. The same point, of course, holds if we go toeight percent. The second quarter to the fourth quarter would be, ifI figured it right, about 5.3 percent and June to December would be2.8 percent. The fact that June is so high is obviously the reason.MR. KEEHN. As I hear the numbers, it appears that if werebase--and I think there are some compelling reasons to rebase--andmaintain the same 4 to 7 percent range, there is a high probabilitythat we would be about in the range. Or a possibility--MR. PARTEE. Yes. I wouldn't say a high probability.MR. BLACK. What bothers me about raising the upper part ofthe range as opposed to rebasing is that when we get to next year andwe want to work it down a little--if indeed we want to, and certainlyover the long run we have all agreed that we want to--if we start with8 percent, we have to work it back down to where it once was beforeand then down beyond that. And in this political environment in whichwe live, if we had 4 to 7 percent on a rebased basis, it is easy towork it down, if that is what we want to do then. If we had a 9 or 8percent top, I think---37-7/9-10/85MR. BALLES. I would like to support Bob Black's point onthat. I think [there is] the historical continuity factor asperceived by the public when we have to announce not only '85 buttentative '86 targets. We might get to the same end results byraising the range to 4 to 8 percent or even 5 to 9 percent versusrebasing and keeping 4 to 7 percent but I think it would make the 1986rationale a lot harder to establish, whatever range we decide on.Either keeping them the same as they were or cranking them down anotch would be my preference. So that led me, Mr. Chairman, to favorrebasing over raising the range.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't see anything wrong with it. Whatwe would be doing is raising the spread too, Bob. If we take it to 4to 8 percent, I don't see anything wrong with 3 to 7 percent nextyear. And I think [M1 growth] might well be very low [next year]because of Reg. Q ending, which I think is going to lead to transfersfrom checking-type to savings-type instruments.MR. BLACK. That is a good point. I think we probably willend up about the same place at the end of the year, in terms of thelevel, regardless of which course we take. The important thing iswhat we do in the shorter run.MR. PARTEE. Well, I can't speak with certainty, but it justseems to me that as a result of Reg. Q we can get some rebirth in thekinds of instruments that we classify as M2 rather than M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody who is going to move out ofsavings deposits already has.MR. PARTEE. But I am talking about moving back in, with newattractive instruments.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How can you make an instrument moreattractive than a money market deposit account already is?MR. RICE. No minimum balance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no minimum balance on the MMDAnow, is there?MR. AXILROD. Well, a thousand dollars.MS. SEGER. There's a limit on withdrawals.MR. PARTEE. Well, it is hard to say. NOW accounts could getthe expansion, too, because there would no longer be the 5-1/4 percent[rate] limit on NOW accounts. As I say, I just have no idea. But itis conceivable that M1 could come out low in the range next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The principal change next year will be totake the ceiling off the [interest rate paid on] NOW accounts so thatit will increase the transactions--MR. PARTEE. Well, that is a possibility, too.MR. MELZER. One problem that I have in terms of thinkingabout rebasing--and yesterday I thought that was the appropriate way-38-7/9-10/85to go--is not knowing whether the problem is behind us. That concernsme. On the other hand, putting M1 on a monitoring basis also troublesme. As I reflected on some of the activity in terms of the foreignexchange markets and also what is happening to the growth rate in GNPhere in the United States versus overseas economies, I could see asubstantial shift in psychology in terms of what has been driving someof the capital flows in this direction. None of us really knows howthe dollar is going to correct. We have assumed an 8 percentdepreciation for next year, but it seems to me that if we got a moredramatic weakening of the dollar--not even a precipitous one, but amore dramatic one than that--that is going to feed back pretty quicklyinto inflationary expectations here, certainly amongst marketparticipants in the domestic credit markets. At the same time thatwill affect feelings about the ability to continue to finance thedeficit through foreign investments. And at the same time we havewhat we were talking about yesterday, in terms of a less favorableoutlook on the budget deficit. It just seems to me that if we were toput M1 on a monitoring basis against the backdrop of all thosepotential developments, people could question our resolve in terms ofdealing with inflation in the long term. And it could have a verysignificant impact, particularly in terms of the shape of the yieldcurve, I would say. So, as between monitoring or one of the other twooptions, I would do one of the other two. And, as I say, I amtroubled about rebasing because that implies that we know the problemis behind us. As I said yesterday, I think it is a more difficultargument to make in terms of the rationale than it was two years ago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, there has been a good deal ofdiscussion about the uncertainty of what M1 is going to do. I wouldstart from the premise that M1 has a value in that it hasinformational content even now when we are uncertain about it. Wehave seen it return to more normal relationships in the past and Iwould hope that would occur in the future. As a result, I would notwant to do away with M1 totally. But in view of the uncertainty, itwould seem to me that it makes no sense either to rebase or raise thetop limit for the reason that that uncertainty suggests: that we don'tknow whether we can hit the target if we raise the top, for example,or if we rebase. To be sure, it improves the chances. But it alsoimplies to the market, it seems to me, a precision that nobody aroundthis table believes--that we know what is going to happen to M1 in theperiod ahead. Therefore, I come to the conclusion that we should donothing with M1 other than to move it to a monitoring status. Weshould let you describe in the upcoming testimony that velocity anddemand for money have created the uncertainty; that M2, M3, and debtare all within their boundaries; that the economy is chugging along--maybe not to the level that we want, but chugging along nonetheless;and that looking at all things we are setting aside M1, which we don'tunderstand, to a monitoring status but are not totally doing away withit because it does have some information content as to direction ifnothing else. So up or down, if you will, on M1 I would describe whathas happened in the past and the uncertainty, and rely upon the othertouchstones--and I am talking about the aggregates, principally, aswell as the economy and the level of the dollar. I would not want toraise the upper limit or rebase because either one implies precisionthat we don't have.-39-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly share theuncertainty that has been voiced around the table about theperformance of M1. But I am a little concerned about moving it to amonitoring position at this point. If we do that, in light of whathappened last year, I think the public is going to come to theconclusion that we, in effect, are setting it aside. We moved it intoa probationary status and then we moved it back to a regular targetstatus: now if we turn around and do it again, I am a little concernedabout the public's perception about that. While there is uncertainty,I think there is some evidence, and some possibility, that M1 willreturn to more normal levels. I am inclined to believe, althoughthere are uncertainties, that this is a one-time shift and that wewill get more normal relationships in the future. For that reason, Ithink that rebasing is supportable; and for that reason I would liketo suggest that rebasing is probably the better way to go. Again, Ithink it is premature to put M1 on a monitoring status at this time.If we rebase or if we raise the targets without rebasing and find outon the basis of subsequent experience that M1 is not in fact returningto a more normal level, then I'd move it to a monitoring status or setit aside completely. I would prefer to rebase and leave the targetessentially where it is, at 4 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I don't think anybody around the tablefeels terribly comfortable with any of the suggestions that have beenmade.MR. GUFFEY. That's not true! [Laughter.]MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that when you find yourself inthat situation, you want to keep your options open and keep someflexibility for movement between now and the time you want to chooseamong those options. As I sit here and read proposal two on page fourof the various options for the directive, it strikes me that thatparticular proposal provides flexibility, keeps options open, and isabout as sure as we can be about anything. As I read it, it puts M1on something of a monitoring range and the only thing that it commitsus to is slower M1 growth in the second half of the year compared tothe first half of the year, which seems to me about as precise as onecan be at this point. It is sort of a fuzzy middle ground, but itseems to me that is about where we are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say, if this is right in substance,that this is a most peculiar sentence, it seems to me. We reaffirmthe range and then we say it doesn't mean anything.MR. BOEHNE. Well, we may want to play around with thewording in terms of using the word "reaffirm." But it seems to methat this does capture the essence of where we are; one can playaround with [the wording of] this alternative. I don't think wereally know enough to raise the range or rebase because we just arenot sure what happened during the first half let alone what mighthappen. I think that most of us, certainly, would like to see slowergrowth in M1 during the second half than in the first half.-40-7/9-10/85MR. GUFFEY. I would share that [view]. I think proposalnumber 2 does capture what I have in mind: put M1 on a monitoringstatus but don't do away with it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I won't reiterate the reasons I expressed earlierfor favoring putting M1 on a monitoring status. But if it is on amonitoring status, we do need some range; at least in the past we havehad that. And whether we rebase or not I would prefer that we widenthe range a little, maybe to something like 4 to 8 percent. The realreason for doing that, in my mind, is that it gives us a little moreflexibility going into next year. And given all the uncertaintiesboth about the economy and about deposit flows and asset holdings, andgiven further the elimination of Reg. Q, that flexibility strikes meas desirable. For that reason, looking ahead to 1986, I would want totake this opportunity to broaden the M1 range. It seems to me itwould be on the side of prudence.MR. PARTEE. If it were 8 percent, Steve, what could growthbe from June to December?MR. AXILROD. Recognize that a lot depends on the pattern ofthe months. Assuming essentially a straight line after whateverhappens in July, for 8 percent for the year you would have month-to-month average growth of roughly 2-3/4 percent--not much.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And what would growth over thesecond half of the year be?MR. AXILROD. Growth from June to December, as I said, wouldbe 2-3/4 percent; on a Q2 to Q4 basis it would be around 5-1/4percent, again depending on how the months bounce around. That, bythe way, given the staff GNP projection and the way the quarterlyaverages work out, still would give you a negative velocity in thethird quarter and then a very strong positive velocity in the fourthquarter.MR. MARTIN. Considering the difficulty in predictingvelocity so far in this expansion and considering the difficulty inprojecting interest rates, real and nominal, so far in this businessexpansion, it would seem to me that we would want to give ourselvesthe flexibility that has been alluded to several times here and thatrebasing gives us that flexibility. It also recognizes theunusualness of recent events with regard to both velocity and,therefore, on the other side of that coin, the growth of theaggregates. Why not give ourselves the operational flexibility thatrebasing presents and indicate--to work a word to death--theuncertainty associated with these relationships at the moment? Maybewe ought not use the term "monitoring" and so forth if our goal hereis [unintelligible]. Let us not call it "monitoring;" let us call it"bananas" or something else. But let's give ourselves someoperational flexibility. We don't know what will happen to interestrates; we don't know what the public's attitude is toward holdingvarious kinds of assets.MR. KEEHN. While the objective in proposal 2 as stated--thatwe would expect M1 growth to slow down in the second half--is-41-7/9-10/85obviously something we desire, that proposal seems a bit on the vagueside. Perhaps we do need to be just a bit more specific about what weplan to do and how we plan to do it. Just to say it again: It seemsto me that the arguments for rebasing are compelling and I would be infavor of rebasing; I quite recognize that this may not be the lasttime that we have to do it. I don't think we ought to get into thebusiness of rebasing every other meeting--nor would I expect that tooccur--but I don't see anything wrong with rebasing now and perhapshaving to rebase some time in the future if there is a recurrence ofsome of these events. But I do think that we need to be a little morespecific as to how we are going to be conducting monetary policy. Ithink rebasing is a way of recognizing that something has taken placethat we need to deal with. Reestablishing a range provides someguidance as to what we plan to do, though always being able to usejudgment as we go along. So I would be in favor of rebasing,reaffirming the ranges at least for this year, and going into nextyear very likely with the same ranges in place for next year that wehave for this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Gary expressed my view pretty well. Itseems to be me that raising the upper limit to 8 percent simplyrecognizes what has happened already. But at the same time, it putsus in a position to be flexible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am having a littledifficulty following some of the discussion from the standpoint ofrebasing or raising ranges, and so forth. I still don't have a sense--maybe I am missing it--of whether or not we want to address thisvery large growth in M1 and address it forthrightly. I am leaning inthat direction in my own view. It seems to me that once that basicpoint becomes clear, how we structure our ranges then becomes a littleeasier. I am not comfortable at this point in knowing where we reallystand in terms of: Are we going to try to do something about M1 or arewe going to accept it the way it is and just let whatever happenedhappen? And based on what we think [the answer to] that might be,then decide to rebase or change the range? I guess what I am sayingis that I would like to see, however it is constructed, some movementto reduce the rate of growth in M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to see some reduced growthin M1--just for instance--if trade problems continue to get worse andthe dollar goes up and the economy is in recession?MR. BOYKIN. To some extent, I would be inclined to do thatlooking longer term, because I have a very uneasy feeling that we arebuilding major problems as opposed to the difficult problems that wehave right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What major long-range problem will you beadjusting by curtailing M1 with the dollar strong and the economy inrecession?MR. BOYKIN. The major problem, it seems to me, would be thepossibility of inflation coming back and coming back very strongly.7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. In a recession?MR. BOYKIN. Yes.MS. SEGER. Recession/depression?MR. PARTEE. Well, I think the argument is that you havebuilt in excess liquidity that then becomes uncontrollable.MR. BOYKIN. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Boy, that's a tough belief to follow right intoa recession.MR. BOEHNE. Fundamentalist economics!MR. PARTEE. I am sure that Friedman would say that if hewere sitting here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not what he said ex post in 1933.MR. BOYKIN. Don't misunderstand me. I am not talking about[unintelligible] it. I am just talking about moving in the directionof some restraint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can conclude that everybody would bedelighted if M1 subsided without doing--MR. BLACK. And was accompanied by declining interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will stipulate that.MR. BOYKIN. Well, I don't think we're coming to a recession.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is a heck of a lot moreimportant what we do than what numbers we put down here, myself.MR. BOYKIN. Well, that is what I am searching for--not howwe present it. In the final analysis it will become rathertransparent. I think the big question out there--at least in thelayman's mind--is that we have had this excess of M1 money growth andare we going to do something about it or not?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's a question in manylaymen's minds.MS. SEGER. [Their question is:] Do they have a job?MR. BOYKIN. Well, quasi-laymen.MR. MARTIN. Interest rates are all they care about.MR. BLACK. Well, I sense that the Chairman felt somewhatlike that in posing the question first as to what we do in the shortrun. I think he was saying something perfectly compatible with whatyou are saying, although his answer might not be the same as yours.But I think he was saying that's where one ought to start.7/9-10/85MR. BOYKIN. I agree. All I am saying is--and maybe you gotahead of me--that I didn't sense that that really had been answered.MR. BLACK. No, I agree with you. It's just that I didn'twant to be associated with you in any way, so I didn't say that! Idid really; I thought that was your best statement to date, as amatter of fact.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the sense of this, I guess, is thatif we don't do anything other than keep the numbers the same, weprobably ought to rebase. We can pick numbers that are the samearithmetically and that are a more forward-looking, easier translationof what we intend, rather than changing the range for the whole yearto take account of what took place in the first half of the year.MR. GUFFEY. Doesn't that imply to the markets that we areintending to hit those targets if we rebase, or if we raise them?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we change the existing targets, it alsoimplies that to the market. It depends on the language surroundingit.MR. GUFFEY. That's exactly my point. If we either changethe target or rebase, it implies that we are going to hit it. And Imight just observe that there is a possibility that if we rebase wewon't even hit the bottom end of the target. That's an outsidepossibility, to be sure; nonetheless, the possibility exists. Andcertainly it's going to put us to the test to hit the top of thetarget if we rebase. Therefore, I would opt not to do either of thosetwo things, but describe what has happened and describe what we thinkwill happen in the future and put M1 on a monitoring basis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, an alternative is not sayinganything about M1, in effect. I think that that does suspend it. Butthat does not reflect the desire that everybody would like to see itlower.MR. PARTEE. I think we do maximize our problems if we rebasebecause if things continue as they are, we are going to be over thetop; and if this was some kind of a strange aberration that isreversed, we are going to be below the bottom of a rebased number. Ithink Roger is right: that possibility increases. That exposes us tothe maximum danger of missing it utterly on either side.MR. RICE. It doesn't increase that danger if we just simplymove the range to take into account what already has happened.MR. PARTEE. It's obvious that that's my preference.MR. FORRESTAL. If you keep missing the target on acontinuing basis, isn't that the time to set it aside?MR. PARTEE. We surely have missed it.MR. FORRESTAL. But we haven't rebased. Why not try therebasing and then--?-44-7/9-10/85MR. PARTEE. Because we don't know why it is down. We don'tknow what accounts for what happened in May and June.MR. GUFFEY. And we don't know whether it is over or not.MR. PARTEE. We don't know whether it is over; we don't knowif it is reversing. We don't really know anything about it.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I would be willing to take that chance:rebase and then see what happens.MR. GUFFEY. I don't share that.MR. FORRESTAL. I gathered you didn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would associate myself, at leastin part, with Tom Melzer's remarks that the frequency with which theseproblems come up--no matter how we deal with them--inevitably willraise questions about the philosophy and the practical approach topolicy that we are taking. Somewhere out in the future--I don't thinkthat we are there now--there will be at least a perception, or maybeeven a danger, that we could kind of slide into a degree ofindifference about the speed of money and credit growth, howeverdefined. There could be that danger. Primarily for that reason, Idon't want to end up in a position of altogether disregarding M1,which I think, Roger, is the logical conclusion of your position.Then, looking between rebasing and raising the range, I would have amodest preference for raising the range; I'd put it at 4 to 8 percentor something like that, with some language about probation, as opposedto rebasing. But in the end, [Mr. Chairman,] you are the one who isgoing to have explain it. I wouldn't go to war over one or the other,but I do think the integrity of the process, in a context in which theimportance of M1 for the time being is reduced, is preserved a littlebetter by raising the range rather than rebasing.MR. MARTIN. I would like to make the argument for rebasingon a slightly different basis. It is certainly important that thefinancial markets accept what we do here as being operationallydictated and not an abandonment of disinflation as a primary goal ofthis institution. On the other hand, it seems to me that theoperational considerations are important here and that we shouldattempt to adopt those features of a policy which are most likely,with all the difficulty of forecasting, to be attainable. We rebasedin very recent history. There was not a reinflation following thoseactions, and it seems to me that operationally we would have a littlemore flexibility [by rebasing]. We can be careful with the languagein which we ascribe weight to M1, but nevertheless I think it isimportant to reiterate that M1 is an information variable. It doeshave content; most of the time it does have information that isvaluable in the implementation of policy. I think that rebasing andthe right language accomplish this. Why not pick the alternative weare most likely to succeed in?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can make them arithmeticallyequivalent.-45-7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. But we have to raise the top limit so high if wedon't rebase, Mr. Chairman. To be pragmatic, we really ought to use a10 percent top for that range and who wants to go to 10 percent? Idon't.MR. WALLICH. I wouldn't rebase. I wouldn't change the M1range. I would just let M1 sit there with a statement that it is notmore than a monitoring--whatever the word is--variable. I wouldn'tchange any of the other ranges. That makes for a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not even a monitoring range if youdon't expect to make it.MR. WALLICH. Well, we can eliminate M1 totally, but I don'tsee any purpose in doing that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The hardest thing to explain is why wewouldn't change the range and yet expect to be over it. I can seewhere one can abandon the range. That's easy to explain. If it'swider, that's another question. But I don't know how we can sit thereand say we reaffirmed the range for M1, but expect to be well over it.MR. MARTIN. By 300 basis points.MR. RICE. How much over we don't know, and that's whyraising the range somewhat gets--MR. PARTEE. I am rather impressed with the integrityargument that Jerry just gave. People who have been around here forsome years know that we are often accused of rebasing any time we getinto trouble. That has been a constant source of friction anddifficulty in discussions of these matters. I think we can rebase ifwe have a good argument for rebasing. My problem with rebasing now isthat we don't know what has happened. In 1982 it was a stab, but itsure looked as if [M1 growth] was running way off. Right now we don'tknow. What we really have is a couple of high months, which happen tobe the months just right now, and we don't know what is going tohappen. And when we rebase, it looks like we are rebasing to make iteasier. That's the old complaint about rebasing.MR. MARTIN. Chuck, we have had interest rates come down 400basis points from their peaks and, in somewhat more recent time, 200basis points. That must have some relationship.MR. PARTEE. I think that's a reason for raising the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say, I don't see much differencebetween rebasing and raising the range.MR. PARTEE. I do.MR. BOEHNE. Well, there is a cosmetic difference and I thinkPres has put his finger on it. It's just the numbers you look at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Cosmetically, I don't see any substantivedifference; arithmetically it is equivalent.-46-7/9-10/85MR. PARTEE. I think the majority have indicated that theyare not prepared to wring out the high M1 numbers. So we are onlytalking about cosmetics. We have given up on substance here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just don't see the cosmeticdifference in your own terms between saying we are raising the rangeor we are rebasing. They both amount to the same thing.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Arithmetically, obviously you canmake them come out to the same thing. But to my way of thinking--again, this is a highly judgmental thing--[there is a difference].Raising the range and accompanying that with some verbiage along theline that several people, including Mr. Stern, have suggested says: Wedon't know what has happened; we don't know if it's over; we stillthink over time this variable matters; and we still have a view overtime as to what we would like to do, but we are not going to--particularly in these current circumstances--let that view get carvedin stone. Now, rebasing seems to say something that in my judgment isa little different than that. The way that it is different is that tome it does not carry the same conviction in terms of what we aretrying to do over time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You escape me. We raise the [M1 growth]rate for a year and that expresses a great conviction.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It doesn't express great conviction.I just don't think we can go on in the situation that we have in termsof rebasing when we don't have a good explanation as to why we arerebasing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's your good explanation as to why youare raising [M1 growth] rates?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Because I don't know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You lose me.MR. PARTEE. In one case you wipe the slate clean and in theother case you don't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You wipe the slate clean and end up with alower number; you don't wipe the slate clean and end up with a highernumber. I don't think it takes any genius to say that you are at thesame place at the end of the year.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think you can count it either way.All I'm saying is that in my judgment it strikes me a little better,and that's all, to do it that way. But I could live with it the otherway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't make any difference either way;you end up in the same place, except in the one case you are puttingin higher numbers and in the other case you are not.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, coming back to both the integritypoint and to Bob's point about what it is that we want to do with M1:Although I have a technical preference that I have already expressedfor not doing anything on the M1 target and declaring it a monitoring-47-7/9-10/85range, it seems to me the real issue here is not so much technicallywhat we do, but the words you use to surround it. The real issue isthat you in fact very carefully describe to people what it is about M1and the uncertainty, what the circumstances are that we find ourselvesin, and what kinds of circumstances we might find ourselves in thefuture that might cause us to do this, that, or the other thing.Those words in the end will be what preserves our integrity, whatevertechnical mechanism we use at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can agree with that.MR. BLACK. I pretty well agree with you, Mr. Chairman, thatthere isn't a lot of difference, but one minor issue is: Which onewould make it easier for us as we work over the long run to lowerthose ranges? That's why, frankly, I came out in favor of the 4 to 7percent range, rebased. I think it would be easier to get it down, asI assume we are going to have to do over time, if we have a top of 7percent rather than a top of 8 percent. But that is a very minorpoint, probably.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Rebasing carries a little more implicationthat we think this is probably an exceptional circumstance. If youdon't rebase, you are starting with a higher number, and it's harderto put it down lower the lower you get. That's what it amounts to.MR. BLACK. That's my point, really.MR. BOEHNE. How do you view this? You are the one who hasto sell this and we are talking a lot about cosmetics here. Do youthink there would be a big problem if we suspended the M1 rangealtogether versus trying to put something in there that we say wedon't know very much about?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the trouble with that from mystandpoint is that if we ever have to tighten, it's good to have thatM1 number out there.MR. BOEHNE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we abandon it completely, we've lost a[unintelligible]. Suppose it runs [above] whatever we put down,whether we change it for the year or rebase. We could always say, ifwe have to, that we have persuasive enough evidence that says we'regoing to run above it. If we don't have it out there at all, and wedon't want to run above it, that's a little hard to do.MR. BOEHNE. Good argument.MR. PARTEE. It could be very hard to put back in too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what the cosmetic issue comes downto is whether we want to say primarily that we think this is anexceptional case or whether we want to build the kind of backgroundfor a permanent increase in the rate of increase in M1. It might beright, if in fact the trend velocity is changing. Maybe it is. Ithink probably it is. Maybe we don't want to move the money supplydown to where we used to think that we wanted to move it, because withthe changed structure, it's going to have to be higher relative to the-48-7/9-10/85nominal GNP. If that's what you think, then change the range for thewhole year and begin getting people used to higher M1 numbers. If theodds are this is once and for all, rebase it. Who knows?MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that, contrary tosome of the views that have been expressed here, there is no greaterimplication of being forced to hit a rebased target than if we didn'trebase. I don't know what experience or earlier precedent wouldcorrespond to that conclusion. Circumstances change and uncertaintiesdevelop that we don't anticipate; I don't think we are stuck with anyrebased range any more than we are stuck with hitting today's range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I am saying. Thedifferences are relatively minor, but I do think it depends uponwhether you want to get people used to higher M1 figures as a kind ofnorm or not. I think we are getting used to higher M1 figures anyway,because that's probably the fact of the situation. So, it's aquestion of how fast you want to go in that direction. I think it'shard to go from 5 to 9 percent--or whatever we are talking about if wedon't rebase--down to 4 to 7 percent if that's where you want to gonext year. Or less. It's much easier to do that if you rebase anddon't have to go down at all or go down a relatively minor amount.MR. BALLES. That's the big argument in favor of rebasing, inmy opinion.MR. BLACK. Mine too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I'm sure of is that we are going todecide one way or the other.MR. GUFFEY. I would like to ask a question about your laststatement that it is more difficult to go to 4 to 7 percent next yearfrom the 5 to 9 percent. If we rebase or raise the range this yearbecause of an aberrant behavior of M1 that we think is behind us, andwe select the fourth-quarter average as the next year's startingpoint, I don't see that 4 to 7 percent is any more difficult in 1986from either of those two starting points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't say that you cannot do it. Ijust say that, marginally, it takes a little more explanation.MR. GUFFEY. And the explanation has to be that it was a one-time aberration that occurred in M1 in 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. Do you express a one-timeaberration more clearly by rebasing or by raising the range for thewhole year?MR. GUFFEY. I guess I would suggest that we don't do either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't do either?MR. GUFFEY. Don't do either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But what I find a little difficult to sayis that we haven't changed our range but we expect to be above it.-49-7/9-10/85MR. GUFFEY. We said at the beginning of the year that we seta range of 4 to 7 percent and that we expected to be at or near thetop. And indeed, we are above the top because of unforeseencircumstances. I don't see any problem with admitting that andadmitting that we don't know--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will admit that we are above the top.That's where we are.MR. MARTIN. If we do neither, every Friday we are going tobe confronted by The Wall Street Journal's bad diagrams showing us notjust above the top of the cone but at an extreme distance above thetop of the cone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we express it strongly enough,they might stop showing the chart. But I take it that that's not whatyou want to do. You want to retain some discipline.MR. MARTIN. That diagram looks out of control.MR. PARTEE. That's because it is out of control.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know quite what words we would useto say our range is 4 to 7 percent but it doesn't mean anything.MR. GUFFEY. You simply would describe in your testimonythat, because of the uncertainty. M1 is on a monitoring basis orhowever else we may describe it; that it has informational content sothat we are going to retain it; and that we don't know what is goingto happen over the remainder of the year but we are still dedicated tothe proposition that we are going to move toward price stability inthe period ahead. And we do that with the 1986 targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can explain abandoning M1; that'sstraightforward. But I don't know what the 4 to 7 percent means if weare not intending to--. There is no content.MR. GUFFEY. I think that's correct. But I don't know thatyou can explain any better 4 to 7 percent rebased or raising the rangeto 5 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have to say I think we expect tobe within the range. That's not a promise. We can violate it again,if that's the wisdom. But at least I can say we expect to be aroundthe upper edges. We do think it's once and for all--well, not quiteonce and for all--a step function. I don't find that very difficult.To explain that we don't have an M1 range is simple enough too. WhatI find a little difficult to say is our range is 4 to 7 percent, butthat doesn't mean anything.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I think we can find words to get over thathump, if that's the only hill we have to climb.MR. PARTEE. Well, if you feel much more comfortable withrebasing, I'll accept it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, much more comfortable is anexaggeration. I don't feel very comfortable with no change at all.-50-7/9-10/85Probably a better expression of where we want to be is to rebase--assuming that the arithmetic is all the same anyway [and] there is noargument on what it should be.MR. MORRIS. My problem with setting new guidelines is thatif we have every reason to believe that we are going to get stillfurther lagged responses to declines in interest rates that havealready taken place, that's a big uncertainty. It, therefore, makesmore sense to me to set aside M1 as a target variable for this yearand reconsider it again for next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a perfectly coherent approach.Presentationally, it's easy. I don't see any objections to that side.That's a question of substance: whether we want to set aside M1 thatfar, which says we can't come back later in the year and say we thinkM1 is too high, in effect. It makes it more difficult. Do we want tothrow out--throw out is a bit exaggerated--the possibility of sayingthat M1 is just too high and we want to tighten up?MR. MORRIS. Well, if M1 is too high because the economy isstronger, the other measures are going to be too high as well. Idon't see that retaining M1 is that critical.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As a practical matter, I'm not surehow Peter and Steve would go about constructing a framework to operatein, literally, if we just throw it out.MR. MORRIS. We did it in 1982.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We didn't throw it out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In 1982, what did we do--rebase in themiddle of the year?MR. AXILROD. 1983.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we do in 1982? We didn't doanything in 1982? We just ran above it.MR. AXILROD. No, I don't think so.MR. MARTIN. We ran at 8.8 percent against a top of 5-1/2percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were within the range at the midyearmeeting, I guess, in 1982 and we just let it run above [later].MR. AXILROD. I think you made a statement in September orOctober of 1982 to indicate that that was happening.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we did was: We didn't change ourrange in mid-1982. We ran above it. We set a new monitoring range atthe beginning of 1983, and then we rebased in the middle of 1983.MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we said we were going to be moreserious about it. That's the difference. In the middle of 1983 we-51-7/9-10/85rebased and said we were going to get a bit more serious about it, Iguess.MR. PARTEE. This time we're going to rebase but we're notgoing to get more serious.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This time we rebase and say but we're notgoing to get more serious. Well, we didn't say much more serious, asI remember. We still called it a monitoring range. Okay. I guess wedidn't get a lot more serious about it in the middle of '83--onlyslightly more; we got more serious about it at the beginning of '84.Well, we'll go to something easy, like next year. Does anybody havestrong feelings about next year?MR. MORRIS. I just have one thing, Mr. Chairman. As I said,the evidence suggests to me that nobody knows whether it's a permanentchange or not. But the fact is that it does seem now to take moremoney, more liquid assets, and more debt to generate a dollar of theGNP. Therefore, it seems to me that there is a strong case formaintaining the ranges and making no change for next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M1 for next year?MR. MORRIS. I'm for [retaining them] where they are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're for alternative I for next year.MR. AXILROD. That retains the ranges for this year for M1and M2 and reduces the range for M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just reduces the top end of the rangefor M3 by 1/2 percentage point; that's all it does.MR. MORRIS. I don't--MR. AXILROD. That's right. It reduces credit and I wouldthink--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It reduces the debt range.MR. AXILROD. --you would reduce M1 if you move up the rangeor rebase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we're leaving M1 aside for themoment. The other three--MR. MORRIS. I don't see any case for reducing the M3 anddebt ranges. What rationale is there for that?MR. AXILROD. Well, the main rationale is that this tracksthe nominal GNP. The rationale is that there would be less debtexpansion because the increase in spending is lower in '86 than in '85because of the turn in the balance of payments. But that may or maynot happen. And secondly, we expect that there will be less mergeractivity. That's the rationale.MR. MORRIS. Yes, but I think there's going to be---52-7/9-10/85MR. AXILROD. Our point estimate for 1986 is 10.4 percent.MR. MORRIS. 1986 will probably have a higher nominal GNPthan 1985.MR. AXILROD. Well, as I say, one of the questions raised is:Does the Committee like the GNP? If they don't like the GNP--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's correct. The GNP estimates[of Board members and Presidents]--well, there is a 5-1/2 percent onthe low side and an 8-1/2 percent peak--are bunched in the 6-3/4 to 8percent area, roughly. If you just took that and said there shouldn'tbe any velocity changes, you're more or less satisfied there. And forM2 and M3 and debt you could take alternative I or you could takealternative II too; there isn't much difference. Alternative IIIbegins to look like a squeeze on our projections of nominal GNP.MR. AXILROD. That was our idea, Mr. Chairman. AlternativeII in some sense gives a little looser fit, which would provide someroom if the Committee wanted to express a view of wanting more nominalGNP than is in the staff projection. Alternative III is tighter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is so little difference between Iand II that it's negligible, it seems to me. Alternative III doesbegin to be a pretty tight fit, given the nominal GNP figures that areprojected. You can argue that they're too high, I suppose, if youwant to tighten it. I think you have to begin arguing that, though.MR. MARTIN. I think part of that argument, Mr. Chairman,turns on the expectation of what is the real growth trend line. Is itreally 2 or 2-1/2 percent or is it 3 or 3-1/2 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, here I'm just talking about M2 andM3 and debt for which, presumably, in the long run there isn't anytrend.MR. BLACK. You meant real GNP didn't you?MR. MARTIN. Yes, I'm talking about real GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'm sorry.MR. MARTIN. If 2 to 2-1/2 percent is the trend, then wecould be comfortable with the staff structure rather than our ownhigher projections. But if that's incorrect and the longer-termgrowth line is around 3 or 3-1/2 percent, then the staff model willgive us higher unemployment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where our real GNP average[projection] is. It looks like it ought to be over 3 percent. Well,I don't know; some are more pessimistic.MR. MARTIN. Personally, I think it's closer to 3 or 3-1/2percent and, therefore, we're flirting with higher unemployment at 2to 2-1/2 percent real growth. Why should we take that risk?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's fair to say by andlarge that the projections for next year cluster around a 3 percent-53-7/9-10/85real growth. So, alternative I and alternative II would allow forthat. You could argue that that's too low, but [unintelligible]probably higher price figures than are likely. Another fall of thedollar--. Well, I'm just looking at the easy aggregates now: M2, M3and debt. Who's for alternative I? Who's for alternative II? Who'sfor alternative III? That knocks out alternative III. Not everybodyraised his or her hand by a long shot. The difference between theseis very small: it's 1/2 percentage point on the upper end of M2 and1/2 percentage point on the upper and lower end in the debt range. M3is the same [in both]. If I don't hear great howls, it seems to methose are nice round numbers; we don't get into halves.MR. PARTEE. Yes, they are nice round numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Alternative I for M2, M3, and debt--that'sall I'm talking about. Now, M1 is another story. That may affectwhat people want to do about this year.MR. PARTEE. With monetary--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The choices given range from 3-1/2 to6-1/2 percent to 4 to 8 percent. Who has a strong feeling about that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know how you can have astrong feeling about M1 at all right now. But, again, I would have apreference--not a strong feeling--for the specifications ofalternative I. That's against the background of what I think is oneof the stronger economic forecasts for next year. And I think thereis a very plausible case developing that the velocity of M1 may bemoving lower. Maybe in the current institutional, inflation, andinterest rate environment the kind of trend or expected behavior of M1velocity is more like 1 percent instead of 3 percent. That's what I[tend to factor] into my own thinking.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe it's even zero.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No,--MS. SEGER. Minus 2.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I certainly don't have any illusionsabout that judgment, but I think the M1 specifications of alternativeI are quite compatible with growth in the real economy of 4 percentnext year, which is basically what is in my forecast anyway. So,that's where I come out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] maybe you get 1 percentincrease in velocity with that projection.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even if you're in the top of it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.MR. PARTEE. Well, I like 4 to 7 percent too, because this issupposed to be a tentative indication for next year. We know verylittle about what M1 is doing, as we are going to admit in one way or-54-7/9-10/85another again. So I think tentatively what we should say is that wewould hope to reestablish this range.MR. BLACK. There is a cosmetic aspect in this. If we voted4 to 8 percent this year, then 4 to 7 percent looks better to me fornext year than if we vote 4 to 7 percent rebased and 4 to 7 percentfor next year. I think we ought to appear to be working toward ourlong-run objectives; I'd like to see it a little lower than whateverwe select.MR. BOEHNE. Well, it gets back to the explanation that wegive for why the ranges in M1 are no longer valid. If we think it'ssomething more permanent, then it's going to be hard to argue to keepdropping the top of M1. If we argue that it's a one-shot deal in1985, then one can make the argument. I find it hard to decide whatto do in 1986 until I have some sense as to which argument you feelmost comfortable giving for whatever we're going to do on M1 in 1985.I think there's a logical consistency here that one needs to pay a bitof attention to.MR. BLACK. But if, by the time we get to 1986 we have thatinformation on the velocity of M1, as I assume we will--and if itlooks as if it has permanently declined--then I would be willing to goup at that point. I don't see that evidence now. When we had thelast episode in '82-'83 we had a decided decline in inflationaryexpectations and there was reason to expect the trend rate to decline.We haven't had that this time, as I read it. So there is less reasonto expect the trend to decline, although there certainly does appearto have been that one-time downward shift in velocity.MS. SEGER. What if it isn't a one-time downward shift? Whatif it's going to happen again?MR. BLACK. If it keeps happening, it's going to become moreor less permanent and then I'd be willing to have higher ranges.That's what I'm saying. By that time I think we would have theevidence, and I would favor higher ranges if that is in fact true.I'm a real pragmatist, despite what you may think.MS. SEGER. You're a purist.MR. BLACK. I'm a pure pragmatist.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose there's something to be said for4 to 8 percent simply on the basis that it's a wider range, given allthe uncertainties we have talked about.MR. MARTIN. And given that we will be overshooting--overshooting, changing, rebasing, and so forth for this year.MR. WALLICH. I would find it hard to understand. It's truethat there's greater uncertainty, but also the number is higher. Theupper number is higher and it sounds as though we are yielding.MR. MARTIN. It's not higher than what actually is going tooccur in 1985. It's much lower; 8 is lower than 10, I believe.MR. PARTEE. We don't know what's going to happen in '85.7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. I wouldn't bet on 8 percent for '85.MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't bet on 10 percent either.MR. KEEHN. In that this is a preliminary look at next year,it seems to me that establishing a range of 4 to 7 percent now wouldbe appropriate. If the circumstances are significantly changed at theend of the year and we want to have a higher range next year, we willbe perfectly free to do that when we get into the February meeting.MR. BALLES. I happen to agree with Si on that, but I thinkit's time for our semi-annual reminder from Steve. The July figurethat we pick out, as I seem to recall, Mr. Chairman, more often thannot--and probably very more often than not--is never changed by thetime we get to January. For some reason this Committee has felt inJanuary that we ought to stick with what we picked out in thebeginning of July. Am I wrong on that, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, let us get the figures; I just want tocheck my memory.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 4 to 7 percent looks like aperfectly reasonable figure on the kind of analysis we used to use.Whether that's still reasonable in terms of potential velocity undertoday's conditions is the question; it's an awfully tight fit. And itassumes an increase in velocity.MR. STERN. I come out on the other side, given that this isa preliminary number. For that reason I'd start with something like 4to 8 percent. If the economy is doing better as the year progresses--and when we get into 1986 if M1 is looking a little more reasonable--it seems to me that February would be the time to move to 4 to 7percent. I suspect (a) that that's not a big change; and (b) that 4to 7 percent would seem to be appropriate and easily justified underthose circumstances at that time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how many like 4 to 7 percent? Howmany like 4 to 8 percent? That encompasses the range, unless somebodyelse has some other feeling.MR. BLACK. Not knowing what we're going to do this year, butassuming we might rebase with 4 to 7 percent, I like 3-1/2 to 6-1/2percent [for 1986]. I think a lot of people are going to say when werebase that in fact we have eased. And if we don't wave the flag andshow some determination to deal with inflation down the road, then Ithink we've got a problem there. That's why I'd put it a little lowerthan whatever we select for [this] year. It might be merely astatement of pious intention, but I think it might be important.MR. WALLICH. It would be a very [specious] thing, though, tosay we don't know what M1 is doing and now we're going to change therange by 1/2 point. I would try to convey the sense that M1 is insuspense, and that is best done by an unchanged range for 1986.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, in response to President Balles'question, we really do change the ranges at the February meetings fromwhat was adopted tentatively. Only in one year, 1982, were all the-56-7/9-10/85ranges tentatively adopted maintained. In four other years--this isgoing back to 1981--there were substantial changes.MR. BALLES. Oh yes?MR. AXILROD. Sometimes there were changes in M1. The mostspectacular, of course, was in February 1983 when M1 was deemphasizedto a monitoring range and that monitoring range was raisedsubstantially from the one that had been adopted the previous July.MR. BALLES. I take it all back!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I find it difficult to work up agreat deal of emotion in assuming what the language is going to be;it's quite tentative anyway.MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we probably ought to do the shortrun and come back to this.MR. BLACK. This gets back to your point, Bob.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The situation we have is that the economylooks pretty sluggish and there is not much sign of a breakout on theup side, apart from looking at the M1 figure. If you look at the M1figure you might say that maybe we are going to have a great increase[in GNP]. I don't know where that's coming from. But as a practicalmatter, if you wanted to stimulate, where can you stimulate? You canstimulate housing, which is already high, and maybe consumption andyou would get more distortions in the economy and more imports. It'shard for me to see, particularly in the midst of this, that we shouldtighten up, barring evidence that the economy is expanding [too fast]or further evidence on Ml. So, I conclude that we [should] stay aboutwhere we are.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No argument here.MR. MARTIN. I have no argument with it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose what that means, just in termsof setting forth specifications, is that we do something likealternative B, with a clear understanding that everybody would bedelighted, I'm sure, if July and August suddenly had a jump downwardin M1. We would not take that as a sign for great easing unless itwere accompanied by very clear evidence that, say, the dollar wasstrong and the economy was weak. Conversely, I certainly would agree,if M1 continued high and there were pretty definite signs--or somesigns anyway--that the economy was expanding more rapidly, we mighthave to react. Even then I'd be a little more tentative about that ifthe dollar turned out to be very strong. I don't think the dollarwill turn out to be strong during this period. Hypothetically, Ithink we could get a combination of a declining dollar, a little moreevidence of business firmness, and a high M1, and then we wouldtighten up. Except we don't make that decision today. We would makethe decision to do that if those circumstances arose.-57-7/9-10/85MR. BALLES. I would support alternative B, Mr. Chairman. Ithink that makes a lot of sense in view of all the uncertainties we'rewrestling with here. I think the other alternatives would be puttingup too big a bet. One of the things about alternative B that I likeis that it's more or less an explicit admission--at least I interpretit that way--that we're prepared to go along with the overshoots inthe first half of the year and we have no intention of trying to getM1 back within that original range. I think that would be a terriblemistake in view of all the uncertainties we've heard around this tablethe past two days. Therefore, I think alternative B would make a lotof sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say alternative B, you are alsoencompassing something around the borrowing target that's in there?MR. BALLES. Oh, yes.SPEAKER(?). Which is what?MR. MARTIN. $350 million.MR. BALLES. Around $350 million.MR. WALLICH. The principal argument in favor of "B," itseems to me, is that it is clearly and definitively inaction. Anyaction that is possible here is very small relative to the distortionin M1 that has taken place. So, one would seem to be making a half-hearted gesture trying to deal with M1. "B" seems to say we're nottaking M1 seriously and we're suspending judgment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're in favor of "B"?MR. WALLICH. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Me too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Corrigan is in favor of "B."MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would support alternative Balso, for many of the reasons given. I think stimulation of any kindat this point, as you've indicated, would get us exactly where wedon't want to be--stimulating the side of the economy that doesn'treally need it and not doing much for the areas that are really,really distressed. I think it's too early to make a move one way orthe other without further economic indicators. So, I would supportalternative B with the borrowing at around $325 to $350 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I myself, just in the area of fine tuning,would say $350 million played somewhat cautiously. In other words, itmight be more likely to be higher rather than lower, depending uponhow market conditions develop.MR. GUFFEY. $350 to $400 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's getting a little narrow,considering what we've gone through. Basically, I would aim at $350million but not put funds in there if the market is very easy and---58-7/9-10/85SPEAKER(?). That's right.MR. KEEHN. I would be in favor of that. I'd be a littleclearer in my judgment if I knew what we were going to do with regardto the rebasing of ranges. But basically, I'd be in favor of "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's make this all tentative untilwe come back and look at the package as a whole. And we have toconsider the language too. But you're basically "B"?MR. KEEHN. Right, with a trending up in the borrowing alongthe lines you described.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't say trending up. Trending upif the economy gets stronger.MR. KEEHN. Tolerance of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Tolerance, okay.MR. FORRESTAL. Then does that tolerance include a little onthe down side if the economy turns out weaker?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well,--MR. FORRESTAL. You know, there's not much difference betweenthem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if the economy turns out weaker,then we have different circumstances. Then, I presume we would writea directive that says if everything comes out weak we would ease andif everything turns out tight, we would tighten. But I'm talkingabout apart from that now; I think the word "tolerance" is for alittle higher [borrowing] depending upon market circumstances. It'swhat we have been doing, basically.MR. GUFFEY. I would support "B" with the caveat on theborrowing. It would appear, just looking back at the historicalnumbers, that the $350 million is pretty low. And we have had thefederal funds rate dropping below the discount rate for some shortperiod of time. Whatever the number is, I'd start at $350 million askind of the base--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.MR. GUFFEY. --and accept something a bit higher than thatproviding the funds rate is trading around the 7-3/4 percent level.MR. BLACK. If we got 5-1/2 percent [M1 growth] from June toSeptember, and then to December, that would mean for the year as awhole it would be something in excess of 9 percent. That seems alittle too rich for me. I just don't think we need quite that muchliquidity.MR. PARTEE. The problem is that July is rather high and wecan't affect July; it may be the wrong number but we are not going toaffect it. And then it drifts right down; by September the pointestimate is 4 percent or something, isn't it?-59-7/9-10/85MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. PARTEE. I think that's about as sharp a dampening as onewould want, Bob. And what we would then look forward to is a lowerfourth quarter than the third quarter.MR. BLACK. Well, on a quarterly basis, the second quarter tothe fourth quarter would be 7.6 percent.MR. PARTEE. That's continuing in the fourth quarter what thethird quarter--?MR. BLACK. Yes.MR. PARTEE. I could accept that.MR. RICE. I would like to see some gesture in the directionof less M1 growth, but I don't want to tighten up the interest rates.MR. BLACK. I think that's where I am, Emmett.MR. RICE. So, I could go for alternative B, keeping in mindthat at the next meeting it might be necessary to do something totighten.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, under certain conditions, it may benecessary to do something before then. That would not be to get alower M1, I guess, but in response to a still higher one. Who else?MR. RICE. A minor gesture for public relations reasons mightnot hurt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have different public relations inmind than I do, Emmett.MR. MARTIN. I support alternative B with $350 million ofborrowing for reasons already given.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I guess I'm more concerned about the health ofthe economy than most of my colleagues. The sluggishness in someareas is actually almost to be described as a recession, if you lookat certain parts of the industrial sector. And Mr. Guffey's farm areaI would almost call a depression. Looking at the strong dollar andthe effect that it's having on the manufacturing sector, I wouldreally like to push for something that is considered easing; if that'salternative A, then that's what I would vote for.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's alternative A by golly. Doesanybody else have anything? Well, it looks like the center of gravityis at B. Is the coffee out there?MR. BERNARD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we have our coffee? We'll comeback and consider what the directive should say for the near term andconsider the longer-run alternatives, working around alternative B.-60-7/9-10/85[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we might return to this issue ofthe targets for the year. If I am correct, I think the sentiment isto change the targets. Let me assume that for the moment, one way oranother. If we change it to 5 to 9 percent for the year as a whole,that is roughly the same as rebasing it at 4 to 7 percent. Is thatcorrect, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that is right. The upper limits would beroughly--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not quite the equivalent, I suppose.If we change it to 4 to 8 percent or 5 to 8 percent with rebasing,what's that equivalent to? That's equivalent to 5-1/2 to 9-1/2percent?MR. AXILROD. Well, 8 percent is roughly 9-1/2 percent and 5percent is roughly 8 percent for the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume we're going to do something inthat area with some language fuzzing up M1 to some extent. Those arearithmetic equivalents, so I think it's purely a presentationaldifference. Let's talk about the substance for a moment, which I willsay whichever way you [want me to] present it: Is it 5 to 9 or 5 to9-1/2 percent, which are the equivalents of 4 to 7 and 4 to 8 percent,[respectively]. Is it the lower or the higher of those that we'retalking about?MR. MARTIN. It's the higher, to give ourselves operatingroom when the expectation, I think, on balance still is for a higherrather than a lower rate of growth in M1, even given the decisionsmade in the short run. I don't think we should set ranges that wefeel have a higher probability that we can't obtain them.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm confused.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not discussing whether we rebase ornot.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, I know. I'm confused becauseyou've lost me on the numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Looking at it in annual terms, the issueis whether we make the high number--which is the relevant one--9 or9-1/2 percent; they are equivalent on rebasing to 7 or 8 percent.MR. MARTIN. I'm arguing for 8 or 9-1/2, Mr. Chairman,depending on which way the Committee goes. It's operational; I'lljoin the pragmatists. We heard from a pragmatist.MR. BLACK. Well, as another pragmatist, I'll take the otherside on that because I think that that 9-1/2 percent, even with allthese things going on, might be a little too much liquidity.MR. PARTEE. It's the same amount.MR. BLACK. No, you see---61-7/9-10/85MR. WALLICH. The symbolism is tremendous, it seems to me.MR. BLACK. Yes, but it's not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to talk in terms of therebased numbers so we don't have to keep talking in terms of both,without in any way prejudging that decision? Let's just refer to therebased number or the other number.MR. MARTIN. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let's do that. Rebased.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's use the rebased number, which givesus two round numbers. We're talking about 7 percent or 8 percent.MR. MARTIN. 8 percent.SPEAKER(?) 7 percent.MR. BLACK. 7 percent.MR. BOEHNE(?). 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many do we have? One 8 percent--MR. WALLICH. 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7 percent.MR. KEEHN. 7 percent.MR. FORRESTAL. 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who am I hearing 7 percent from?MR. PARTEE. The problem is that 7 percent is very tight.MR. MARTIN. Very, very tight.MR. PARTEE. That's the trouble with rebasing.MR. MARTIN. Not with 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's the same--MR. BLACK. That's no tighter than 9 percent if we don'trebase. It's the same; well, it's 1/10th of 1 percent different, if Iread it right.MR. PARTEE. I think if we're going to rebase that we oughtto have a figure that we can have some reasonable presumption ofhitting, so I'm for 8 percent.MS. SEGER. I'm for 8 percent also.MR. RICE. If we rebase, we may as well make it 8 percent.7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm assuming people want to be consistentarithmetically whether or not we rebase. So, I'm automaticallyassuming anybody that says 8 percent is for 9-1/2 percent on M1 if wechange [the range] for the year.MR. RICE. Right.MR. PARTEE. Well, I would take 9 percent. I'd skip the 1/2point.MR. RICE. No, no.MR. BLACK. Well, that puts you back down to 7 percent then,Chuck, I think.MR. PARTEE. The 1/2 point does?MR. BLACK. Yes, it does.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To repeat: The arithmetic equivalents, Ithink, are 9-1/2 and 8 percent and 9 and 7 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I can live with 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, cosmetically, people may think it'sdifferent. They may be happy to do 4 to 8 percent but not 5-1/2 to9-1/2 percent, even though they're the same thing.MR. MARTIN. The media will talk about the top of the range;the media will talk about 8 percent. They've done it again and again.I think, cosmetically, we will have them talking about rebasing forone day and it will be forgotten.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I've heard from everybodyhere. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Oh, I guess to give us a little room I'd go for8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. 7 percent for me, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well I've heard from all the Committeemembers. Do I want to hear from anybody else?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It depends on what they want to say!MR. BLACK. The Committee members didn't do a particularlygood job; maybe you ought to listen to them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any non-Committee members have a strongfeeling that they want to affect this narrow balance here?MR. MORRIS. They both seem unrealistic to me, Mr. Chairman.One is growth of 1/2 to 1 percent June to December and the other is2.8 percent; and both of those seem improbable. No, that's not right.-63-7/9-10/85MR. PARTEE. 5 percent.MR. BLACK. It's 5 percent.MR. MORRIS. I thought you were talking about 7 or 8?MR. PARTEE. This is quarter 4. We're talking aboutrebasing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is if we rebase, which is theequivalent of 9 or 9-1/2 percent if we do the full year.MR. PARTEE. That's a little more than 5 percent.MR. MORRIS. I could take it; I was looking at the wrongnumbers.MR. BOEHNE. If we're going to take the heat of rebasing orupping the range, it seems to me we ought to go far enough to give ussome breathing room. I wouldn't want to go six months and every weekget hit on the head because we have gone over target.MR. PARTEE. Rebase again!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll just add that we're going tostart off high and we're just stuck here. Unless we rebase on thefirst week in July, we're going to start out above. I don't know thatwe start out above the parallel lines, but the parallel lines close uppretty fast; we've only got six months. But we're going to start offwell above the cone simply because the trajectory was so sharp inJune. It's not going to look appreciably different whether we pick 7or 8 percent because it doesn't make any difference when we're thatclose to the origin.MR. PARTEE. What about 3 to 8 percent, Paul?MR. BLACK. That's a little sneaky.MR. WALLICH. At least that says that--MR. PARTEE. If it comes back down, why, we'll accept it.MR. WALLICH. Yes, that they're not taken to be quite soweighty.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are so many permutations andcombinations. What we have is a slight majority for 8 percent at themoment. Now, let's see whether this has affected where you are onrebasing or not. Let me just ask the Committee members; we'llprobably be 50/50. Now, all of this is going to have some kind oflanguage that depresses the importance of M1, probably somewhat shortof calling it a monitoring range, if I understand this [discussion]correctly. It won't be demoted all the way to a monitoring range butit will be deemphasized a bit.MR. PARTEE. With a certain amount of diffidence.-64-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. Who wants to rebase? One,two, three, four, five, six. [Secretary's note: Messrs. Balles,Black, Forrestal, Keehn, Martin, and Ms. Seger.] Did I count thatright? Yes, just what I figured.MR. BLACK. Well, you could break the tie, Mr. Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We don't have a tie.MR. MORRIS. Now ask about the other one.MR. PARTEE. Ask about the other one.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean: Who doesn't want to rebase?MS. HORN. If you want [to be] certain.MR. PARTEE. You definitely want to rebase?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think that some are indifferent.MR. RICE. Probably.MR. BLACK. There are 6, and if the Chairman is going withit, there would be 7.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who doesn't want to rebase?MR. WALLICH. Well, I'd go with rebasing provided we staywith the 4 to 7 percent.MR. PARTEE. The reason I asked is that I'm going to votewith you. I would prefer not rebasing; but if you want to rebase,I'll rebase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think this is the most crucialissue in the world. Let me ask the question somewhat differently.Who feels strongly that we should not rebase?MR. GUFFEY. I'm not a voting member, but I would prefer notto.MR. PARTEE. You could hardly be strong about this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who feels strongly that we should rebase?That was 3 or 4 members. We have more qualitative strength of feelingon that side. Now, we'll lose them all when we put the numbers on.The majority was for 4 to 8 percent if we rebased. Or we could makeit 3 to 8 percent. Does that help? Would people like to make it 3 to8 percent?MR. MELZER. That might give a little more room to toleratemuch slower growth toward the end of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody object to saying 3 to 8percent?MR. PARTEE. It gives you a little better average too.-65-7/9-10/85MR. BLACK. I don't object to the 3 percent; I object to the8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who's in favor of 3 to 8 percent, rebased?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's a landslide!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, I don't think we're going toget any combination that's better than that, but the floor is open foranybody who wants to try another number.MR. FORRESTAL. I said 4 to 7 percent originally, but I don'tfeel strongly enough about 3 percent on the down side; it seems to meto be fairly unimportant given the state of M1 at the moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a way we could face that, I suppose,is if the dollar were weak, quite weak, and we felt it necessary torespond to it. If we began getting low money supply numbers, we mightwant to say that's fine--with that big increase we had in the firsthalf of the year and the dollar weak, the economy is going to getbetter. That's the kind of conditions. It may be a very outside[chance], but I don't think it's absolutely impossible.MR. FORRESTAL. [Unintelligible] on the high side.MR. PARTEE. If this May-June increase is reversible, wecould get--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, just as a kind of natural reflux plussomething else. As soon as we want to be pretty restrictive we mightrun into a low number.MR. KEEHN. What's the message that moving the band from 3points to 5 points conveys to the markets?MR. PARTEE. Some uncertainty.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that probably is fair enough,isn't it, given all the uncertainty we've expressed? That seems to beconsistent.MR. KEEHN. It's a fairly heavy change.MR. AXILROD. That gives you approximately 7 percent for theyear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For what?MR. AXILROD. It makes it approximately 7 percent, 6.8percent, for the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does?MR. AXILROD. The 3 percent lower limit.MR. PARTEE. If we happen to get 3 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes. Therefore, this involves no change---66-7/9-10/85MR. PARTEE. I could buy the top with a 3 percent [lowerlimit].MR. BOEHNE. Well, there have been an awful lot of double-digit months followed by zero months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's very unlikely we would get 3percent, but I don't--MR. PARTEE. I do too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we had a combination of a desire totighten some plus a kind of natural reflux, I don't think it'sabsolutely impossible. I don't think it would be very hard from aJune base, but it's awfully hard from a second-quarter base, given howhigh we start out.MR. GUFFEY. But with only a 6-month horizon we ought to havea wider band. A 3 to 8 percent range would be a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that. I don't know what thearithmetic is, but to get 3 percent for the year we'd have no growthfrom now on, I guess.MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's pretty low.MR. AXILROD. It means after July it would be negative.MR. KEEHN. Then what do we do about the range for next yearif we have 3 to 8 percent for the rest of this year?MR. PARTEE. 3 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was 4 to 7 percent that we were talkingabout, wasn't it? Well, is there a preference for 3 to 8 percent asopposed to 4 to 8 percent?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, I have a preference.SPEAKER(?) Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've found a fair amount of supportfor 3 to 8 percent, all things considered. Does anybody have aproposal that they think will attract more support? We were going tokeep the other aggregates unchanged, right? Well, let's try somelanguage. Let me suggest something like this--and this is surely notwritten in concrete--looking at the language on page 20 [of theBluebook]: "In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at thismeeting reaffirmed ranges for the year of"--whatever they are for M2and M3. What is it, 6 to 9 percent--?MR. BERNARD. 6 to 9 percent for M2 and 6 to 9-1/2 percentfor M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"and 6 to 9-1/2 for M3. The associatedrange for total domestic nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed at"--7/9-10/85MR. BERNARD. 9 to 12 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"9 to 12 percent." Now, if we changethe base we would say: "The base for the M1 range was moved forward tothe second quarter of 1985."MR. PARTEE. And the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "--was moved forward to the second quarterof 1985 and established at 3 to 8 percent, tentatively, in theexpectation of a return of velocity growth toward more usual patterns,following a sharp decline of velocity during the first half of theyear." I would insert something like "the appropriateness of the newrange will continue to be reexamined in the light of evidence withrespect to economic and financial developments, including foreignexchange markets." That is an attempt to say that we'll look at thiswith some flexibility but not use the term "monitoring range." Andthen I would leave that last sentence, I think: "The Committee agreedthat growth in the aggregates generally may be in the upper parts oftheir ranges, depending on continuing developments with respect tovelocity and provided inflationary pressures remain subdued." Howdoes that package--MR. RICE. Would you read that last part about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me read the whole thing again.This has some preliminary boilerplate sentences, if you go back to getthe whole thing, to the effect that the Federal Open Market Committeewishes to do wonderful things. "In furtherance of these objectivesthe Committee at this meeting reaffirmed ranges for the year of 6 to 9percent for M2 and 6 to 9-1/2 percent for M3. The associated rangefor total domestic nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed at 9 to 12percent. With respect to M1, the base was moved forward to the secondquarter of 1985 and a range was established at 3 to 8 percent in theexpectation of a return of velocity growth toward more usual patterns,following a sharp decline in velocity during the first half of theyear. The appropriateness of the new range will continue to bereexamined in the light of evidence with respect to economic andfinancial developments, including foreign exchange markets. Moregenerally, the Committee agreed that growth in the aggregates may bein the upper parts of their ranges, depending on continuingdevelopments with respect to velocity and provided that inflationarypressures remain subdued."MR. AXILROD. "At an annual rate" [should be added] after the3 to 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Established at an annual rate of 3 to 8percent"? It sounds awkward. That's the way to make it sound lower:"established at 1-1/2 to 4 percent"! I guess we say "at an annualrate."MR. BLACK. I guess so.MR. PARTEE. It might take some a while to pick that up.-68-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, if we change the range for theyear we have to have a somewhat different sentence here, taken offfrom the other sentences in the directive. But how does that sound?MR. AXILROD. That would be followed I assume, Mr. Chairman,by that paragraph that we didn't repeat on the top of page 20? "TheCommittee understood that policy implementation would require..." andall that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is that?MR. AXILROD. It's on the top of page 20. That's the nextparagraph in the structure of the directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do we need that?MR. PARTEE. We had that, didn't we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We already have it.MR. AXILROD. You can take it out with the new wording.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I should think that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's in the short-term part. Why can't wejust take that out?MR. AXILROD. I think the way this is reworded, you certainlycan.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the way I've just written thissentence, what I inserted has some of that sense. The appropriatenessof the new range just applies to M1. If that general language seemsall right, this of course assumes that we rebase. It also containssome numbers. I don't think there's any dispute with the numbers forM2, M3, and debt. I don't know that anybody has any better number toput in for M1. Does anybody have anything further to say aboutwhether we rebase or not? If not, maybe we better vote on this.MR. BERNARD. This is for the 1985 ranges:Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black NoPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us go on to the 1986 ranges; I'm notsure I remember what we decided on before.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Could be good reason for that!-69-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there was agreement on M2, M3, anddebt. It would be: "The Committee agreed on tentative ranges ofmonetary growth measured from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourthquarter of 1986--". Well, the first question that arises is whetherwe want to leave M1 in that same sentence or deal with it separately.The numbers anyway are: 6 to 9 percent for M2; 6 to 9 percent for M3;and the associated range for debt was 8 to 11 percent. I think wepretty much agreed on that part. Now, whether we leave M1 in thissentence or not, I think we probably would want to say somethingseparately about M1. Wasn't that the sense of where we were? Or wecan just leave it. I don't know. What do you think? There was somedisagreement about whether it should be 4 to 8 percent or 4 to 7percent, with a majority at 4 to 7 percent.MR. PARTEE. Well, all of these are tentative. Is there someword like "tentative" in there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It starts out by saying "tentativeranges." I think that's the question: whether we somehow want to tryto indicate that M1 is even more tentative than usual.MR. PARTEE. Especially tentative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Agreed on tentative ranges for M2 and M3and an even more tentative range--"MR. WALLICH. I think there's something to be said forstaying with 3 to 8 percent and carrying that forward. But if wedon't, then at least the midpoint should be preserved so that 4 to 7percent is the logical thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 3 to 8 percent was not in theballpark when we discussed it earlier. I'm not saying we can't do itnow. I just have the feeling, in light of the earlier discussion,that if they're all left in the first sentence that way, which may beall right, we should put in a sentence saying that the Committeerecognized that the behavior of M1 velocity was subject to particularuncertainties that would require reexamination at the beginning of theyear or something. Does that thought make sense?MR. MARTIN. Yes, that makes sense; and then preserve the 3to 8 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It cuts the other way.MR. RICE. Or we can say 4 to 7 percent.MR. MARTIN. But I want to go from 3 to 8 percent to 4 to 7percent, you see, eventually. And I want to start at 3 to 8 percent.MR. KEEHN. Again, this is preliminary. What if we did go to3 to 8 percent now and 4 to 7 percent but use some caveats that if thenormal relationships didn't reemerge, we might consider a wider band?MR. MARTIN. But they haven't reemerged. Why startbackwards?MR. KEEHN. Well, they might.-70-7/9-10/85MR. MARTIN. They might, and then we can narrow the range.That's when you narrow the range--when you know something.MR. KEEHN. But in the interim, don't you think it would beuseful to have a message out there that we intend to continue movingtoward price stability? This is a way we can accomplish that.MR. PARTEE. Well, if we use 3 to 8 percent, it seems to methat it ought to be picked out of the first sentence and put in thesecond sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree.MR. MARTIN. Yes, I agree.MR. PARTEE. I must say that I think there's some merit tothat argument that we need a little more certainty before we collapsethe range.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, but we're not really collapsingit. The backdrop of even a tentative range for 1986 is going to bevery, very rapid growth in 1985. I do think that in a context inwhich we emphasize uncertainty, the direction of the M1 range and thetime to [unintelligible] should be set a notch lower.MR. PARTEE. The fact of the matter is that if we need the 8percent in M1 to keep the economy going, we're going to have 8 percentin M1 as a practical matter.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree.MR. PARTEE. But we [unintelligible] going to read the paperswith interest.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just wrote a sentence here. Wecould leave M1 in the same sentence at the beginning but then say:"With respect to M1 particularly, the Committee recognized thatuncertainties surrounding the recent behavior of velocity wouldrequire careful reappraisal of the target range at the beginning of1986."MR. MARTIN. Good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever number we put in there--. If weput in 3 to 8 percent, we can just say: "With respect to M1, thebreadth of the target range reflected the uncertainties surroundingvelocity, which would require--MR. MORRIS. We could preface it, Mr. Chairman, by saying inthe light of the fact that in 3 out of the past 4 years we have setaside or rebased the M1 target.MR. PARTEE. I don't think we want to say that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right: '82 and '83.'84 is the only one--MR. MORRIS.7/9-10/85MR. BALLES. Unless there's been a [unintelligible], thatdoesn't help.MR. AXILROD. In '81, we sort of ignored it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what number do you want to put infor M1?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 3 to 7 percent.MR. MARTIN. 3 to 8.MR. KEEHN. 3 to 7.MR. FORRESTAL. 3 to 7.MR. PARTEE. 3 to 8.MR. WALLICH. 3 to 7.MR. BLACK. 3 to 7.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3 to 7 percent, let me note, is[unintelligible] low.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 4 to 7 percent, then.MR. BLACK. 4 to 7.MS. SEGER. 3 to 8.MR. RICE. 4 to 7.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the choice is between 4 to 7percent and 3 to 8 percent. Who's for 3 to 8 percent? One, two,three, four. [Secretary's note: Messrs. Martin, Partee, and Wallich,and Ms. Seger.] Who's for 4 to 7 percent? And we'll see how many areindifferent here between them. One, two, three, four, five, six.[Secretary's note: Messrs. Balles, Black, Corrigan, Forrestal, Keehn,and Rice.] I guess that says we make it 4 to 7 percent. Do we leaveit in the same first sentence?MR. PARTEE. Particularly if it's 4 to 7 percent.MR. RICE. Yes.MR. MARTIN. I'd rather see it treated special.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's partly special now because we put ina special sentence. It's a great subtlety as to whether it's doublyspecial or half the same and half special. I don't detect any groundswell to take it out of the first sentence. So it would read: "For1986 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary growth,measured from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of1986, of 4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 9 for M2, and 6 to 9 for M3. Theassociated range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt wasprovisionally set at 8 to 11 percent for 1986. With respect to M1particularly, the Committee recognized that uncertainties surrounding-72-7/9-10/85recent behavior of velocity would require careful reappraisal of thetarget range at the beginning of 1986." We better change that lastsentence. "Moreover, in establishing ranges for next year, theCommittee also recognized that account would need to be taken ofexperience with institutional and depositor behavior in response tothe completion of deposit rate deregulation early in the year." Doesanybody want to suggest any modification of that language? Well, I'llget the question: Does that mean it's a monitoring range?MR. PARTEE. I should say the whole thing's up for grabsgiven the two sentences. They both suggest to me that it's possiblethat [unintelligible] things could be done for--MR. BALLES. I thought we were going to stop short of amonitoring range.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One way is to say that it couldbecome one but it is not.MR. MARTIN. I don't think you need it. I don't think youneed the word "monitoring."MR. PARTEE. I don't either. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, you don't need it here, but I will beasked. That's pretty fuzzy, so I will be asked: What do you mean?MR. PARTEE. It's pretty muddy. It might be one of thoseoptions.MR. KEEHN. It's too early to form a judgment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody has any improved language topropose here, I think we have 4 to 7 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6 to9 percent.MR. BERNARD. And 8 to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8 to 11 percent [on debt].MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger NoGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Now we get to the operationalpart. Forgetting about the language for the moment, what we weresaying I think fits this definition of "maintaining the existingdegree of pressure," to be interpreted arithmetically, I suppose, as$350 million plus. We have a week this week that started out with a-73-7/9-10/85high level of borrowings and we're saying we won't drive the averagelevel of borrowings down to $350 million and push a very easy moneymarket simply to meet that target. We make allowances on the up sidemore than on the down side, depending upon market developments.That's what we're doing initially. Heaven knows what happens from nowon. If the money supply continues to rise fast, that certainly is afactor pushing us toward a tighter direction. That's easy to say, butsuppose that is combined with a tone of worse business news; we'd bepretty cautious about it, I suppose. What we may have is a decidedweakening of the dollar here. We may have broken through this threemark level of the dollar and we may see a continuing decline, whichsooner or later probably has to come. But if it begins gettingmomentum, I think that's a factor on the tightening side. It's easyto say any one of these things singly. When they go in oppositedirections at the same time--MR. MARTIN. Which they will.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They probably will. I don't think we cansay much except that if this gets extreme enough, we will have aconsultation. We get a nice clear picture if the dollar is weak, theeconomy is strengthening and M1 is high; we clearly would be leaningon the tightening side. But if things don't all go in that direction,we have a bigger mess. I don't know what more we can say about it,really.MR. GUFFEY. That kind of description precludes easing,except when everything runs in the opposite direction that you justdescribed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a matter of degree. If theeconomy looks soft, the other aggregates are behaving, and M1 iswithin the general range here, we might ease, particularly if thedollar were strong. Apart from that, we don't have a lot of room foreasing anyway, on reserve pressures. [The Board] can easily make achange in the discount rate, but we can't get borrowings a heck of alot lower.MR. MARTIN. We can reduce the discount rate.MR. BLACK. Does this mean you would say somewhat lesserreserve restraint "might" be acceptable rather than "would," Mr.Chairman?MR. PARTEE. In the end of the second part of the sentenceI'd be tempted to say "would" instead of "might."MR. BLACK. Yes. I usually like "would" on both of them, butthis time I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to say "might" and "would"?MR. BLACK. That's what I would prefer.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] change the order. "Inthe implementation of policy for the immediate future the Committeeseeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve7/9-10/85conditions. This action is expected to be consistent with growth inM2 and M3 at annual rates of"--what is that?MR. BLACK. 7-1/2 percent and 7-1/4 percent, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we don't want 7-1/4 percent inthere.MR. PARTEE. Yes, make it 7-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Continuing: "of around 7-1/2 percentduring the period from June to September and with a substantialslowing of M1 to a rate of 5 to 6 percent." We could put that first,if you wanted to.MR. PARTEE. Consistent with what we've been saying, put itsecond.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Well, I just changedsomething. Instead of just putting that number in parallel [with theothers], I said "with a substantial slowing of M1 to a rate of 5 to 6percent." And then the rest of it would be "might" and "would."There's nothing else there that needs to be changed particularly, isthere?MR. PARTEE. Would you like to change that funds rate rangeto 9 percent at the top?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could. But where are we now? We'renot quite at the midpoint of a 6 to 9 percent range; well, we'repretty close to the midpoint. We could if you wanted to. I don't--MR. PARTEE. Certainly people would be getting excited if itran over 9 percent, wouldn't they?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, they surely would. I might even geta little excited if it went to 6 percent, too.MR. PARTEE. Well, it seems to me some evenness--. I dislike[unintelligible] of the extreme numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the only argument against that--and I don't even know that it's against it--is that a month from nowwhen this is published the press will play that as an easing, despitewhat we said earlier. I don't know if that's a big deal.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Better leave well enough alone.MR. MELZER. It was okay last month; it ought to be okay now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 10 percent.MR. PARTEE. We will have a telephone call if it gets to 10percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I would have one somewhat beforethat.-75-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If it gets to 10 percent, Chuck, youwon't need the telephone!MR. BLACK. Some other people might be calling!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it gets to 10 percent, I may not behere to make the telephone call! If nobody has any further commentsto make, we will vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles NoPresident Black NoPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger NoGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we seem to have worked our waythrough this. Maybe you ought to get some clean typed copies of this[directive], Mr. Secretary, and we'll leave the record open for anyeditorial changes.MR. PARTEE. Would you like us to reconsider our projections?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the normal course of events, youought to reconsider the projections at this point. I would remind youthat these are explicitly projections of members of the Committee andare presented on that understanding to the Congress. Theseprojections are closer than they usually are, I think. There isusually an array of different numbers. Under the assumptions made,some of these inflation numbers look high to me. I think we have asubstantial risk of inflation and worse when and if the dollar goesdown, but that's not the assumption of these projections. And we willhave a real mess on our hands if the dollar goes down sharply. Wewill have a real mess on our hands if it doesn't, which is unpleasant,and which is the measure of our difficulty. But I don't know how weturn around this trade balance without overtaxing at this point theindustrial side of the economy, apart from the direct effects of thelower exchange rate on higher prices. We haven't got 10 percent ofspare capacity and that's what it takes--probably more than 10 percent--to produce a trade balance in the course of three or four years.MR. TRUMAN. 2 percent of GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 2 percent of GNP. And manufacturing is 20percent of the GNP; it's more than that value added.MR. TRUMAN. We're presuming we'll get some of this out ofagriculture as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3 percent of GNP.SPEAKER(?). That's right.7/9-10/85-76-7/9-10/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three, or more than three. We face theprospect of some indefinite number of years ahead of having lowerdomestic consumption than GNP, lower domestic demand than GNP. Idon't know how you manage that except by budgetary policy and eventhen it's not very happy. Barring an equally violent shift in fiscalpolicy from what we've had, I literally don't know how it getsmanaged. If you try to do it by monetary policy, you tighten moneyand you hit the investment side of the economy--which is precisely theside that has to expand to meet the foreign demand. The tax reformbill hits the investment side of the economy and not the consumptionside of the economy. And you say some of it is in agriculture; Ithink part of the problem is agriculture. The major part of theproblem is that people aren't eating enough or the crops are too goodin the rest of the world, depending upon which way you want to put it.In a residual supply you have a little difficulty in selling to asurplus market.MR. TRUMAN. Not necessarily on quantity, but you might getsomething on price. That will help you too.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's a ways off too.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Kichline, have you heardanything about these normal GNP revisions--the historical revisionsthat come up later in the year--pointing in the direction of asubstantial downward revision in the deflator over the past severalyears?MR. KICHLINE. Well, the whole national income accountsstructure will be revised in a major way in December. The last majorone of this significance was in 1975.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.MR. KICHLINE. And they will be rebasing the deflators to1982 instead of 1972 dollars. That will make major changes. One areawhere they are struggling, of course, is in the computer area wherefor the last decade they held the price at $100 and the assumption isthat the right price is something like one-fifth of that. But whenthey rebase, a lot of these things will disappear. There is a hintthat they'll probably find more output along the way. There have beensome upward revisions to income. The IRS has had a program trying totrack down income growth and it appears that the numbers that IRS hascome up with are much higher than incorporated in the national incomeaccounts. So it appears at the moment that there will be some upwardrevisions to income in this set of revisions coming out. But it'sgoing to be so major, any of the numbers you now remember willdisappear as a result of the base changes and other things.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When does the next GNP, or whatever theycall it, number come out?MR. KICHLINE. The first preliminary? It comes out July18th, a week from tomorrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The day before I testify, so I'll knowwhat that is.-77-7/9-10/85MR. BOEHNE. What date do you testify?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. July 19th.MR. BOEHNE. The 19th?MR. BLACK. I thought it was the 17th.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 17th. Oh, it's the day after Itestify! I'll get asked what that figure is and I'll have to take astab. Who does that now? Who's the head of that?MR. PRELL. At BEA Allen Young is Acting Director.MR. KICHLINE. Allen Young.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a terrible day. I'll say I thinkit's really going to be low and then they'll raise it. They'lltestify the next day with it.MR. BOEHNE. Is it the House side first or the Senate side?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. House side first. I don't know whetherthe sandwiches are out there. Will somebody investigate?SPEAKER(?). They are out there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess the Open Market Committeemeeting is over. I declare it over.MR. KICHLINE. Mr. Chairman, the Board is scheduled to reviewdrafts of this Humphrey-Hawkins report on Friday morning, so if thereare revisions to projections we really would need them by tomorrowevening.SPEAKER(?). Here's one.MR. KICHLINE. Thank you.END OF MEETING-78-