Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 16, 2008  A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 16, 2008, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present were the following:  Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Ms. Duke Mr. Fisher Mr. Kohn Mr. Kroszner Ms. Pianalto Mr. Plosser Mr. Stern Mr. Warsh  Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee  Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively  Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Mr. Sheets, Economist Mr. Stockton, Economist  Messrs. Connors, English, Kamin, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Slifman, Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists  Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account  Mr. Cole, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors  Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Mr. Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors  Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Mr. Carlson, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Mr. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  Mr. Judd, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  Mr. Altig, Ms. Baum, Messrs. Rasche, Schweitzer, Sellon, and Tootell, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively  Mr. Krane, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  Mr. Chatterjee, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a list of the attendees at a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.


Passage number 2.
 Wolman, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on September 16, 2008 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Sorry for the late beginning.  The markets are continuing to experience very significant stresses this morning, and there are increasing concerns about the insurance company AIG.  That is the reason that Vice Chairman Geithner is not attending, and Chris Cumming will sit in his place. I want to turn in a minute to Bill Dudley for his usual report, and he will be able to give you more information about the situation.  There is another action item I would like to add, given what is happening, which is that there are very significant problems with dollar funding in other jurisdictions—in Europe and elsewhere.  After Bill makes his presentation and we have our discussion, I would like to put on the table a request for authorization for swap lines.  I prefer not to put a limit on it, so I know I’ve got my own bazooka here.  [Laughter]  There is a Foreign Currency Subcommittee that consists of myself, the Vice Chairman of the FOMC, and the Vice Chairman of the Board.  Again, after Bill’s discussion, I would like to discuss the possibility of giving us a temporary authority to use swap lines as needed. Before I turn to Bill, let me say one other thing.  Obviously, we started late.  We have a lot to talk about.  I would like—just for today, if you would indulge me—to condense our discussion to one round.  In your discussion, please include your tentative views on the policy decision.  Obviously, that is not ideal because you will not have heard everyone else’s views, but we will have an opportunity afterward for people to amend, revise, and give additional thoughts.  But in the interest of time, I think it would be more efficient at this time just to do it that way.  Without further ado, let me turn to Bill and ask for a report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 3.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Questions for Bill.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are questions for Bill and mentions President Rosengren.


Passage number 4.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just an amplification on the State Street situation.  My understanding is that no money actually went out.  There was $20 billion in withdrawals that came in late in the day.  They had a $7½ billion credit line.  State Street had enough collateral to do $7½ billion.  They were unwilling to do $20 billion.  They asked us what our position was, and we told them that they needed to make their own business decision in this case.  I haven’t heard what has happened this morning.  I assume that they are scrambling for funds.  But I would emphasize that a real concern is that there will be a run this week on money market funds because they may have to freeze the funds.  It is possible that they will break the buck, and this will be at organizations that don’t have sufficient capital to make people whole.  So I think that is a real concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting information and expressing concern about the situation.


Passage number 5.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only presents the name "President Plosser." It does not provide any context or information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just a question on the PDCF, about the expansion of the collateral base.  You said there was $42 billion, $28 billion of it was Lehman.  Do we know what kind of collateral Lehman posted.  Did they actually make use of the expanded options or not.  What was the nature of it, do you know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and information about the collateral base and the nature of the collateral posted by Lehman.


Passage number 7.
 MR. DUDLEY.  That was not actually even known until late yesterday evening.  It takes a while for us to get the reports from the clearing bank to be able to go through and tell you what the collateral is.  In terms of the Lehman collateral, they are not allowed to broaden the PDCF—they are basically bringing us the stuff they had on Friday.  It is also important to recognize that for Lehman we are demanding a lot higher collateral requirements on the non-Treasury and non-agency securities.  Their collateral haircut for those is 20 percent.  So the Fed is taking some credit exposure there, but we put in place on Friday—and we are continuing that—a 20 percent collateral haircut on the non-Treasury and non-agency stuff that is in the PDCF for that exposure to Lehman.  We think that’s about roughly three times the market level that investors had been charging previously, so I think that gives us a fair degree of protection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and explaining the collateral requirements for Lehman. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions President Lacker without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 9.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The higher collateral requirement, is that just Lehman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply thanking the chairman and asking a question about the higher collateral requirement.


Passage number 10.
 MR. DUDLEY.  At this time, I believe that is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Dudley, believes that something is right, but there is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  I know there was a lot of concern going in yesterday about the tri-party repo market, and I envisioned two scenarios and anything in between them.  One is tri-party lenders pulling away from particular names and moving their funds to other names.  Another, at the other extreme, would be tri-party repo lenders pulling away from the market as a whole.  If you look at the tri-party repo market from the point of view of the borrowers, that is a frightening scenario.  Then the lenders are going to do something with that money.  I have been curious about what they would do.  My understanding is that cash balances, in essentially deposit accounts, piled up at State Street and BONY yesterday and that they were able to do tri-party repos with some institutions that had been pulled away from.  Is that a valid observation.  What are the prospects for that providing some kind of resilience for the tri-party market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention and disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two scenarios, one where tri-party lenders pull away from particular names and move their funds to other names, and another where tri-party repo lenders pull away from the market as a whole. The speaker then asks for clarification and validation of their observation about cash balances and tri-party repos. This suggests that there is uncertainty and disagreement about the prospects and resilience of the tri-party market.


Passage number 12.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Well, I guess the first thing I would say is that you are absolutely right.  If investors pull away, they have to take their money somewhere.  It doesn’t disappear.  I think that the Primary Dealer Credit Facility has been shown to be pretty significant in providing support to this market.  If you look at what happened to Lehman, for example, even though Lehman was under extreme pressure on Friday, the tri-party repo investors stayed with Lehman on Friday night, which actually surprised me.  I think the reason that they stayed is that they knew they didn’t really have a lot of rollover risk.  As long as the broker-dealer didn’t file for bankruptcy over the weekend—and that was the risk they really were taking—the Federal Reserve and the PDCF would be there as the tri-party repo investor of last resort.  Lehman’s experience suggests to me that, if we can contain the broad parameters of this crisis so that it doesn’t spread much further, then we can keep the tri-party repo investors from bolting because they don’t really have a huge amount of risk as long as we are there behind them to take them out when their overnight obligation comes due the next day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with the statement made by someone else and providing an explanation for their agreement.


Passage number 13.
 MR. LACKER.  So, if I can just follow up, my understanding is that tri-party repos are exempt from the automatic stay, so it is not filing per se that is the risk.  It’s the risk that they don’t have the cash, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question seeking clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 14.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Well, I’m not sure about that.  I thought that there was an issue about broker-dealer filing.  I know that the clearing banks are certainly quite nervous about that eventuality, but I’m not a lawyer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Dudley indicates that he is not sure about a specific issue and mentions that the clearing banks are "nervous" about it. This suggests a level of disagreement or contention regarding the topic at hand.


Passage number 15.
   MR. PARKINSON.  The repos are exempt from the automatic stay provisions of the bankruptcy code.  But if Lehman had gone into SIPA liquidation, they could have been subject to a SIPA stay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the different provisions of bankruptcy code and SIPA liquidation without taking a stance on either.


Passage number 16.
 MR. LACKER.  All right.  Then a question about the TSLF.  Is it this program in which we provide Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question being asked.


Passage number 17.
 MR. DUDLEY.  We give them Treasuries, and they give us other stuff.  You know, this will also probably be helpful this week in providing more Treasuries to the market.  There was a tremendous amount of Treasury fails yesterday.  So this mechanism does two things.  It takes illiquid collateral from the dealers, and it also supplies a lot of Treasuries to the market, which should help improve the market function in Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Dudley, is providing information about the effect of a certain mechanism on the market for Treasuries.


Passage number 18.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  Bill, would you be able to talk a bit about the need for swaps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Bill if he can talk about the need for swaps.


Passage number 19.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I have just sketchy details based on a phone call, so this may not be quite right.  But my understanding is that this morning Norway put in place a facility by which they are going to offer their banks dollars, up to $5 billion, on a one-week term—sort of an open facility.  The fact that Norway is doing this suggests that the situation has broadened quite a bit further because this is the first time that we have heard about Norway in this story, except for maybe some exposures to the Icelandic banks. I have had some conversations with my counterparts at the ECB this morning—this is at a staff level, so I can’t really say what would happen if you were to take this up the chain of command.  But certainly, at least on a preliminary basis, there is quite a bit of interest in having a similar facility for the ECB, which would not be a TAF loan type of facility but more of an open facility where European banks could come and get dollars.  This would reassure people that dollar liquidity was available in Europe throughout the European day.  My advice to you is that this is probably a good idea in this environment because we are seeing that the lack of dollar liquidity in Europe is really having a feedback effect on people’s willingness to do business with one other in the broader markets.  I think we should be open to doing this with the ECB and perhaps with the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan as well—at least have the ability to do it should it prove necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and advice based on their understanding and conversations with others.


Passage number 20.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You had a two-hander, Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "You had a two-hander, Governor Kohn" does not contain any contradictory or opposing ideas. It seems to be a simple observation or statement.


Passage number 21.
 MR. KOHN.  Just to note that we did have a discussion of foreign exchange swaps in the Committee on the Global Financial System a week and a half ago, and the general consensus was that these had been very handy in damping pressures in money markets—dollar funding markets in particular—when the foreign exchange swap market isn’t working very well in Europe and in Switzerland.  The central banks around the table, which are all the major central banks, are quite supportive of expanding the facility.  We were talking about putting something on a standby basis for use in situations just like this.  So the other central banks view this as very helpful to them in containing pressures in their own markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that central banks are supportive of expanding the facility and view it as helpful in containing pressures in their own markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
 MR. DUDLEY.  The Bank of Japan has requested at the staff level to set up a facility that would be on the shelf for year-end because the Japanese are quite worried that their banks are going to face a dollar funding problem at year-end.  Now, this preceded the recent crisis, so even before this last week they were concerned that the Japanese banks could potentially have problems, and they were interested in exploring with us having a facility in place.  We were actually going to pursue this, and I hope we will have more at the October FOMC meeting if not sooner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The disagreement or contention is between the Bank of Japan and the speaker (Mr. Dudley) about the need for a facility to address potential dollar funding problems in Japanese banks at year-end. While the Bank of Japan is worried and requested the facility, Mr. Dudley seems to express hesitation by saying they were "going to pursue this" rather than fully committing to it.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Bill, if we were going to take action today, what would you recommend in terms of counterparties.  Should we say an unlimited amount.  Should we specify an amount.  Can we leave the time open.  What are your recommendations on all those dimensions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage presents multiple questions regarding recommendations on different dimensions. However, there is no explicit contention or disagreement being expressed in the passage. It appears to be a straightforward inquiry seeking Bill's input and recommendations.


Passage number 24.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Certainly you want to make it pretty broad.  You want to make it to the Bank of England, Switzerland, the ECB, the Bank of Japan, potentially Canada.  I would leave it to their discretion if they would like to participate.  I would make the offer to them; and if they want to participate, then we should be willing to do that.  In terms of size, I think it is really important that you don’t create notions of capacity limits because the market then can always try to test those.  Either the numbers have to be very, very large, or it should be open ended.  I would suggest that open ended is better because then you really do provide a backstop for the entire market.  As we’ve seen with the PDCF, if you provide a suitably broad backstop, oftentimes you don’t even actually need to use it to any great degree.  So I think that should be the strategy here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Dudley, is expressing his own opinions and suggestions without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about President Lacker's stance or opinions on any particular issue, so there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 26.
 MR. LACKER.  Remind me again how big the European system of central banks’ own outright holdings of dollar balances are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a reminder of the size of the European system of central banks' own outright holdings of dollar balances.


Passage number 27.
 MR. DUDLEY.  European banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. It only mentions the name "Mr. Dudley" and "European banks" without indicating any conflicting ideas or disputed topics.


Passage number 28.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The word "Yes" in this context indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but it does not provide any specific information or evidence about the nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 29.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I don’t know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Dudley, without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 30.
 MR. LACKER.  Central banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only introduces a person's name, Mr. Lacker, and states that he is associated with central banks.


Passage number 31.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Do you mean in terms of their dollar foreign exchange reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for clarification about the term "dollar foreign exchange reserves."


Passage number 32.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  The ECB—they all have their own dollar reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the dollar reserves of different institutions.


Passage number 33.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I don’t have the numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have the numbers, without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 34.
 MR. SHEETS.  I believe that number is about $180 billion of dollar reserves in the euro system.  The ECB itself has control of only a fraction of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the amount of dollar reserves in the euro system and clarifying that the ECB only has control over a smaller portion of that amount.


Passage number 35.
 MR. LACKER.  These are held at individual national central banks, so our swap lines to them aren’t approaching that level yet, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 36.
  MR. DUDLEY.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 37.
 MR. LACKER.  Note here a sense of discomfort with our lending them dollars that they already have and so our serving as a substitute for their mobilizing their own dollar reserves for this purpose.  Obviously, the demand could swamp their own reserves, and at that point I would feel differently about this.  But my understanding is that the distribution within the European system of central banks is uneven, and in some sense this just provides them with a way to circumvent negotiating how those dollars would be distributed from different central banks to different private-sector banks within their own system.  Broadly, I’m uncomfortable with our playing that role.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a sense of discomfort and disagreement expressed in the passage regarding the idea of lending dollars to European central banks and serving as a substitute for their own mobilized dollar reserves. The speaker expresses discomfort about the distribution of dollars within the European system and suggests that this lending could circumvent the negotiation process between different central banks and private-sector banks within their own system. Therefore, there is contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Whether it’s sensible or not, the ECB has made a pretty strong distinction with us between their foreign exchange reserves and their dollars that they use in these operations.  They really want to keep those segregated.  They want, to some extent, to represent this as being a collaborative effort with the United States as opposed to something they are taking on their own behalf.  From their perspective—actually President Poole raised the same issue earlier on, and we had this discussion—they seem to put a lot of value on having a distinct swap line, which symbolizes the cooperation and coordination of the two central banks as opposed simply to using their own reserves.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing the perspective and actions of the ECB without expressing any differing opinions.


Passage number 39.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I was going to say that we had this discussion before.  We did approve the swap lines.  I wonder if you could just summarize for us what you view as the downside risk to our doing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is asking the chairman to summarize the downside risk of a previously approved action, indicating a request for information rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I don’t think there are any significant downside risks.  There are operational issues that Bill Dudley and his team have to worry about.  If we extend funds to the Europeans, which they then relay to their banks, it affects our reserve positions and affects the management of the federal funds rate and requires sterilization.  That’s an operational issue.  I suppose, if there were really very large draws, it would begin to affect some of these balance sheet constraint concerns that we have.  I think that is not an entirely separate issue, but it is certainly one that we are looking at in terms of trying to get interest on reserves and those other kinds of measures. Again, my expectation is that having the facility would in part provide some confidence over and above how much we actually extend.  So I guess the operational issues and the further draw on the balance sheet would be the downside, but to me, it seems to be a relatively straightforward step—one we’ve done in the past and one that has the additional benefit of indicating global cooperation on these issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the potential operational issues and downside risks associated with extending funds to the Europeans.


Passage number 41.
   MR. DUDLEY.  In principle, we could talk to the ECB and other central banks about having the rate on these swap lines be at a slight penalty relative to normal times to try to mitigate the potential reserve impact.  I mean, it doesn’t have to be at 2 percent or 2¼ percent for overnight funds—it could be somewhat north of that.  But if we have a credible backstop, then it should calm the markets, and then the backstop should not be used.  If we have a backstop and it actually is used, that is presumably because market conditions are horrific.  So in that environment, you could argue that the reserve-management things are very second order concerns in some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not have contention or disagreement. It presents a suggestion and explains the reasoning behind it.


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments.  All right.  Then I’d like to propose that the FOMC delegate to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee an unspecified authority, in terms of amount, to offer swaps to foreign central banks as needed to address liquidity pressures in those other jurisdictions.  Those decisions will be made, again, by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee in consultation with the Open Market Desk.  We would keep the FOMC closely informed, and we would revisit and discuss this issue again in October.  Is that an acceptable resolution.  Any amendments to that.  Further discussion, comments, or concerns.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a proposal and asking if it is acceptable, and then asking for any amendments or further discussion.


Passage number 43.
 MR. STERN.  Yes.  I am in favor of this.  I just wonder how the marketplace will look at the open-ended nature of this because typically we have dollar magnitudes associated with swaps.  It may all go relatively smoothly; on the other hand, it may raise questions about exactly what we think the issues are here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stern expresses his support for the idea but raises a question about how the marketplace will perceive the open-ended nature of it. However, this does not indicate disagreement or contention with the overall proposal.


Passage number 44.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Well, I think we are going to have discussions with our foreign counterparts to decide what the right strategy is.  I think right now it is better to have it open ended.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Dudley is simply expressing his opinion and suggesting that discussions with foreign counterparts should take place to determine the appropriate strategy. He believes that keeping the approach open-ended is currently a better choice.


Passage number 45.
  MR. STERN.  That’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stern's response of "That's fine" indicates his agreement or acceptance of something.


Passage number 46.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we have discussions with our counterparties—we won’t announce anything today, I would assume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is suggesting that they do not engage in discussions with their counterparties, and they assume that no announcements will be made today.


Passage number 47.
 MR. DUDLEY.  No, I think they have to take it up the chain of command, just as we do here.  So it’s going to take probably a day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Dudley is simply expressing his opinion on the matter.


Passage number 48.
 MR. KOHN.  This would come out in the minutes for this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is discussing the content of the meeting minutes and how certain information would be included in them.


Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  We’ll announce something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "right" indicates agreement and there is no indication of disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 50.
 MR. STERN.  But I assume there will be an announcement at some point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple assumption made by Mr. Stern.


Passage number 51.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course.  When would we announce this measure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 52.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I think it would be after we’ve had a chance—I mean, I think we have a lot of work to do with our foreign counterparties.  This was basically raised to me this morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Dudley is expressing his opinion and stating that there is work that needs to be done with foreign counterparties, without any conflicting viewpoint being mentioned.


Passage number 53.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  So this is all conditional on agreements and discussions with other counterparties.  We will come up with a joint communication announcement strategy.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is mentioning that their plan is conditional on agreements and discussions with other parties, and they will work on creating a joint communication announcement strategy. The mention of "President Plosser" does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 54.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I just have one clarification.  I have no basic objection to this.  I wonder whether or not, if the FOMC is going to delegate the decision to this group, it is sort of an open-ended delegation to do this on an ongoing basis.  Does it make sense to define a period of time for which this open-ended delegation is appropriate—that it would expire and would have to be renewed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is seeking clarification and suggesting a possible improvement to the suggestion being discussed.


Passage number 55.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Yes.  We have authorities extending right now to January 30 for a lot of these facilities, so that would certainly be a reasonable time frame, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information and expressing their opinion about a time frame.


Passage number 56.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Existing facilities go to January 31, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is being presented as a question, seeking confirmation or clarification about the date.


Passage number 57.
 MR. MADIGAN.  January 30.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 58.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  January 30.  Would that be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a date and asks if it is acceptable without expressing or implying any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 59.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  I think it ought to have a termination point so that, if we wanted to renew it, we would be free to do so, but it wouldn’t last forever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is expressing his opinion that a policy should have a termination point, allowing for renewal if desired, but not lasting indefinitely.


Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "of course" is more often used to express agreement or acknowledgement, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 61.
 MR. KOHN.  One more clarification, Mr. Chairman—this is intended for G-10 central banks, to include the ECB.  Just to be clear, if somebody asks, this is not to give to central banks of emerging-market economies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the intended recipients of the document are G-10 central banks, including the ECB, and explicitly states that it is not meant for central banks of emerging-market economies. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 62.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I presume so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 63.
 MR. KOHN.  I think we should presume so.  If the other were to happen, we would come back to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn is expressing his opinion that they should presume a certain outcome. There is no opposing viewpoint or debate present.


Passage number 64.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Yes, this is about the major financial centers and the ability of large banks that operate globally to obtain dollar funding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states information about the major financial centers and the ability of large banks to obtain dollar funding.


Passage number 65.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  So I amend the proposal to terminate on January 30.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a proposal to terminate something on January 30.


Passage number 66.
 MR. LACKER.  Could I hear a little more about the benefits of an open-ended commitment.  All of our programs have been capped at a certain size.  You said something about “test the limits,” and it makes me think of foreign exchange regimes.  What kind of scenario do you have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker simply requests further information about the benefits of an open-ended commitment and asks for clarification on the concept of "test the limits."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 67.
   MR. DUDLEY.  I think a lot of the programs that we have are actually open ended.  The discount window is open ended in the sense that it’s limited only by the amount of collateral that the banks post there.  The Primary Dealer Credit Facility is open ended in that it is limited only by the size of the tri-party repo system.  My point here is that, if foreign banks worry about capacity limits, even having a large program could in principle not be sufficient in extremis.  But if the program is open ended, the rollover risk problem goes away.  If I lend you more dollars today, I don’t have to worry about getting those dollars back because I always know that the facility is there.  So it’s really the elimination of the ability to flatten out your position if you need to in terms of your dollar exposures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially presents the view that the programs are open-ended, suggesting that they have no capacity limits. However, he later contradicts himself by acknowledging that even a large program may not be enough in extreme situations. This contradiction implies a disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s not open ended in the sense that it is not an open window that anybody can come to and take.  It just gives us the authority to adjust the amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact about the nature of something without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
 MR. LACKER.  So you will set a definite amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will certainly negotiate with the other central banks and tell them what we’re doing now.  But we want to have the flexibility in case of an emergency to respond, and we also don’t want to communicate to the markets somehow that we have a hard limit that is not going to be changed.  That would be potentially bad for confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the intention to negotiate with other central banks and maintain flexibility in case of emergencies, while also avoiding a fixed limit that could harm market confidence.


Passage number 71.
 MR. LACKER.  But we will communicate a program size.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker simply states that they will communicate a program size.


Passage number 72.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I think that remains to be discussed with our counterparties.  I think we need to have discussions about what would be most effective.  Would a big size that’s fixed in quantity be most effective.  Would an open limit be most effective.  I think we have to have those discussions.  I think the important thing here—and what we’re going for—is credibility.  In a crisis you need enough force—more force than the market thinks is necessary to solve the problem—and we’re going to have to have discussions to determine how much is enough force.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that further discussions are needed with counterparties to determine the most effective approach for dealing with a crisis and ensuring credibility.


Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it is mostly a communication issue.  Anything else.  All right.  Do you want to call the roll on this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the issue at hand is primarily related to communication. The phrases "Anything else" and "All right" indicate that the conversation is transitioning smoothly without any conflict. The question "Do you want to call the roll on this one?" suggests a desire for organization or participation rather than disagreement.


Passage number 74.
   MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 75.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We need a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a standalone statement without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 76.
   MR. FISHER.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "MR. FISHER. Second" does not contain any conflicting or contradictory claims.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude after receiving something.


Passage number 78.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Can we read the resolution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The passage only mentions Mr. Plosser asking if the resolution can be read.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The resolution is to provide to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee the authority to enter into swap agreements with the foreign central banks as needed to address strains in money markets in other jurisdictions.  This will be done in cooperation with the Open Market Desk and in consultation with those other central banks.  The amounts are unlimited in principle, but the decisions will be made by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee as needed and as appropriate for the particular circumstances.  The FOMC is providing this authority through January 30.  It will, of course, be open to discussion at any meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is describing a resolution and the procedures involved in providing authority for swap agreements with foreign central banks. There is no indication of disagreement among the parties involved.


Passage number 80.
 MR. PLOSSER.  As actions are taken, presumably you’ll circulate the outcomes of these decisions to this Committee in advance of any announcements..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Instead, Mr. Plosser is making a statement or request about the communication process for sharing the outcomes of decisions with the Committee.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course.  All right.  Let’s take a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrases "of course" and "all right" indicate agreement or acceptance. "Let's take a vote" suggests a collective decision-making process.


Passage number 82.
 MS. DANKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without more information.


Passage number 83.
   Chairman Bernanke   Yes First Vice President Cumming  Yes Governor Duke   Yes President Fisher   Yes Governor Kohn   Yes Governor Kroszner   Yes President Pianalto   Yes President Plosser   Yes President Stern   Yes Governor Warsh   Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Brian, have you circulated the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a list of names and their agreement or acknowledgement of a statement.


Passage number 84.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Everybody should have it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Madigan is simply affirming that everyone should have something without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Has everyone a copy of that.  Good.  Before we get started on that, I just want to comment that we may want to say something in the statement about financial conditions, but we’ll come back to that later.  We need also now a vote to ratify the domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is only asking if everyone has a copy and then making a comment and requesting a vote.


Passage number 86.
  MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Kohn.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any objections.  Okay.  Thank you.  Let’s turn now to the economic situation.  Dave Stockton and Nathan Sheets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
  MR. SHEETS.  I also will be very brief in summarizing economic developments abroad.  Indeed, I would just like to make six very brief points.  The first one is that the incoming data we’ve received since the last Greenbook for the foreign economies have been extraordinarily soft.  Indeed, we’ve marked down our forecast or projection of the second quarter by a full percentage point.  The data also suggest that we should carry forward a fair amount of that softness at least through the next year.  So our foreign outlook is much softer than it was before.  The second point is that this softening outlook in our view has been a key factor that has contributed to further sizable declines in oil and commodity prices.  This morning, oil prices were trading around $92 a barrel, which was down another $25 a barrel from where we were at the time of the last meeting.  The third point is that this deteriorating foreign outlook also seems to have triggered something of a reassessment in currency markets.  Since your last meeting, the dollar has strengthened nearly 5 percent in broad nominal terms.  In our view, what happened in currency markets was that the markets had priced in the expectation that the foreign economies would remain quite resilient in the face of a slowing in the United States.  Now with the incoming data over the past couple of months, it is becoming clearer and clearer that the U.S. slowing is going to have a marked effect on these foreign economies, and this has shifted the relative attractiveness of the dollar and supported the appreciation that we’ve seen over the last couple of months.  The fourth point is that, in a number of emerging market economies, we’ve seen a resurgence of certain sorts of financial vulnerabilities.  We’ve seen across really a broad array of these economies rising external debt spreads and rising CDS spreads.  We’ve seen falling equity prices and, for a number of these economies, downward pressures on their currencies.  On that last point, a number of the Asians have been intervening in the foreign exchange market over the intermeeting period but have actually been intervening to try to prevent their currencies from depreciating, which is a marked change from what we’ve seen in the last couple of years.  The fifth point is that the surprisingly strong performance of U.S. exports that we’ve seen appears to have continued through July.  After the Greenbook went to bed, we got the July trade data, and they continue to point to a fair amount of strength in the export sector.  It was particularly strong in the auto sector, but it was a broad-based strength through July.  Nevertheless, our view is that, given the rise in the dollar and the softening outlook for foreign growth, we’re very likely to see some slowing in export growth going forward.  The final point I’d like to mention is that, also late last week after the Greenbook went to bed, we received data on import prices.  These data, really for the first time in a long time, showed a marked deceleration in both material-intensive goods import prices and finished goods import prices.  Our forecast for a long time has called for a deceleration in import prices in line with the projected flattening out of commodity prices and a projected flattening out of the dollar.  Now it seems that we’re at a point at which all those things that have been incorporated into our forecast but we haven’t had a lot of evidence for are starting to materialize.  We have the dollar flattened out and, indeed, somewhat stronger than in the last Greenbook.  We have lower paths for commodity prices, and then the data that we recently received showed an actual deceleration in core import prices, which gives us some confidence that perhaps the rise in those import prices has peaked.  I’ll stop there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing economic developments abroad and presenting information and observations without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 89.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Dave and Nathan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there are questions for Dave and Nathan. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 90.
 MR. FISHER.  Could I ask just one question, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 91.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes the name "President Fisher" and does not provide any context or information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 92.
 MR. FISHER.  Could you interpret for us the Bank of China’s cut in the bank lending rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply asking for an interpretation of the Bank of China's cut in the bank lending rate. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 93.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes.  Yesterday the PBOC cut its main policy rate 27 basis points.  I guess they felt that 26 would not have been enough and 28 would have been too much.  [Laughter]  And 27 was just the right number.  I’d say a couple of thoughts were there.  One important point is that inflation in China has decelerated significantly.  In the spring they were looking at twelve-month inflation rates of around 8.3 percent.  The latest reading for August was 4.9 percent.  So it’s clearly on a decelerating trajectory.  That has been driven by a marked decline in food prices.  Earlier this year, food prices were moving up at over a 20 percent rate, and now it is about 10 percent.  So the deceleration in prices; some concerns about where activity is going, particularly in the aftermath of the Olympics; and signs of slowing external demand have given them the scope they need to cut policy rates.  Besides the cut in monetary policy, we’re also hearing reports that the authorities are poised to implement fiscal stimulus if that’s necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis without expressing any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 94.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Three is a lucky number in China.  Don was going to tell you that 3 cubed is 27.  [Laughter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides factual information about the number three being considered lucky in China and the mathematical calculation of 3 cubed being 27. The laughter in brackets indicates that the statement elicited amusement, but it does not imply any disagreement.


Passage number 96.
 MR. KOHN.  He was also going to wonder, Mr. Chairman, whether we needed to harness the mystical powers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 97.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we have good feng shui here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker believes their current location has good feng shui.


Passage number 98.
 MR. SHEETS.  The science of monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the science of monetary policy.


Passage number 99.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other deep questions for our colleagues.  I’m a little surprised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that they are surprised and asking if there are any other deep questions for their colleagues.


Passage number 100.
   MR. PLOSSER.  We’re all trying to be brief, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply acknowledging the need for brevity in their discussion.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Everyone has been very brief.  I’m shocked.  [Laughter]  My proposal, which I can be argued out of, is to do one round, if that’s acceptable.  Please indicate your preliminary view on policy, and you will have another opportunity to refine and extend your views.  Is that acceptable with everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a proposal and asking for the audience's opinion on it.


Passage number 102.
  MR. KROSZNER.  Should we have Brian’s presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting or expressing the need for Brian's presentation.


Passage number 103.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, of course.  I was about to turn to that.  If that’s acceptable, let’s turn to Brian and have your discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the previous statement and suggesting a discussion with Brian.


Passage number 104.
MR. MADIGAN.2  I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives and Trial Run Survey Results.”  The results of the survey are shown in exhibit 2.  In the interest of time, I will not cover them this morning.  The Subcommittee on Communications plans to be in touch with the Committee on this issue over the upcoming intermeeting period.  The first page of the package reproduces the version of table 1 that you received yesterday afternoon.  This version includes three policy alternatives.  As in the Bluebook, alternative B would leave the stance of policy unchanged at this meeting, and alternative C would involve a 25 basis point firming today.  However, alternative A now entails a 25 basis point policy easing rather than the unchanged funds rate that was specified in the Bluebook version of this alternative.I will begin by discussing alternative C.  The discussion at your last meeting suggested that you generally saw the next move in policy as likely to be a firming, a point that was explicit in the minutes of the meeting.  Even though market volatility and financial strains have increased notably in recent weeks, you might view those developments as having only limited implications for the economic outlook and hence see economic fundamentals as continuing to suggest that policy should soon be firmed.  Inflation has been well above the rates that Committee members judge as appropriate for the longer run, and despite lower oil prices and greater slack in labor markets, there remains considerable uncertainty about how soon and how much core inflation will slow.  In these circumstances, you may believe that a firming of policy is appropriate.Under the version of alternative B distributed yesterday evening, the Committee would hold the target funds rate constant at this meeting, and the statement would suggest that the Committee sees the risks to growth and inflation as roughly balanced.  You may believe that this combination is appropriate for this meeting if your modal outlook for the economy has not changed much since the last meeting and if you judge that the upside risks to inflation have diminished, given the sharp drop in energy prices, the decline in indicators of inflation expectations, and the greater economic slack implied by the recent unexpectedly sharp jump in the unemployment rate.  You might also believe that the downside risks to growth have increased as a result of the recent increase in financial strains.  But at the same time, you may want  2 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). to let the dust settle a bit before concluding that these developments warrant an adjustment in your policy stance.  In particular, you may think there is a good chance that the latest enhancements to the Federal Reserve’s special liquidity facilities will help keep markets functioning and mitigate the risks to growth.   Relative to the Bluebook version, the language of alternative B has been revised in three material ways.  First, B2 now notes that “strains in financial markets have intensified.”  Second, the clause “some indicators of inflation expectations have been elevated” has been dropped from B3 in view of the recent declines in inflation compensation and survey measures of inflation expectations.  Finally, the first sentence of B4 has been revised to suggest that the Committee now sees the significant risks to growth and inflation as roughly balanced.  Given market participants’ expectation that the funds rate could trade soft to the target for a time in light of recent developments, gauging exactly what is built into markets for the outcome of today’s meeting is difficult.  But earlier this morning, market prices appeared to incorporate high odds of at least a 25 basis point easing today or possibly more.  Thus markets might well see a decision to keep the funds rate constant and to make no appreciable change to the language of the statement as signaling less concern about financial developments than they anticipated.If you saw recent developments as significantly boosting the downside risks to growth or noticeably lowering the modal outlook, you might consider easing the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting, as in alternative A.  The rationale language for this action would begin by noting that strains in financial markets have increased significantly and would go on to indicate that the policy action should help to promote moderate growth over time.  The Committee would cite the recent decline in energy and other commodity prices and the increased slack in resource utilization as factors that are expected to foster a moderation of inflation.  The risk assessment would indicate that “the downside risks to growth have intensified, but the upside risks to inflation remain a concern to the Committee.”  With a policy easing largely built into markets, shorter-term interest rates would likely decline modestly in response to such an action, depending on how much is built in, or they might be little changed.  As the Chairman indicated earlier in the meeting, adjustments to the statement could be considered in light of the further volatility in markets over the past day.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a presentation of different policy alternatives and their rationales.


Passage number 105.
  MR. DUDLEY.  If I could add a few thoughts on market expectations about this meeting—I think it looks as though easing is priced in for two reasons.  One, dealers do expect the federal funds rate to trade soft as we add excess reserves, so I would not take the softness in the September federal funds futures contract as indicative of necessarily expecting an easing.  Two, I think it is important to recognize that the rates embodied in those fed fund futures contracts are means not modes.  So I would characterize the market expectation as either that things get very, very bad and the FOMC cuts rates significantly or that the FOMC does nothing. I think that actually a 25 basis point cut is probably the least likely outcome that the market anticipates.  As evidence of this, a couple of dealers yesterday did change their forecast to a 50 basis point rate cut.  I’m not aware of anybody who has changed to 25.  Probably people like that are out there.  I know that my colleagues at Goldman Sachs, where I used to work, are saying that they think the FOMC is going to keep rates unchanged today but, if they were to move, it would be 50.  That gives you a sense that it’s really a bimodal kind of view and that putting different probabilities on 50 and zero gives you some easing priced into the federal funds rate futures market.  So I think the consensus view still in the marketplace is that the Fed probably will not cut rates today.  That would be a disappointment to a degree because there’s some probability placed on the idea that the Fed might do 50, but that’s how I would interpret what’s priced into the markets today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing market expectations and interpretations.


Passage number 106.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Fisher without providing any context or information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 107.
 MR. FISHER.  Could I ask for a little clarification here.  The indication of sentiment is important, is it not, in terms of expectations from the population that you’re talking about.  The signaling of our direction would be important here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is seeking clarification and suggesting that indicating sentiment and signaling direction are important.


Passage number 108.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Well, I think the market participants would gain some comfort to the extent that the Federal Reserve as an institution indicates concern about what’s going on in the financial markets.  But in some ways the Desk has already signaled that concern by its intervention, so I’m not sure that additional indications are needed.  But in the language you might want to indicate to market participants that, if things were to materially worsen in the financial markets, the Committee might revisit the issue of where the federal funds rate should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement where Mr. Dudley is expressing his thoughts and reservations about providing additional indications of concern in the financial markets.


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just on the issue of trading soft, though, the October-December has also come down, and there is certainly some shift in the actual policy expectation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the October-December trading soft has decreased and there seems to be a shift in policy expectation.


Passage number 110.
 MR. DUDLEY.  That is true.  I think on Friday the mood was basically that the funds rate was going to be flat for a long time.  Probabilities placed on either easing or tightening were quite low, and since then the probability of easing has gone up fairly significantly.  But I think it’s hard to interpret because it’s really not about 25 versus zero.  It’s really about zero versus 50 or maybe even 100 as you look out longer term.  Either the financial system is going to implode in a major way, which will lead to a significant further easing, or it is not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their analysis and interpretation of the situation.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  All right.  If not, let’s begin with President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the conversation will begin with President Lockhart. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 112.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I finalized the thinking that went into my prepared remarks late last week, which seemed like a good idea at the time.  But I should follow the philosophy of Charlie Brown, who I think said, “Never do today what you can put off until tomorrow.”  [Laughter]  Obviously, we can’t ignore the events of the weekend and yesterday’s financial markets.  So late yesterday I reviewed the views that I shaped last week and tried to ground them in an assessment of whether the outlook for the real economy has changed materially, whether the balance of risks has been altered, and whether, in my opinion, we must reintroduce a risk-management approach and consider taking out more insurance.   With that as prologue, let me make just a couple of comments on regional soundings from the last couple of weeks.  Anecdotal reports from the Sixth District support the view that the economy is quite weak but not deteriorating markedly.  The CFO of a large retailer of housing-related goods said that they think they see a bottom forming.  I am also starting to hear some reports that housing markets feel as though they are beginning to stabilize; but, really, it is a little too early to say that a bottom has formed in any of our housing markets.  My overall sense from District contacts and our surveys is of an economy that is quite weak, with no clear trend evident. Turning to the national outlook, like most forecasts, my view on the likely path for the economy has not changed materially since our August meeting.  I see nothing in the data and hear nothing from District reports that alters my views that the second half will be very weak.  I expect this weak period to be followed by a slow recovery gathering in 2009, but the foundation of a recovery starting around year-end or early 2009 may be far from solid.  The contraction of credit availability that is confirmed by both surveys and anecdotal evidence could deepen as financial institutions face tight liquidity and difficulty recapitalizing.  A protracted credit crunch would likely operate as a substantial drag on the economy. Consistent with the Greenbook, I expect some near-term improvement in headline inflation, as we saw this morning, some near-term deterioration of core inflation measures, and inflation moving in the right direction later this year and into next year.  That said, one director said that he and his particular industry had seen no moderation of price increases up to this date.  I am comforted somewhat that the upward drift in some inflation expectation measures appears to have been reversed.  In addition, my staff has been monitoring revisions to inflation forecasts of professional forecasters, which also seem to suggest that concerns about accelerating inflation have abated somewhat. Regarding the balance of risks in the economy, I am concerned that the downside risks to growth may be gathering force, as evidenced by the weakening personal consumption and retail sales data, the weakening economies of export partners, and the delicate state of the financial markets.  At the same time, I perceive that there is significant risk that the current disinflationary environment may fail to bring core inflation down to anything resembling acceptable levels for the longer term.  Adding up all of this, I perceive a very rough balance of risks that could break either way in coming months.   My view of the appropriate policy path is consistent with the Greenbook—that the fed funds rate target will remain stable at or close to the current level for several months going into 2009.  My preference is to hold the fed funds rate at the current level of 2 percent.  Among the reasons is that a ¼ percentage point drop, as suggested by alternative A, is really not clearly called for by a changed outlook for the real economy.  Inflation risks are still in play, and I think we should give credit markets more time to digest events and sort out rate relationships. As regards the statement, my preference is alternative B.  However, I am concerned that the reference to the recent financial turbulence is not quite strong enough, so I took a shot at rephrasing just the beginning of the rationale section to read as such:  “Economic growth appears to have slowed recently, and labor markets have weakened further.  In addition, strains in financial markets have increased significantly”—basically taking the slightly stronger expression in the alternative A rationale and putting it in alternative B.  So my position, Mr. Chairman, is to hold at this meeting.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear statements of disagreement or contention. Instead, the speaker is providing their own analysis and views on the economy, inflation, and the appropriate policy path.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Rosengren do not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 114.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be brief.  This is already a historic week, and the week has just begun.  The labor market is weak and getting weaker.  The unemployment rate has risen 1.1 percentage points since April and is likely to rise further.  I am not convinced that the unemployment rate will level off where the Greenbook is assuming currently.  The failure of a major investment bank, the forced merger of another, the largest thrift and insurer teetering, and the failure of Freddie and Fannie are likely to have a significant impact on the real economy.  Individuals and firms will become risk averse, with reluctance to consume or to invest.  Even if firms were inclined to invest, credit spreads are rising, and the cost and availability of financing is becoming more difficult.  Many securitization vehicles are frozen.  The degree of financial distress has risen markedly.  Deleveraging is likely to occur with a vengeance as firms seek to survive this period of significant upheaval.  Given that many borrowers will face higher interest rates as a result of financial problems, we can help offset this additional drag by reducing the federal funds rate.  I support alternative A to reduce the fed funds rate 25 basis points.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their opinion and supports a specific course of action.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
   MR. HOENIG.  Mr. Chairman, I see no reason to focus on the details of the forecast.  Clearly, the economy is under stress, both as we look at the economic growth forecast and as we look at the inflation forecast.  So I recognize the amount of stress we are under here.  I would say to you, in dealing with that stress, I am fully supportive of the actions that we take in terms of liquidity—the TAF and the other efforts to provide liquidity into the market.  These are tools that we can and should use for these kinds of shocks in a short-term context.  On the other hand, I would encourage the Committee to resist the impulse to ease policy in a sense of doing something.  The issue is not the level of our policy rate at this time.  It is the dysfunctioning of the markets that we hope our liquidity efforts will help address.  To begin to talk about easing or even to put language in there that suggests easing is to cause people, on the expectation that we might ease at some point even if we hold off now, to delay decisions that they would otherwise make that would benefit the economy. I also encourage us to look beyond the immediate crisis, which I recognize is serious.  But as pointed out here, we also have an inflation issue.  Our core inflation is still above where it should be.  Headline inflation has been up, even though there are some signs that commodities and energy are backing off.  But the businesses themselves are saying, “How do I recover my margin.”  So there is no impulse to pass along those reductions.  We talk about wages and labor backing off.  But they are holding off, they are not backing off, and in negotiations they are much more antagonistic.  Those kinds of pressures will emerge at some point.  Those are the longer-run issues that I think we need to keep in mind as we deal with this immediate crisis.  So I would strongly encourage us to leave rates where they are, to be very careful with our language, not to encourage the expectation of further rate decreases, and to continue to be aggressive in our liquidity provisions as we have been the last several weeks and months.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the following passage. Mr. Hoenig is encouraging the committee to resist the impulse to ease policy and not to encourage the expectation of further rate decreases, while also emphasizing the need for aggressive liquidity provisions. This suggests a difference of opinion on how to address the current economic stress and whether easing policy or maintaining current rates is the right approach.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards President Yellen.


Passage number 118.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the past several weeks, my head office and Branch directors have become decidedly more pessimistic about the economic outlook.  My own assessment of incoming data coincides with theirs.  My contacts also report that their businesses are still raising prices in response to past increases in commodity and import prices that boosted their costs.  I expect as a consequence that core inflation will remain uncomfortably high for a while longer, but the marked decline in commodity prices since June reinforces my conviction that there is light at the end of this inflation tunnel. With respect to growth, our forecast is similar to the Greenbook’s, with a little more weakness in the second half of this year and a little more strength in 2009.  I think the risks to this forecast are decidedly skewed to the downside.  I agree with the Greenbook’s assessment that the strength we saw in the upwardly revised real GDP growth in the second quarter will not hold up.  Despite the tax rebates, real personal consumption expenditures declined in both June and July, and retail sales were down in August.  My contacts report that cutbacks in spending are widespread, especially for discretionary items.  For example, East Bay plastic surgeons and dentists note that patients are deferring elective procedures.  [Laughter]  Reservations are no longer necessary at many high-end restaurants.  And the Silicon Valley Country Club, with a $250,000 entrance fee and seven-to-eight-year waiting list, has seen the number of would-be new members shrink to a mere thirteen.  [Laughter] Exports were a huge source of strength in the second quarter, but I am concerned that we cannot count on very large contributions to growth from exports going forward, now that the dollar has begun to rise and economic growth abroad has slowed, even turning negative in some important trade partners.  Indeed, the growing weakness of the global outlook appears to be an important explanation for the reversion in commodity prices, and this adds a dimension of gloom to what would otherwise be a decided plus for both inflation and demand. Recent data also suggest that labor markets are weakening across the board—a development that will cast a pall on household income and spending.  The interaction of higher unemployment with the housing and financial markets raises the potential for even worse news—namely, an intensification of the adverse feedback loop we have long worried about and are now experiencing.  Indeed, delinquencies have risen substantially across the spectrum of consumer loans, and credit availability continues to decline.  One ray of hope is that the changes at Fannie and Freddie have caused a notable drop in mortgage rates.  Another is that the decline in home prices has become somewhat less steep, and we have seen an outright improvement in home inventories relative to sales.  But my contacts are very pessimistic about the prospects for nonresidential construction.  They note that construction is continuing on projects in the pipeline with committed funding, but new projects are all but impossible to finance. Turning to inflation, I have long anticipated and still expect that inflation will fall to more-reasonable levels in 2009.  However, developments since our August meeting diminish the upside risks to this projection.  The drop in oil and other commodity prices, along with the appreciation of the dollar, should work to moderate the current inflation bulge and diminish the potential for a wage–price spiral to develop.  Import inflation has already begun to ease.  Furthermore, we have seen a remarkable decline in inflation compensation for the next five years in the TIPS market.  I would not rely heavily on this decline to support my view, but I do have to say that the decline is a lot more reassuring than the alternative.  I was also encouraged by the 30 basis point drop in long-term inflation expectations in the most recent Michigan survey.  I anticipate that the recent jump in the unemployment rate will place some additional downward pressure on growth in labor compensation, which has been quite low, and in core inflation.  Although the jump in the unemployment rate probably partly reflects the extension of unemployment insurance coverage, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the upper bound on this effect is just a few tenths of a percent.  I would agree with the Greenbook estimates.  We have also examined the possibility that the increase in unemployment reflects a rise in the NAIRU due to sectoral employment shifts out of construction and finance and into other industries.  Ned Phelps has argued that the sectoral shift story implies a sizable dispersion of employment growth across industries and states.  But we looked at these data and found no significant increase, so I don’t find this Phelps argument particularly convincing.  Considering all of these factors, I expect both headline and core PCE price inflation to fall to about 2 percent for 2009 as a whole, and I see the risks to this projection as roughly balanced.   With respect to policy, I would be inclined to keep the funds rate target at 2 percent today.  For now, it seems to me that the additional liquidity measures that have been put in place are an appropriate response to the turmoil.  I am fine with the wording of alternative B and would support President Lockhart’s suggestion for change.  That would seem fine to me, too.  In view of the intensified financial stress and the potential for more turmoil, obviously I think we will need to be flexible in setting policy going forward, and I am very concerned about downside risks to the real economy and think that inflation risk is diminished.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. Instead, it presents the speaker's assessment of the economic outlook and their views on various factors such as inflation, growth, and policy.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 120.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to start with the national economy in the interest of brevity here.  Concerning the national outlook, it is difficult and probably unwise to try to assess growth and inflation prospects in the immediate aftermath of an event like the Lehman bankruptcy.  I expect to see more failures among financial firms, and I expect those failures to continue to contribute to market volatility.  This is part of an ongoing shakeout among financial market firms, following some of the worst risk management in a generation.  I expect sluggish growth in the second half of 2008, in part due to labor markets that are somewhat weaker than expected.  Financial market turmoil is certainly a key concern, but the U.S. economy still outperformed expectations in the first half of 2008, despite the demise of Bear Stearns—an event not too different in some respects from the current episode. My sense is that three large uncertainties looming over the economy have now been resolved—the GSEs and the fates of Lehman and Merrill Lynch.  Of these, the resolution of GSE uncertainty seems to be the most pivotal, even though it is not the one leading the news today.  Normally, the elimination of key uncertainties is a plus for the economy.  As is typical in this type of situation, safe interest rates have fallen dramatically across the board. A second macroeconomic shock stemming from the dramatic rise in oil and other commodities prices has been an unwelcome development during the past six months.  The retreat of West Texas intermediate prices to $94 a barrel, and today down to $92 a barrel, should improve second-half growth prospects. Meanwhile, an inflation problem is brewing.  The headline CPI inflation rate, the one consumers actually face, is about 6¼ percent year-to-date.  That does not include today’s report.  This is against the federal funds target of 2 percent.  While it makes sense to focus on financial markets for the time being, it is essential that we keep in position to put downward pressure on inflation going forward.  The financial crisis threatens to roll on for such a long time and to demand so much attention that the private sector may rationally conclude that we have lost all sight of our inflation objective.  In such a case of unmoored expectations, outcomes could be far more severe than those envisioned in the Greenbook. My policy preference is to maintain the federal funds rate target at the current level and to wait for some time to assess the impact of the Lehman bankruptcy filing, if any, on the national economy.  In uncertain circumstances like these, I think it would be unwise to react too hastily to a fluid situation.  Any immediate effects may not be the ones that are intended, and further down the line—that is, once more data have accumulated—a hasty action may leave the Committee out of position relative to the incoming data.  By denying funding to Lehman suitors, the Fed has begun to reestablish the idea that markets should not expect help at each difficult juncture.  Changing rates today would confuse that important signal and take out much of the positive part out of the previous decision.  In addition, a rate move would be poorly targeted toward mitigation of difficulties at particular financial firms.  The FOMC has already done a great deal to create a low interest rate environment in order to shepherd the economy through a substantial shock to the financial and housing sectors.  The Committee now needs to allow the financial sector shakeout to occur using liquidity facilities to the extent possible to help navigate the resulting turbulence.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Bullard is providing his assessment of the national economy and his policy preference. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of thanks from someone named President Plosser.


Passage number 122.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Stern.


Passage number 123.
 MR. STERN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, even before the events of the last several days, I thought that this was the most severe financial crisis, certainly, that I have seen in my career.  And the last several days—as well as some of Bill’s comments about possible contagion spreading from breaking the buck and so on and so forth—have only heightened that conviction and my concern about where we are.  So I think it is fair to say that the headwinds confronting the economy have intensified even further.  It is difficult to comment on the degree or the duration, but I think we know the direction.  As far as the near-term economic outlook is concerned, I wasn’t terribly optimistic about the next two or three quarters to begin with.  If I were going to prepare a new forecast at this point—or even had I prepared one last week—I probably would mark it down a bit.  But, of course, there is not much we can do about that at this stage. As far as the inflation outlook is concerned, I have thought that, late in this year and into next year, inflation would start to abate, and recent developments perhaps heighten my conviction about that.  But I will agree that it is still an open issue.  So it seems to me that all of this suggests that the outlook, at least in terms of financial conditions and the economy in the near term, has clearly deteriorated.  The inflation outlook, if anything, has perhaps improved a notch, or at least the outlook that I had earlier is a little more solid. Given the lags in policy, it doesn’t seem that there is a heck of a lot we can do about current circumstances, and we have already tried to address the financial turmoil.  So I would favor alternative B as a policy matter.  As far as language is concerned with regard to B, I would be inclined to give more prominence to financial issues.  I think you could do that maybe by reversing the first two sentences in paragraph 2.  You would have to change the transitions, of course. I would say that if we wanted to change policy at this meeting—and that is not my preference—I would do it by ½ percentage point, and I would think that the rationale would be psychological reasons.  Again, I don’t think we are going to have a big effect on the near-term performance of the economy.  But if we think psychology in the marketplace is sufficiently bad or that there is sufficient concern that the Federal Reserve somehow doesn’t quite get it—I would think that all our actions cumulatively, including the actions over the weekend, should not make that a grave concern—then I think we would want to do more than ¼ percentage point.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and thoughts about the financial crisis and possible actions to take, without directly addressing any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 125.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The unfolding financial situation is injecting enormous uncertainty into the economic outlook and policy picture.  Although this analogy is imperfect, today’s uncertainty reminds me of March 2003.  Then, on the eve of the invasion of Iraq, the FOMC decided that geopolitical uncertainty was so great that the Committee could not characterize the balance of risks at all in the policy statement.  Today, the downside risks to output are almost too dispersed to characterize.  In one or two weeks, we may know better that either the economy will somehow muddle through or we’re likely to be facing the mother of all credit crunches.  I think that the first outcome would be quite an accomplishment under the circumstances, but at the moment it’s very hard to say how this will turn out. Nevertheless, we have to offer an opinion.  With respect to the economic landscape before the developments of last weekend, one thing that I kept hearing was that uncertainty and caution in the business community had increased in recent weeks and that they were causing many firms to hold back on spending and committing to financial investments.  But a number of my contacts indicated that the weakness was not out of line with their earlier expectations.  On the plus side, I got the impression that, with the exception of housing, there are not many excesses on the real side of the economy that needed to be worked off.  Notably, I did not hear of inventory overhangs or unused capacity, and Manpower even indicated that their clients had been careful not to go overboard earlier in the hiring cycle, and so we’re not left with bloated workforces.  Still, this sentiment and the incoming data did not paint a pleasant picture with regard to the national outlook.  As one of my directors said, turning the common phrase against me, the economic problems that we are facing appear to be remarkably resilient.  Even before last weekend’s events, the economic risks had increased somewhat.  We had the large rise in the unemployment rate, the recent weak consumption data, and heightened caution by firms.  Now, of course, the financial risks have increased substantially and further threaten the growth outlook.  At a minimum, credit standards are likely to tighten further and crimp spending. I’m not looking forward to putting a forecast together in October.  Dave and the Board staff have my sympathy and respect for doing this each meeting.  It’s unfortunate, Dave, that we haven’t had the time to spend talking about the excellent special memo that you and your staff put together on gauging the effective stance of policy.  I thought that was very helpful.  I had on previous occasions mentioned that it would be nice to have some markers that we could look at, and at least for me, that was quite helpful.  Now, it’s not a large stretch to expect that inflationary pressures will recede, given what we’re facing.  We could see enough weakening in the economic outlook that the projected slack in the economy will point inflation more clearly down and below 2 percent over the medium term.  Just last week I was still a bit skeptical that these forces would be large enough to achieve this disinflation.  But we need to be forward looking, and that would be how I would mark my inflation forecast down today. So what does this mean for policy today.  I favor alternative B.  In my view, we’ve kept the policy rate low so that we would not be far from appropriate policies if and when the risks to growth intensified enough relative to the risks to inflation.  So we are well positioned to act if we need to.  I agree with President Stern that, if we were to act, we should do something significant on the order of 50 basis points.  But I think we should be seen as making well-calculated moves with the funds rate, and the current uncertainty is so large that I don’t feel as though we have enough information to make such calculations today.  We will know much more in a couple of weeks, I hope at least about the changes in underlying financial conditions, and will thus have a better sense of the risks to both elements of the dual mandate and the associated policy actions.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty and acknowledging the need for more information before making a decision.


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence simply expresses gratitude towards someone named President Pianalto.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The recent financial market news is shaking people’s confidence dramatically.  But even before recent events, the evidence was already pointing to more effects of the financial crisis on the real economy than I had built into my projection at our last meeting.  The reports from my District contacts and the incoming data caused me to revise down my near-term output projection even before the latest round of financial market troubles.  The improvement in net exports that was reflected in the second-quarter GDP growth has not encouraged manufacturers in my District to revise up their export projections.  They are still holding firmly to the opinion that the global economy is slowing and that export growth will slow with it for several quarters.  Of course, manufacturers are concerned about weakness spreading further within their domestic customer base. The ongoing turmoil in financial markets continues to affect businesses in my District.  Some of the banks in my District are finding it very, very difficult to attract new capital and to manage their way out of trouble.  I am hearing that credit is harder to come by for many borrowers who in the recent past would not have thought twice about their creditworthiness.  Last week I met with a business contact with a very long and successful track record of buying and operating private companies.  He reported that he had reached a deal with a bank to finance a project at a 7 percent interest rate with the loan amortized over a fifteen-year term.  On the morning of the close just three days later, the bank faxed him the paperwork, which reflected a 12 percent interest rate on a non-amortizing loan with a 10-year term.  So the deal obviously is not going forward.  One of my directors, who heads a very large regional banking organization, reported at our board meeting last week that many banks are shedding assets and that in some cases they are walking away from longstanding customer relationships in order to do so.  He said that investors are very skeptical about putting new equity into banking deals and that those who have done so in the past vow not to be burned twice, let alone a third time. Of course, inflation remains an important issue as well.  My contacts, as Dave mentioned in his report, are not so confident that a broad array of intermediate and retail prices are actually going to move back down as a result of the recent decline in energy and other commodity prices.  Several of my contacts report that major suppliers are trying to maintain their prices despite the decline in raw material costs just to make up for a long period of absorbing price increases.  Nevertheless, most of my contacts agree that the commodity price environment has stabilized considerably, making me more confident that core inflation will gradually slow over the next couple of years.   At our last meeting, my forecast was broadly consistent with the Greenbook baseline.  Today my forecasts for output and prices are broadly similar to the Greenbook’s for 2009 and 2010, although I am expecting more weakness in economic activity in the second half of this year than the Greenbook is forecasting.  My contacts in the manufacturing sector have persuaded me that exports are going to be weaker in the short term than I had previously thought, and I have also revised down my consumption path on the basis of the credit constraints on households.  Although I am more encouraged about the recent decline in energy and commodity prices, I would like to see further evidence of price stability in these markets and also continued stability in inflation expectations for a while longer before I reduce the upside risk that I place on my inflation outlook.  However, a growing risk to my outlook is that the short-term weakness that I have now built into my outlook extends further out into the forecast period.  I worry that my outlook doesn’t fully capture all of the many ways in which financial forces at work in the economy are actually going to restrain spending. On Friday, I was convinced that the best course of action was to keep an even keel in these rough seas—to be flexible, of course, but to look beyond the latest wave crashing over the bow.  Only six weeks ago, inflation risks were on the verge of being unacceptable, and today the troubles of Wall Street are the focus.  I was sure that we were going to be in for many more surprises; I just didn’t know when and from where they would be coming.  So I supported not only keeping our policy unchanged but also keeping our language changes to a minimum even if that language missed some nuances of the outlook.  Given the events of the weekend, I still think it is appropriate for us to keep our policy rate unchanged.  I would like more time to assess how the recent events are going to affect the real economy.  I have a small preference for the assessment-of-risk language under alternative A.  I think it captures my concern that the downside risks have intensified.  However, I can support some of the comments and changes to highlight the financial market strains that were made by President Lockhart and President Stern.  So I can support the language under alternative B with some additional comments about the financial strains that we are facing.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the effects of the financial crisis on the real economy and believes that the downside risks have intensified. However, they also mention that they supported keeping the policy rate unchanged and are unsure about how recent events will affect the real economy. This indicates a lack of consensus or uncertainty.


Passage number 128.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 129.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be brief.  The Fifth District hasn’t changed much; it pretty well aligns with the national outlook.  On the national outlook, I find myself, all except for the policy path, aligned well with the staff.  There have been a lot of economic reports since the last meeting about particular categories of spending or particular sectors of the economy, but they net out to only a small change, if any, in the broad contour of the outlook for me for overall growth.  I expect it to be sluggish for the remainder of the year with recovery beginning at some point in the first half of next year.  I’ll commit the sin of saying that uncertainty is especially high now.  There seem to be reasonably plausible risks in the outlook in virtually every spending category and, in many cases, on both sides of the outlook. About inflation, so far our credibility has helped to prevent a pickup in compensation growth.  In fact, it’s heartening that compensation growth is coming in a little below expected in response to the energy price shock this year.  This has allowed us to accomplish the inevitable decline in real wages without setting off an inflationary acceleration in wage rates.  But we’re still in the midst of an upsurge in core inflation, which the Greenbook expects is going to tick up near 3 percent this quarter.  As I said before, I think it’s critically important for us to emerge from this episode without trend inflation ratcheting upward, and I’m not sure we can take the forecasted moderation for granted.  Inflation compensation has been well contained, and that has been heartening.  But I have also said this before—I think the current level of five-year, five-year-forward inflation compensation seems more consistent with a trend above 2½ percent than it does with a 2 percent trend.  So I’m not convinced that there’s going to be much gravitational pull down from an elevated rate once core rises.  At the very least, I think there’s some uncertainty about that. For financial markets, this is yet another historic week, as President Rosengren remarked.  I think the questions facing financial market participants, the uncertainty they face, can be usefully partitioned into three broad categories.  One is the aggregate magnitude of fundamental losses that the financial sector faces.  Another is the location of those losses—where they are going to pop up within financial intermediary sectors.  The third is the likelihood and the magnitude of fiscal transfers in the form of governmental support for particular firms.  I think the weekend’s events have caused financial market participants to revise their assessments of the future.  It seems to me at this early date in the process that the revision in the outlook has had more to do with the latter two categories than with the aggregate size of fundamental losses we have coming down the pipeline.  That is to say, it’s about where they’re popping up, which firms are affected and are going to be hit, and about the likelihood of government support. What we did with Lehman I obviously think is good.  It has had an effect on market participants’ assessment of the likelihood of other firms getting support, and I think you would have to attribute at least some of changes in equity prices to that.  We’re likely to see a lot more disruption this week and in the days going forward than we’ve seen so far.  I don’t want to be sanguine about it, but the silver lining to all the disruption that’s ahead of us is that it will enhance the credibility of any commitment that we make in the future to be willing to let an institution fail and to risk such disruption again.  On the other hand, if the disruption proves less severe than we expect, the silver lining is that that will strengthen our hand in the future as well.  However, I would note that I don’t think that what we did with Lehman has set a clear and firm boundary on the circumstances under which government support is likely to be forthcoming.  All the language around not supporting Lehman was of a one-off nature.  So I’m not sure about the extent to which we’ve diminished uncertainty about the likelihood of support going forward, and I think that such uncertainty is likely to exacerbate financial volatility in the months ahead until we can make more progress on articulating a reasonably principled policy on when we’re going to intervene and when we’re not, or at least enhancing clarity about that. Overall, I don’t take what’s happened in the last few days as changing much.  It’s not obvious to me what the implications are for the outlook for inflation and growth, at least at this point.  So I don’t see a reason to deflect from our policy path at this point.  I can support standing pat with the funds rate today.  I think that’s a good idea.  I think, looking forward, that we will want to raise rates sooner rather than later if core inflation doesn’t moderate.  I think we’re more likely to require a path more like the August Greenbook than the current one.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is giving their perspective and observations on various topics, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, I have a question.  I really would like your advice on this.  Historically, if we look at situations like Japan and Scandinavia, ultimately there comes a point at which the banking system is decapitalized and dysfunctional and the government intervenes on a large scale.  Those interventions have been very expensive, but in those cases I mentioned, they have generally restored the banking system to health and have helped the economy recover.  What’s your view on the right sequencing.  Do you think that we should remain very tough until such time as it becomes inevitable that fiscal intervention is needed.  Do you think that we should avoid fiscal intervention at all stages.  I’m seriously interested in knowing what you, or anyone else who would like to comment, think is the appropriate stage, if any, at which fiscal intervention becomes necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking advice and opinions on the appropriate stage at which fiscal intervention becomes necessary, without expressing their own stance or opposing any particular viewpoint.


Passage number 131.
 MR. LACKER.  We have a legislated program of fiscal intervention—deposit insurance—and the boundaries around that are very clear.  Which liabilities are insured and which ones are not are very clear.  Around the edges there’s some lack of clarity about what least-cost resolution means and the extent to which deviations from that can be verified, and that provides some room for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to deviate from that and implicitly to forbear to some extent.  But even that is sort of a well-contained and well-defined government support.  That’s what the Congress has enacted, and it’s not clear to me whether we should go beyond that.  Japan got down to deposit insurance.  Scandinavia did, too.  That seems like a natural benchmark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is simply discussing the clarity and boundaries of deposit insurance and questioning whether further government support beyond that is necessary.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I think this is a historical fact—that, once the banks became decapitalized, there were also capital injections into the banks in both of those cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "But I think this is a historical fact" expresses the author's opinion or belief, suggesting that there may be differing perspectives or interpretations about the occurrence of capital injections into the banks.


Passage number 133.
 MR. LACKER.  Sure.  Those were fiscal actions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made before them.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The word "right" by itself does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention. More context would be needed to determine if there is any disagreement present.


Passage number 135.
 MR. LACKER.  And the FDIC does exactly that when it resolves a failed institution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states that the FDIC resolves a failed institution.


Passage number 136.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 137.
 MR. HOENIG.  Mr. Chairman, I have thought about this considerably because I think we have come to a time in our history when we have institutions that clearly ought to be and may in fact be too big to fail.  I think we tend to react ad hoc during the crisis, and we have no choice at this point.  But as you look at the situation, we ought, instead of having a decade of denying too big to fail, to acknowledge it and have a receivership and intervention program that extends some of the concepts of the FDIC but goes beyond that.  That is, if you are insolvent, it is not a central bank issue—we are a liquidity provider—and therefore the government comes in.  But unlike the GSEs, everyone has to take some hit—the equity holders, certainly the preferred stockholders, also the subordinated-debt holders, and perhaps the senior ones—by assuming a certain amount of loss.  They would have immediate access to—pick a number—80 percent.  The research would help us pick that number, and they can have access, but the rest becomes a subordinate-subordinate position after the liquidation so that you have still a sense of market discipline in play and you don’t get the system gaming it in that, if you know there’s a bailout coming, you buy the debt and sell the equity short to make a bundle.  I think therein lie the distortions that are absolutely detrimental to the long-run health of the economy. Regarding how we go forward, I think we are going to have many lessons from this.  Part of the problem has been very lax lending and, obviously now, weaknesses in some of the oversight.  Also a history of our reacting from a monetary policy point of view to ease quickly to try to take care of the problem and, therefore, to create a sense in the market of our support has raised some real moral hazard issues that we now need to begin to remedy as we look forward in dealing with future receiverships.  We are in a world of too big to fail, and as things have become more concentrated in this episode, it will become even more so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own thoughts and suggestions on how to address the issue of institutions that are "too big to fail" and the potential risks and distortions associated with this. They also acknowledge the need for better oversight and regulation to prevent future problems.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I certainly agree—and the Treasury Secretary and I have said publicly—that we need a strong, well-defined, ex ante, clear regime.  But we have the problem now that we don’t have such a regime, and we’re dealing on a daily basis with these very severe consequences.  So it is a difficult problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 139.
 MR. HOENIG.  I think what we did with Lehman was the right thing because we did have a market beginning to play the Treasury and us, and that has some pretty negative consequences as well, which we are now coming to grips with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that what they did with Lehman was the right thing to do. They mention potential negative consequences but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Rosengren without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 141.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I think it’s too soon to know whether what we did with Lehman is right.  Given that the Treasury didn’t want to put money in, what happened was that we had no choice.  But we took a calculated bet.  If we have a run on the money market funds or if the nongovernment tri-party repo market shuts down, that bet may not look nearly so good.  I think we did the right thing given the constraints that we had.  I hope we get through this week.  But I think it’s far from clear, and we were taking a bet, and I hope in the future we don’t have to be in situations where we’re taking bets.  It does highlight the need to look at the tri-party repo market, look at the money market fund industry, and look at how they’re financing.  There are a lot of lessons learned, but we shouldn’t be in a position where we’re betting the economy on one or two institutions.  That is the situation we were in last weekend.  We had no choice.  We did what we had to do, but I hope we will find a way to not get into this position again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their belief that it is too soon to know if the actions taken with Lehman were right, but states that they did what they had to do given the constraints at the time. They also discuss the need to learn from the situation and find ways to prevent similar situations in the future. There is no indication of disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only includes a statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take about thirty minutes.  I have a couple of calls to make.  See you at about 11:20.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude, informing others that the coffee is ready, suggesting a break of thirty minutes, stating their need to make some phone calls, and mentioning a time to reconvene.


Passage number 144.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  If we’re ready, we can reconvene.  First Vice President Cumming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply indicates that a break is over and suggests reconvening.


Passage number 145.
 MS. CUMMING.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In our forecast, we do show a downgrade in real activity in the near term since the August meeting.  Downside risks to the economy we see as still very considerable, and I would probably say that they really have increased quite a bit.  I’ll say a few more words about that.  I’ll also talk about the inflation front.  We have long thought that inflation in the medium term will moderate, and we’ve been taking some comfort from recent developments that have been cited already. On the weaker economic outlook, we see the intensification of adverse growth coming from many things mentioned already:  the unemployment rate increase and the likelihood that consumer spending is going to be negative.  I would put great stress also on indications that world demand is slowing abruptly, as Nathan mentioned.  I think that all three of these things are occurring in an environment in which we have massive correction, adjustment, structural change in autos, housing, and financial intermediation.  That adjustment is really interconnected—one has effects on the others.  As part of this—particularly in the financial sector, I would say—in our senior loan officer survey we’ve seen indications that, even as rates in, say, the mortgage markets start to ease a bit, nonprice terms may still be tightening.  President Pianalto talked about other areas in which borrowers are facing much tougher terms.  As financial institutions feel their capital is constrained—and there’s plenty of evidence that balance sheets are constrained across much of the financial sector—those kinds of nonprice rationing measures probably will become more evident.  Second, as we discussed earlier, we’ve seen that credit losses, which thus far have been largely confined to the financial sector and increasingly their shareholders, run some risk of spilling over to other kinds of investors, who to date really have not felt that impact, such as money market fund investors, as mentioned earlier.  In addition, the three big corrections that we have seen in autos, housing, and financial intermediation are not limited to the United States.  In particular, as you know, several G-10 countries are facing very difficult situations in their housing markets, not much different from us; and the financial intermediation adjustment is truly a global correction. On the inflation side, as I mentioned, we have acknowledged that we’ve seen elevated rates of inflation.  But the recent developments—as we’ve seen in inflation expectations discussed earlier, in energy and other commodity prices, the unit labor cost developments that President Yellen discussed, and the year-over-year changes in import prices—are all pointing in the direction of some moderation of inflation and moderation of inflation expectations.  In particular, we have looked at inflation expectations as measured by financial markets and feel that the decline that we see in those expectations cannot be explained simply by the drop in energy prices and technical factors but look larger than that.  We would attribute that to indications, again, that global demand is slowing. Coming into this meeting today, we favor alternative B.  I would associate myself with the comments of President Stern and President Evans, that if we were, in fact, going to make a move today, it would be better to make a large move of 50 basis points.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges a downgrade in real activity and expresses concern about downside risks to the economy. They also discuss indicators of inflation moderating and express support for a particular alternative.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude from someone to Governor Kohn.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The expression "Thank you" and the mention of Governor Warsh do not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kroszner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to Governor Kroszner.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Duke. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 150.
 MR. WARSH.  My sense is—and this is certainly open for discussion—that we want the focus to be that we are really watching market developments closely.  We are not trying to monitor the broader economy, which we might not be able to measure too much.  I will admit that we have “economic and financial markets,” with “closely” modifying both of them, but the idea was to put the focus on the market side to a slightly greater extent than we normally do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  So I think that’s useful, although I do note that, all else being equal, there’s a slight barrier for making any change, and that one word is a change.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement expressing an observation about a potential barrier to making a change.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 152.
 MR. FISHER.  I am sort of indifferent about this, but I don’t want to forget what Governor Duke was talking about.  It’s not just financial markets; it’s financial developments.  We are also talking about the internal dynamics of what is happening in the banking system and the credit contraction you spoke of.  So we lead off with financial markets.  I don’t want people to think we are focusing only on markets—Governor Warsh, I would disagree on that point.  It’s a minor disagreement, but I think it is overkill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, states that he disagrees with Governor Warsh on the point that they are focusing only on financial markets. He believes it is a minor disagreement, but still a difference in opinion.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Let me open it up for any other comments on the statement or the policy action.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is allowing for any other comments on the statement or policy action.


Passage number 154.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is really just a question.  What type of reaction do we think will be engendered by inserting “closely”.  Everybody understands that we monitor financial developments very carefully.  So we are bringing attention to this.  Will there be a presumption that we are likely to do something intermeeting or something like that.  I am not saying that is wrong, but it is a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on the potential reaction to inserting the word "closely" in the context of monitoring financial developments. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 155.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I would say that the markets will take it as a statement that is conditional on what happens in markets.  If markets get sufficiently bad, if there is some threshold of deterioration, that can potentially provoke an intermeeting move is the way I think they would take it.  Brian, would you agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Dudley is suggesting a hypothetical scenario and Brian is being asked if he agrees with that scenario.


Passage number 156.
 MR. MADIGAN.  I agree.  The fact that the first sentence of the risk assessment has a parallel treatment of the upside and downside risks may communicate a bit the sense that you are not ready to ease immediately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree that the parallel treatment of the upside and downside risks in the first sentence of the risk assessment may communicate a sense of unreadiness to ease immediately.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  We will decide.  We will take a vote on it, if necessary.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is indicating that a decision will be made and a vote might be taken if needed, without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 158.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I echo President Evans’s concern.  My recollection is—and I haven’t consulted the record recently—under your predecessor there was some phrasing like “watch market developments closely” that came to be widely understood as a signal of an intermeeting move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the agreement and echo of concern by Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it was “monitor closely.”  Is that what it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no content or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their uncertainty about a previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 160.
 MR. LACKER.  “Monitor closely” or some language like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The mention of "Monitor closely" suggests that there is some disagreement or contention around how closely something should be monitored. The use of "or some language like that" also indicates that there may be different perspectives on the exact wording or approach to monitoring.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 161.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, “monitor closely.”  Maybe you’re right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Maybe you’re right" suggests a difference of opinion or uncertainty about the validity of the previous statement.


Passage number 162.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, and that gives me pause.  Then, about “market”—like a lot of economists, I am willing to construe the word “market” very broadly to include intermediation mechanisms of all types and the market for commercial credit in, you know, Dillon, South Carolina.  [Laughter]  But I am not sure that market participants are going to take it that broadly.  They are going to take it in the sense of markets in traded financial instruments and organized exchanges and such.  I just wonder if they are going to interpret it too closely as Wall Street.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing hesitation and uncertainty about the interpretation of the word "market" by market participants, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument.


Passage number 163.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  So the sentiment over here on this side is that nobody thinks “market” is important.  Let’s get rid of “market.”  We’ll discuss “closely.”  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply states a sentiment that nobody thinks "market" is important and suggests discussing something else instead.


Passage number 164.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I think “market” may be construed too narrowly.  We don’t really mean it that way, I don’t think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is expressing his own interpretation of the term "market," suggesting that it may be too narrow and clarifying his personal view.


Passage number 165.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Market” is already gone.  All right.  Other comments, suggestions, or thoughts.  Governor Kroszner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Governor Kroszner is asking for feedback or additional thoughts from others.


Passage number 166.
 MR. KROSZNER.  But I do think it is the delta, so it is the change.  By including “closely,” I think the markets are going to look very closely at that change, and they are going to think that we are clearly trying to convey something with that.  I just think we have to make sure that we feel comfortable in doing so.  Certainly some people have suggested that they would be happy to move 50 basis points if they saw the markets moving, but I do think that that one particular word will get a lot of attention.  Not that it should, but I think it is going to be focused on.  Just as at one point we used the word “yet,” and that got an enormous amount of attention.  And this has two syllables.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It primarily discusses the significance of certain words and their potential impact on the markets.


Passage number 167.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  Unless you are from the south.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 168.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The sad thing is that Governor Kroszner is right.  We have seventeen people debating over this word, and it actually does matter.  Does anyone else want to weigh in.  Okay.  I think my sense is that there should be a barrier, a bit of a hurdle, to changing; so I am leaning toward sticking with what we have.  Would that be okay, Governor Warsh, do you think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Everyone seems to be in agreement that there should be a barrier to changing something and they are seeking Governor Warsh's opinion on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
  MR. WARSH.  On “closely”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The word "closely" suggests that there might be a disagreement or different perspectives regarding the topic being discussed. Since this is just a fragment of the passage, more context is needed to determine the extent of the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Getting rid of “closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 171.
” MR. WARSH.  Let me ask Brian and Bill.  Brian, without “closely,” how do you think the markets will react to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without knowing the full context of the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 172.
 MR. MADIGAN.  That you are not particularly ready to change your stance of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no explicit indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states Mr. Madigan's stance as a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments mentioned.


Passage number 173.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I think the expectation going in is, for most people, that you are not prepared to ease today, but if things got really dark from here you would.  So the question is, How do you convey that with the right word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is giving their opinion and discussing the expectations people may have.


Passage number 174.
  You need something in between “closely” and— MR. WARSH.  I think the sentiment we are trying to suggest is watchful waiting.  We are not indifferent, we are not clueless, we are paying attention, but we are not predisposed.  Hence, Governor Kohn’s suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both speakers are discussing the sentiment of watchful waiting and are providing an explanation of their position. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or disagreement between them.


Passage number 175.
 MR. KOHN.  My suggestion was to substitute “carefully” for “closely.”  I agree that “monitor closely” had this other connotation, but I think we should be seen as paying more attention than usual.  There might be another alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kohn is simply expressing his suggestion and agreeing with the idea of paying more attention. He does mention there might be another alternative, but it does not indicate any disagreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 176.
 MR. DUDLEY.  “The Committee will carefully evaluate economic and financial market developments.”  That means you are on the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the committee will evaluate economic and financial market developments.


Passage number 177.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, it is not an analytical thing we are doing.  We are just watching closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they are not analyzing something, but rather just observing it closely. The statement is straightforward and does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 178.
 MR. WARSH.  Keenly.  Carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply describes how Mr. Warsh is paying close attention.


Passage number 179.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response to that question.


Passage number 181.
 MR. LACKER.  Including “closely,” what does that imply about the opposite.  I mean, are we going to be able to take that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or question seeking clarification about the implication of a certain word.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 182.
   MR. WARSH.  Well, we have done things like “in a timely manner” and other kinds of phraseology.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The mention of "other kinds of phraseology" suggests that there may be disagreement or contention about the specific phrasing used in the past.


Passage number 183.
   MR. LACKER.  Yes, but this is an adjective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply providing a clarification or additional information about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 184.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, it’s an adverb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The statement "No, it's an adverb" does not provide enough information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 185.
   MR. LACKER.  There goes my credibility.  [Laughter]  If we take it out, can we use the phrase without it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker's statement is made in a lighthearted manner and elicits laughter.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What we have done in the past is basically just use a new phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the past practice of using a new phrase. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 187.
   MR. LACKER.  So that means we have to throw this phrase out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a statement made by Mr. Lacker without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 188.
 MR. WARSH.  Mr. Chairman, I would support “carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, is expressing his support for a certain idea ("carefully"), but there is no indication of disagreement or contention between him and anyone else.


Passage number 189.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is that better.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement seems to be a question posed by an individual named President Evans, seeking confirmation or approval for something.


Passage number 190.
 MR. EVANS.  Just to be clear, we have gone a long way just now from its being a semantic discussion to whether or not the Committee wants to hint at the possibility of a near-term action.  I do not have a problem with that.  In fact, in my comments I suggested that the resolution of uncertainty might improve in the next couple of weeks, but that seems to be the principal issue here, which I don’t really recall us discussing in as much detail as we just have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, you’re right.  But there is another issue, which I think is the thing we’re concerned about and which motivates the change in alternative B, paragraph 2.  We don’t want the world to feel that we are not awake, that we are not paying attention.  We know that very unusual things are going on in the financial markets; and we are prepared, maybe not through monetary policy but through whatever mechanism is necessary, to address that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the other person's statement ("No, you're right") and then brings up another issue that they think is important.


Passage number 192.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  So I fully support that sentiment, and if you find the right wording that captures it, that’s fine with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explicitly states that they fully support the sentiment and are fine with finding the right wording to capture it.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 194.
 MR. PLOSSER.  As long as we are throwing monkey wrenches into the language, I think we do signal our concern.  In paragraph 2, we put the very first sentence, which says, “Strains in financial markets have increased significantly.”  So we have acknowledged that at the very top of this statement.  So there is no going back on that.  I am a little concerned about what moving back “closely” means.  Another alternative that I’ll throw out would be, rather than use “closely,” to say that “the Committee will continue to monitor economic and financial developments.”   SEVERAL.  That’s what it said last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Plosser expresses his concern about the use of the word "closely" and suggests an alternative. This suggests disagreement or differing opinions within the group.


Passage number 195.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Well, that seems fine.  We are monitoring these things.  Is this the FOMC statement dictionary we are going to.  Is this the code book.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the statement and is asking for clarification on the code book that will be used for monitoring.


Passage number 196.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other comments.  All right.  Let me just ask for a straw vote: “closely,” no “closely,” or “carefully.”  Do we want “carefully”.  All right.  Is “carefully” more acceptable to those who are concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a straw vote and seeking consensus on the word choice.


Passage number 197.
 MR.KOHN.  It’s less of a code word.  The intention was to loosen it up a bit but not revert to those code words that nearly promise intermeeting action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply explains the intention to use a less strict code word without resorting to promises of immediate action.


Passage number 198.
 MR. PLOSSER.  We make note of this in the lexicon of FOMC terminology.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Plosser regarding something being noted in the lexicon of FOMC terminology.


Passage number 199.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The semiotics class will begin as soon as the—[Laughter]  All right.  “Carefully”—is that okay.  I’m seeing nodding.  All right.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement about the beginning of a semiotics class, with some humorous interruption.


Passage number 200.
 MR. WARSH.  Yes, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Warsh simply acknowledges the speaker by saying "Yes, sir."


Passage number 201.
 MR. KOHN.  I’m closing the dictionary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  So we are changing the last part of that sentence.  We are striking the word “market” and changing “closely” to “carefully.”  Any other comments or thoughts on the substance, sizzle, or marketing.  Or as Rick would say, “moychandising”—but he’s not here.  [Laughter]  All right.  If not, Ms. Danker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a lighthearted discussion about making changes to a sentence and asking for other comments or thoughts.


Passage number 203.
 MS. DANKER.  I will be reading the directive from the Bluebook and the statement that was just circulated.  “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 2 percent.” Then the statement is as it was handed out, except the last sentence reads, “The Committee will monitor economic and financial developments carefully and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both the directive from the Bluebook and the statement that was circulated emphasize the Committee's objectives of price stability and sustainable growth in output. The only difference in the statement is a slight modification in the wording of the last sentence.


