
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

On the one hand, I think we have to respond 3/20/01 71very clearly to the incoming data.
<START>We should not be afraid to do what we think is right for the real economy because of some concern about disappointing the markets and not acceding to unreasonable market expectations.<END>
<START>On the other hand, we should not be overly cautious in adjusting monetary policy out of some concern that we may be perceived to be feeding the markets.<END>
In my view we also will need a great deal of flexibility in the period ahead because, though the incoming data suggest that the economy may be bottoming out, the evidence is still quite mixed, as many of you have asserted.
Such a policy response is not without its own challenges, as I'm sure we will discuss.
But we must recognize that we are in a risky environment regardless of what path we choose.
We are dealing with both an uncertain real economy and unpredictable psychology among consumers and businesses.
We will have to tread very carefully, but I think we should not be paralyzed by the uncertainties that we face.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Second District economy is holding up rather well, with the labor markets quite strong and continued strength in housing.
Despite much gloom on Wall Street, which I will discuss later, employment levels in New York City are holding up extremely well.
That may relate to the fact that restaurants are opening in Manhattan at a record pace and some of the staff look less like out-of-work actors and actresses and more like high-tech types!
In the manufacturing sector, purchasing managers in the District report slow growth, though the automotive sector--which is very important in western New York 3/20/01 72because of the volume of parts we supply--is showing signs of recovery.
The purchasing managers outside manufacturing give an increasingly dreary review of current conditions, which makes me think that their spouses probably work on Wall Street.
The gloom on Wall Street has reached the point of advanced silliness, I think.
It reminds me of Dickens’ description of a London fog in that it is permeating absolutely everything.
<START>The mood is self-perpetuating and contagious, and there’s very little that more optimistic or more realistic people like us can do about it except not fall prey to it ourselves.<END>
People in the venture capital community, who tend to be rather realistic--especially those in the experienced firms--are being very cautious.
They are reluctant to finance even relatively promising companies that are struggling currently.
<START>A lot of those companies are in the high-tech sector, and I think the reticence of the venture capital firms will probably bring down some companies that deserve to survive, adding to the sector’s problem of not being able to provide the creative juices that the economy needs.<END>
I believe the downside risks to our economy are considerable and since others have discussed that subject rather thoroughly I won't add to it.
In the last couple of months I have been an international sales manager for the new Basel Capital Accord, and have been around the world literally.
So, let me talk a bit about the concerns I have outside the United States.
I have already talked about Europe, where the quality of leadership does not seem to be what is needed at the political level and perhaps not in the finance ministries or central banks either.
Their neighbor, Turkey, is going through a problem, which was almost purely political in nature, although it became economic very quickly.
<START>3/20/01 73Given the questionable future of oil prices, I think we have to keep in mind the issue of political stability in the Middle East.<END>
A return to anything like the very low oil prices of a couple years ago would place in real question the stability of some oil- producing countries.
Of particular concern are those with aging and not very flexible monarchs and a society that has become quite accustomed to a much higher level of spending than a low oil price can finance.
That is a situation on which we have to keep a weather eye.
We talked earlier about Japan.
The promising development in Japan is that for the first time its leaders actually are talking in a fairly serious way about reform of the financial sector, which they should have done twelve years ago.
The minister in charge of the area, Mr. Yanagisawa, is extremely sound.
He's at least as knowledgeable about restructuring a private financial sector as anybody I've ever met, so there's no lack of knowledge regarding what to do.
<START>If the country’s leaders are getting close to the point of thinking that they simply cannot plot a reasonable future unless they reform the financial sector, it might just get done.<END>
It's going to be very difficult.
I don't think one would want to take even 50-50 odds on it.
But they are closer to talking and to thinking about doing the right things than at any time I recall since the bubble burst at the end of the 1980s.
The Asian tiger economies are at very serious risk in my judgment.
There is much talk about their dependence on Japan.
<START>Actually, they are not dependent on Japan--they assume that Japan will be in recession or close to it--but they are very dependent on exports to the United States and Europe.<END>
Virtually all the countries have accomplished essentially no structural reform since the Asian crisis in 1997 and, therefore, weak 3/20/01 74exports could easily result in considerable difficulties in a number of countries whose success is so much tied to exports.
In Argentina there is a little breath of life.
The news since our conversation this morning is that Mr. Cavallo is apparently going to be the economics minister.
He is meeting as we speak with the governors of the provinces, most of whom are from the Peronista party, which means that he is probably trying to cobble together a political coalition.
You no doubt recall that he was the economics minister for President Menem, whose political skills along with Mr. Cavallo’s technical economics skills were a very favorable combination for the country.
<START>It's important that Argentina emerge from this situation in good shape because the political system in Brazil is looking rather fragile.<END>
The number of corruption cases that are getting near the president and his closest ministers is increasing to the point that a political or economic contagion coming from Argentina might find Brazil not terribly capable of dealing with it.
So, I think the downside risk coming from outside of our country is very considerable indeed, with a number of accidents looking as if they could happen.
The likelihood of escaping all of them would impress me as quite low.
Given that situation, I very much sympathize with what Governor Ferguson just said.
I think the stance of monetary policy has to make two things clear to all observers.
One is that we will ease when we need to, including today.
The second is that in addition to today’s move, we are prepared to act if and when necessary.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There's very little that I can add at this point about the economy, so I’ll be brief.
But let me try to summarize the situation.
3/20/01 75It was 100 percent predictable well in advance of the economic slowdown that going through such a period would be painful.
We are now in a slowdown and it is painful.
It was almost as certain that after a period of slowing a time would come when we would welcome an upturn but would have to go through a very disconcerting stretch of uncertainty about whether an upturn or more decline was in the cards.
We seem to be in that stage now.
In recent days we’ve all been studying the data, reading analyses, receiving briefings, and sharing ideas.
The bottom line would seem to be this:
While there are good reasons to believe that the economy will soon turn up--and I believe that is the highest probability outcome--we cannot know or be overly confident that an upturn is in train.
It is still possible that the various negative forces existing today will drag us into further weakness.
Our policy choice must be made in the face of this very fundamental uncertainty.
In golf, which I play poorly, club selection before a shot usually presents the player with three options--an aggressive choice, a central tendency, and a conservative choice.
[Laughter] Each option usually has its own plausibility.
<START>In different situations a player might well go with any of the options, depending on his or her objectives at the time and an assessment of the risks.<END>
<START>Shortly I expect Don Kohn to tell us that in this game a conservative choice is to ease 25 basis points, 50 basis points is a central tendency, and 75 is aggressive.<END>
Of course, the loudest voices in the gallery want us to go for it, but that doesn't mean that we should.
In deference to your request that members not discuss policy positions until the next part of the meeting, Mr. Chairman, I will withhold further comments until then.
[Laughter] 3/20/01 76CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Tell me whether you're using your five iron or your six iron!
MR.
MOSKOW.
Or is he using his driver?
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
Three highly interrelated developments over the intermeeting period have, in my view, strengthened the case for further easing.
<START>The first relates to the more powerful negative wealth effect due to the slide in equity prices, the further decline in consumer confidence, the possibility of a more serious shakeout or retrenchment in high-tech investment, and the prospects for weaker foreign growth.<END>
<START>All those factors point to weaker consumer and investment spending and weaker exports over the forecast period for a given funds rate path.<END>
<START>Despite these concerns, the incoming data are mixed and there is considerable uncertainty about the strength of spending going forward.<END>
A second consideration reinforcing the case for further easing is that broader financial conditions have not eased--at least not appreciably--despite the decline in the funds rate to date and despite expectations in the market for considerable further declines in the funds rate.
Instead, the decline in equity prices and the strengthening of the dollar have significantly offset the stimulus from lower short-term interest rates.
Third, and perhaps more speculatively, although David Stockton mentioned this in his presentation, recent developments may be consistent with a decline in the economy’s equilibrium real interest rate.
The staff, as you know, has been working on estimating a time-varying measure of the equilibrium real funds rate.
One of the key drivers of the equilibrium real rate is the equity premium.
To the extent that the recent decline in equity prices is a reassessment of fundamental values rather than a cyclical 3/20/01 77correction, it implies a rise in the equity premium and a decline in the equilibrium real rate.
In this case, the federal funds rate might need to be lowered more aggressively than would be suggested by movements in the output gap or inflation.
Of course, this line of analysis has some implications for the appropriate response to a decrease in the equity premium, but that’s another story.
Let me turn to the question of why the economy has slowed so sharply and what the implications are for the forecast and the policy response.
One hypothesis is that we’re in the middle of an IT inventory correction, one that is sharper and faster than traditional inventory corrections but with less persistence.
This would be consistent with the so-called V-shaped recovery.
I don't disagree that the current inventory correction may be sharper and swifter than traditional corrections, but I do not think that is the most important theme in the story nor even the most important way in which new economy developments are shaping the slowdown.
The deeper story in my view is the interaction of a cyclical slowdown and a correction of pre-existing imbalances.
<START>Such a correction of imbalances is quite typical of recessions and, indeed, often contributes to the severity of downturns.<END>
I will focus on two interrelated imbalances at the start of the slowdown.
One is the valuation of equities, particularly of high-tech firms;
the second is the rate of high-tech investment and/or stocks of high-tech capital goods.
First, consider the consequences of the apparent equity correction.
The staff estimates that the wealth effect, after adding as much as 1-1/2 percentage points to consumer spending growth in the second half of 1999, will be subtracting about 1 percentage point throughout the forecast period.
That will result in growth of consumer 3/20/01 78spending at a rate below the growth in GDP.
The tax cut assumptions in the forecast make only a slight dent in the short run.
<START>As a result, returning to trend growth over the forecast period requires a strong rebound in investment.<END>
<START>Unfortunately, the second imbalance may be in the level of high-tech capital or at least in the rate of high-tech investment.<END>
The V-shaped recovery depends on a strong rebound in investment, reflecting continued high structural productivity growth and an associated high expected rate of return on high-tech investment.
<START>But we also have to put into the investment mix the legacy of excesses associated with the frenzied pace of investment over the last few years.<END>
<START>The result may be a period of shakeout or retrenchment in high-tech investment that weighs against a quick and sharp rebound.<END>
Let me turn now to a critical set of assumptions underpinning the Greenbook forecast.
They happen to be very important in assessing the degree of cumulative easing that might be required.
Despite very similar paths for output, the Greenbook and Blue Chip forecasts show very different paths for the unemployment rate.
This is exactly the issue that President Minehan remarked on earlier and that a number of others also have mentioned today.
<START>The Blue Chip forecast, assuming what appears to be a similar policy path to that in the Greenbook, depicts a quite benign soft landing, with the unemployment rate moving just above 4-1/2 percent--close to the short-run NAIRU--and growth near trend in 2002.<END>
<START>In contrast, with about the same output path, the Greenbook has the unemployment rate a full percentage point higher and growth still slightly below trend in 2002.<END>
<START>As a result, that would call for a more aggressive easing over the forecast period.<END>
The first key assumption behind this difference, as President Minehan noted, is the underlying rate of productivity growth.
The staff assumes that structural productivity 3/20/01 79growth is almost 1/2 percentage point higher than the assumption implicit in the Blue Chip forecast.
This explains a bit less than one-half of the difference.
The second key may be how Okun’s Law is being applied.
The Blue Chip forecast seems consistent with applying a simple static form of Okun’s Law.
<START>The staff appears to be applying a dynamic version, taking into account the delayed effect of the slowdown to date, most of which has not yet passed through to employment.<END>
It’s hard to argue with the Greenbook approach in this case.
But there are some considerations that might support a different dynamic in the labor market response to a slowing in growth.
One example is the reluctance of firms to lay off workers, given the recent difficulty in hiring them.
<START>At any rate, these considerations increase the difficulty of assessing at this point just how much easing will be appropriate and provide a rationale for a gradual, incremental strategy of easing.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you all.
Mr. Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Incoming data, while mixed, have indicated that the economy has been growing at best at a sluggish pace.
Moreover, a number of signs suggest weakness ahead;
<START>downward revisions to sales and earnings forecasts of many firms point to continued restraint on investment spending, and the associated decreases in equity prices along with lower consumer confidence will also be damping consumption demand.<END>
Against this background, outside commentators see you debating between a 50 and a 75 basis point reduction in the target federal funds rate at this meeting.
Primary dealer economists are split close to 50/50 on which you will choose, and market interest rates now seem to have built in similar odds as well.
I thought I would concentrate my remarks this morning on this choice.
Although the staff forecast assumes a 50 basis point reduction in the funds rate at this meeting, elements of that forecast provide good support for the more aggressive action.
<START>To be sure, most interest rates--both long- and short-term--already are a percentage point or more below their average levels in December, before you started easing, but equity prices have dropped 16 percent since then 3/20/01 80and the foreign exchange value of the dollar has risen 2 percent.<END>
As a consequence, the amount of financial stimulus in the pipeline to bolster a rebound in the growth of aggregate demand is much smaller than might otherwise be expected.
Moreover, because markets are placing some weight on a 75 basis point move, a further 50 basis point reduction in the funds rate at this meeting is unlikely to boost the stock market, depreciate the dollar, or lower bond yields.
<START>With limited follow-through in financial markets from policy easing, as Dave has explained, economic growth remains below the growth of potential in the staff forecast and the unemployment rate rises rapidly.<END>
<START>Although some relief of the labor market pressures of last spring may not be an entirely unwelcome development, the rise in the unemployment rate in the staff forecast may be too rapid and the level too high for you to find desirable.<END>
The rate moves above the NAIRU built into the staff forecast, giving a downward tilt to core consumer inflation in 2002 and presumably thereafter.
Moreover, the Committee may see high odds on even less inflation pressure than implicit in the staff forecast if it suspects that the NAIRU may be lower than the staff judges it to be and may prefer to conduct policy on that working hypothesis until evidence more strongly suggests otherwise.
If you accept the staff’s assessment of the strength of aggregate demand but do not put a priority at this time on reducing inflation next year, you might consider the larger, 75 basis point reduction in the funds rate at this meeting to be appropriate.
<START>The argument for such a reduction could be reinforced if the Committee saw the risks around the staff’s outlook for aggregate demand to be substantial and asymmetrical toward lower growth.<END>
<START>Although the staff forecast incorporates considerable weakness in high-tech investment, the extent of the shortfalls in sales of such equipment and the associated earnings revisions and stock price declines could be indicative of a larger overhang of this capital than in the staff forecast.<END>
<START>Moreover, as pessimism about the earnings outlook seemed to spread last week beyond the high-tech sector, it was accompanied by a whiff of a generalized increase in both perceptions of risk and aversion to taking on risk.<END>
If that sentiment intensified, credit conditions could tighten substantially for many more U.S.
borrowers.
Greater risk aversion, and an associated tendency for contagion from one market to another, might also have a marked effect internationally, raising risk premiums and reducing credit availability to governments and private borrowers in countries in which the fundamental outlook is already being called into question.
This possibility would tend to accentuate the 3/20/01 81downside risks in the global economy, a source of concern that Karen has already highlighted.
It has been unusual for the Committee to give considerable weight to the balance of risks, rather than the most likely forecast, when deciding on its policy stance.
<START>In part, that’s because such skews don’t usually appear large enough to raise significant concerns relative to the already difficult issues presented by determining the central tendency of the economic forecast and settling on an appropriate policy response.<END>
<START>Even when the risks are large, the Committee may recognize that buying protection against potential developments can have significant and continuing costs in that such actions foster less desirable outcomes in terms of real activity or inflation if those potential developments never occur.<END>
<START>Finally, there is another approach, albeit not quite as pre-emptive, that can minimize some of the potential costs when you see outsized risks on one side.<END>
That is to be prepared to respond rapidly should you get early evidence that the developments that concern you are in fact materializing.
<START>In the current circumstances, such an approach might argue in favor of a 50 basis point easing but a willingness to act promptly--even before the next meeting, if necessary--should, for example, demand show signs of weakening further or financial markets tighten substantially.<END>
In addition, a good bit of the recent evidence on demand and economic activity may be read as weighing in favor of the less aggressive 50 basis point alternative.
In particular, spending and employment have held up better than anticipated by the staff in the January forecast.
By themselves, these data indicate stronger growth than the Greenbook estimate for the first quarter, suggesting the possibility that the risks may not be all on one side--that underlying demands may be stronger than in the staff forecast or the market’s perception and the inventory correction closer to being completed.
<START>Moreover, January data on core consumer prices highlighted a pattern of acceleration over the last year that could prove troublesome if the economic rebound were significantly stronger or faster than in the staff forecast.<END>
In financial markets, your easing moves may well be having more constructive and supportive effects than is apparent by just focusing on changes in interest rates, exchange rates, and equity prices.
<START>Credit markets have accommodated a large volume of borrowing, and decreases in bond and mortgage interest rates have encouraged a considerable lengthening in liability structures, which will leave both businesses and households less exposed to short-run 3/20/01 82variations in credit availability.<END>
The fact that risk spreads did not widen much--and not at all until very late in the intermeeting period--despite ongoing downward revisions to earnings expectations, may in part be a reflection of declines in long-term interest rates holding down debt-service burdens and hence perceptions of borrower risk.
Moreover, money growth has been quite rapid.
<START>Some of this growth may be the result of greater demands for liquidity in an uncertain economy.<END>
But, in contrast to the early 1990s, depositories seem willing to accommodate this demand and provide credit to borrowers, albeit at somewhat wider spreads.
The opposite outcome--low money growth after decreases in interest rates--would have been a worrisome sign that income and spending were falling short of expectations or that depositories were less willing to carry out their intermediary functions.
Finally, the interplay of your actions and market expectations may also argue on the side of holding the easing action to 50 basis points.
Market participants see a 75 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate as an alternative partly because, by your actions in January, you raised the bar for what is considered forceful action.
The most important aspect of the market’s expectations is the overall trajectory of policy actions built into intermediate- and long-term interest rates.
If, for now, you are satisfied with the expectations that are likely to be built into the yield curve after you move 50 basis points, you can proceed gradually, even if you suspect that more easing may well be needed at some point.
At this time, markets have priced in a decline in the federal funds rate to below 4-1/4 percent by the end of the year.
Easing by 50 instead of 75 basis points is likely to raise this expected path some, but it is not likely to change the basic shape.
<START>If you think that a decline in the funds rate of this dimension implies low enough intermediate- and long-term interest rates to promote sustainable growth, the less aggressive adjustment should not be a problem.<END>
<START>You do need to consider this assessment in light of the drop in equity prices that likely would follow a 50 basis point easing.<END>
Depending in part on the wording of your announcement, it could be substantial inasmuch as equity market participants seem to be counting on you to stop the slide.
But you also need to consider how successful an extra 25 basis points is likely to be in that regard.
<START>The downward movement in equity prices is primarily a consequence of disappointing earnings and a better appreciation of risk, especially in the high-tech sectors.<END>
And it is likely to continue until that disappointment comes to an end, whatever the discount factors used to value earnings streams.
<START>If the drop in equity prices is substantial after a 50 basis point move, markets will prevent it 3/20/01 83from tightening overall financial conditions to its full extent, because they will also price in more ease later.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Questions for Don?
Let me follow on then.
The one statistic that has not been mentioned today, which in fact I find the most worrisome on the down side, is the persistent downward revisions in weekly forecasts of S&P 500 earnings per share for the year 2001.
Those forecasts have been reduced for the first three quarters of this year and, as I recall, for the fourth quarter as well.
The downward revisions have persisted through the latest week for which we have data, which was last week.
If we look at the year as a whole on a chart, the expected change in per share earnings seems to be going straight down.
The main problem is not so much the direction;
it’s that the slope has not changed.
The degree of erosion seems to be continuing, and it's not all accounted for by high-tech industries.
Our estimate is that only about half the revisions involve the high-tech sector.
One consequence of the bleak near-term earnings outlook is that we are beginning to see a significant amount of capital investment plans being placed on the shelf.
It’s not that expectations of rates of return are being materially reduced for the longer term.
They are not, and in fact the discussion we had earlier with respect to the outlook for the foreign exchange rate seems correctly suggestive of the fact that longer-term earnings expectations are holding up because the strength in productivity is still there.
<START>What has happened is that the current uncertainties engendered by the sharpness of the slowing in the rate of economic growth have increased discount factors and hurdle rates of return in the markets.<END>
In a sense, that has made a lot of projects that were viable in the context of the hurdle rates of a year ago no longer viable in terms of 3/20/01 84today's hurdle rates.
<START>It doesn't mean that all these projects are canceled, but it does mean that a substantial number are being delayed.<END>
<START>In terms of how fast such delays can materialize, one just has to visualize a simple model involving the high-tech sector, where our data show an increase in capacity of 50 percent over the past year.<END>
That affects a significantly large part of the economy, and it’s clearly a rate of increase that cannot persist indefinitely.
<START>I don’t know what the relationship is in the high-tech area between outlays for replacement and modernization and outlays for capacity expansion, but if we assume that replacement and modernization expenditures do not change as the growth in expenditures for new capacity falls from 50 percent to, say, 20 percent--a still very dramatic and strong increase--growth of capital investment obviously will decline by 30 percentage points.<END>
And when we consider the fact that such investment has been going up very dramatically, the downward spike that we are looking at is very impressive, wholly independent of the question as to whether there has been a fundamental change in the longer-term outlook.
It’s the acceleration in investment expenditures in 1999 and 2000 that has set up this particular pattern, and the falloff in profit expectations is feeding this whole process.
So the possibility that we may end up with a much lower capital investment number for the year than we forecast is not to be readily dismissed.
<START>I say that without any expectation that substantially reduced growth in capital investment will continue beyond this year.<END>
Because of the decline in expected earnings and the obviously very sharp contraction in profitability, we are also getting some slowing in expenditures from the wealth effect--not as much as one would expect, but still some.
Moreover, the overall slowing in both capital investment and personal consumption expenditures, especially 3/20/01 85late last year, induced a fairly significant backup of inventories--actually, disproportionately in the high-tech area.
If we look at the inventory-sales ratios in various segments of the economy it’s pretty obvious, however we calculate these ratios, that the inventory backup in the high-tech sector has been completely unanticipated and that high-tech firms as a group have run into some difficulties.
The difficulties outside the high-tech area initially occurred largely in autos and a lot of intermediate materials.
While the book value data have grown faster in nominal terms, I believe, than in real terms, we can get a sense of real inventories from the production data, which by definition is where all inventories come from.
From those data we conclude that the decline in manufacturing production through the latter months of last year ended a period of increasing real inventory accumulation.
Leaving aside the somewhat questionable January numbers, February and March clearly are a period of significant inventory liquidation.
Indeed, the data that we have for motor vehicles show some quite substantial declines.
But in comparison with production patterns throughout the economy, consumption in February and March does not seem to be changing as fast.
The implication of that from the perspective of a statistical model is that the rate of liquidation in February and March is really quite stark and pronounced.
The overall effect of this on economic activity is stabilization at some point, if all that is involved is an inventory correction.
Stabilization would occur reasonably quickly because, judging from past experience, the current rate of inventory liquidation seems to be close to a maximum.
<START>What happens when a maximum degree of liquidation is reached is that the economy stabilizes even though the general level of confidence may be very low and indeed people may anticipate that economic conditions will deteriorate 3/20/01 86further.<END>
They don’t.
And the reason they don’t is that the level of inventories becomes a brake on the extent of the liquidation.
<START>The fact that inventories cannot be negative no matter how uncertain, no matter how bearish people feel, is a fundamental feature of the way the economic system functions.<END>
Accordingly, inventory liquidations and inventory cycles are usually of the type that produce change reasonably quickly and can lead to a relatively prompt and pronounced adjustment in the economy.
I suspect that we are going to see a goodly measure of that in the months ahead.
Maybe.
The “maybe” relates to a phenomenon that occurs on occasion but one about which I am quite concerned at the moment.
It’s called a “false dawn.” It occurs when there are a lot of indications that the economy is behaving the way it ordinarily does in a recovery;
but then it surprises us, and we get a renewed wave of weakness.
One reason I would be concerned about that prospect is that the level of consumer confidence has come down fairly dramatically, even though the University of Michigan numbers did show some improvement in the first half of March.
Of course, if we focus on the observations that were collected after the stock market took a sharp swing downward, the number comes down somewhat.
So the level of confidence is still an open question.
Far more important is an issue that we have discussed around this table, namely the saving rate.
The saving rate has a huge multiplier.
All one has to do is add or subtract 2 or 3 percentage points and that does extraordinary wonders to the level of GDP and does so very quickly.
I don’t know whether the negative wealth effect is going to be a major problem.
Conceptually, one has to presume that there is a considerable effect.
I don't know whether we are going to learn specifically how its impact is working its way 3/20/01 87through to expenditures;
but it is not doing so currently at the pace that we would have expected from our models.
The uncertainties surrounding the negative wealth effect, along with the absence of any evidence that the rate of downward adjustments to expected profitability may be stabilizing, make me nervous about the outlook.
Nonetheless, the March sales figures, as Mike Moskow mentioned, are not doing all that badly and the liquidation of inventories continues.
Moreover, the numbers for steel ingot production came out today.
They are still going up, and they are going up at a pace that is very clearly consistent with an inventory turnaround.
So, a lot of positive economic information is showing up.
<START>Indeed, as I listen to the anecdotal reports around this table, I find encouraging signs that in my view would be consistent with stabilization were it not for the profits and the saving rate problems.<END>
Another significant issue is Japan.
Its economy, the second largest in the world, has had virtually no perceivable impact on world economic conditions for a long period of time.
For a decade Japan had been a cipher as far as its multiplier effects on economic conditions in other parts of the world were concerned.
I feel that that is no longer the case.
I think the economic situation is eroding in Japan, and I believe it is eroding at a faster pace than is forecast in the Greenbook.
I don’t think it’s all a political problem.
<START>What the Japanese are dealing with are problems relating to a declining labor force, unfunded long-term pensions, very large deficit spending, and an almost nonfunctioning financial intermediary system.<END>
Japan, remember, has a bank-only financial intermediary system, and we have seen innumerable examples in a number of the smaller East Asian countries of what happens when that intermediary system breaks 3/20/01 88down.
We have not yet seen that in Japan, but I think there is a significant danger that we may.
More broadly, East Asia, as the Vice Chair has mentioned, is clearly in some difficulty.
<START>Latin America is not a current problem for our economy, but there is a problem of political instability in those countries.<END>
We need to remember that a number of Latin American nations, such as Argentina and Brazil, have what might be characterized as American type high-risk economies.
Such economies can function only if they operate in the framework of long-term time preferences and a political system that thinks longer term.
It’s not evident that that’s the way the political system works in Latin America.
As I have often commented--and Bill McDonough knows this better than I, and in fact Roger Ferguson probably goes to more international meetings than I do--when we sit around these international tables, what we hear are people who think like Western economists.
But they are utterly unrepresentative of the government officials who employ them, and we get a false view of how those economic systems work.
So there is a degree of shakiness about the economic outlook in many of our important trading partners, and that makes the false dawn issue disturbing.
In addition, of course, there is the stock market about which much has been said today.
<START>Some market players behave like addicts convinced a heightened dose would relieve their pain.<END>
It does not, and they seek a still larger dose.
There is no stability in a regimen based on false pharmacology, [laughter] nor for stock prices from ever-larger doses of liquidity.
Short-term rates have only a peripheral impact on expected earnings and risk premiums, and they therefore have limited effects on stock prices.
<START>Targeting stock prices themselves cannot be an effective policy.<END>
To restrain an upside stock market 3/20/01 89surge could require the draining of liquidity to an extent that that would cause a collapse of economic activity, an obviously unacceptable trade-off.
Likewise, flooding a depressed market with excess liquidity, unless that succeeds in revving up a moribund economy, revive a deflated stock market.
cannot It is important that the Federal Reserve not follow a flawed strategy.
<START>I fear that with a reduction of 75 basis points or even 100 basis points today, which as you know a number of people are suggesting, stock prices could still fall, leading too many observers to conclude that monetary policy is ineffective.<END>
This is a potentially dangerous view in my mind especially among the broad array of those who do not participate in the equity markets.
If we do 50 basis points and stock prices fall further, as they well might today, it is the central bankers who may be perceived as intellectually inadequate, not policy itself.
This is far less dangerous to the economy!
[Laughter] At least it leaves open up the possibility that we policymakers can be educated or changed.
Beyond that, implying but by no means guaranteeing in our press release that we may well cut rates before our May 15 meeting is a Damocles sword over bear speculators who view the next liquidity fix as more important than higher housing starts.
Ambiguity is rarely useful in monetary policy.
<START>Uncertainty usually creates risk premiums, but that depends on the nature of the uncertainty.<END>
<START>For those who believe that the provision of central bank liquidity is bullish for stocks, history tells us that an overhang of uncertainty about when or whether the Fed will move to lower rates creates a downside or negative risk premium that may well have a larger sustaining effect than acting to remove the uncertainty.<END>
<START>Markets are very often bought on rumor and sold when the rumor proves true, or false for that matter.<END>
This is one of the rare periods when in my 3/20/01 90judgment calculated ambiguity can serve a useful purpose in minimizing unthoughtful activity.
I would propose, therefore, that we reduce the rate by 50 basis points and construct language for the press statement that leaves the door wide open on an intermeeting move.
Any intermeeting action would be governed, however, by a judgment that the real economy is in some unforeseen difficulty beyond our current set of probabilities, not by a further weakening in stock prices.
I do acknowledge a wealth effect, which we must take into consideration.
The wealth effect itself is real in that it has an impact on spending and activity, not just psychology.
If we are required to accelerate our downside moves, I prefer to shorten the interval between the moves rather than increase the size of each move.
I do not like where I believe relatively large moves may lead us in current circumstances.
I believe the cost of a policy of smaller but, as needed, more frequent moves is really quite limited.
It does not require us to make the added move, but leaves our options wholly open.
This in my judgment is necessary in the present environment.
I would like to put on the table for discussion, then, a 50 basis point reduction with a statement in our press release that the risks are still on the down side but that also suggests that we are focused on what is going on in the economy.
Even though we have almost two months to the next meeting, we will be prepared to act when and if necessary, but we recognize that “when and if necessary” does not merely mean a decline in the stock market.
Thank you.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I very enthusiastically support your recommendation, including all the nuances.
When I was on my most recent long airplane ride, which was last Wednesday, I thought to myself that what we had to do 3/20/01 91at this meeting was to be decisive and flexible at the same time.
That would require creating a certain amount of uncertainty among the bears in the market who are forever trying to find a new carcass to feed on.
In my view, therefore, a 75 basis point cut in the funds rate would be very, very unwise.
The market could interpret that as an indication that we had finished easing monetary policy.
We don't know whether we will have finished easing with another 75 basis point reduction.
I would note, too, that I think your use of the word “addiction” was absolutely right.
It would be assumed that the new “normal” move was 75 basis points;
we would be feeding the addict’s habit and the next time he or she would want a move of 75 basis points or more.
So, such an action would be extremely ill advised.
And the peculiar thing is that the end result would be a reduction in our flexibility at exactly the time we need it.
Thus, I believe that every part of your recommendation, in particular making it rather clear that we might well move before the next meeting, is appropriate.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me comment briefly about each of the choices along the spectrum of alternatives that are most plausible here.
Twenty-five basis points is the most conservative possibility.
With inflation quiescent and quite likely to stay so for some time, I just don't see any necessity to keep such a tight hold.
Indeed, I perceive that it would be quite risky to do so.
So that alternative has little attraction for me at this time.
The most aggressive choice is 75 basis points.
While the financial markets are clamoring for it, the data from the real economy seem firmer than such a move might 3/20/01 92imply.
Most particularly, I fear that the message a 75 basis point move would send would be totally wrong.
People in the real economy might perceive us to be in panic, which we are not.
Stock market investors might see us as trying to save them, which would not be correct but could nevertheless create a serious moral hazard that might be quite difficult to eradicate.
And this move would take short-term rates down toward a low level, which could begin to constrain our options should further easing become necessary.
Finally, there is at least some small possibility that a strong, early upturn in the economic expansion could make even this level seem too low in the not too distant future, which would introduce an entirely new set of dynamics.
<START>So, I believe that 50 basis points is the best choice and that asymmetry toward weakness is the correct tilt because I think the risks are still on the down side.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I can support your recommendation, although it is not my first choice.
And because it may prove relevant for some future meeting, I’d like to explain briefly a different view.
<START>Let me call option X a 50 basis point cut with the balance of risks toward weakness.<END>
I’ll call option Y, my preference, a 75 basis point cut with a statement that the risks are balanced.
I think the immediate market impact of those two options would be roughly the same because the balanced risks statement is not foreseen by the market.
I look at this as a problem of where we are likely to be perhaps four weeks from now.
Incidentally, I want to make clear that a balanced risks statement only means that the probabilities of the next move being up or down are equal.
I would not be foreclosing 3/20/01 93another easing move at the next meeting if the data support such a move in a compelling way.
But let’s say the incoming data are on the weak side four weeks out.
Option X, the one we are likely to vote for today, leaves us in the same situation as we were going into this meeting--that is, with continuing speculation about when and how big our next move will be.
Option Y puts us ahead of where we would otherwise be.
<START>If the incoming data are flat to strong, option X results in uncertainty about whether we might still be contemplating another downward move.<END>
Option Y leaves us “finished” for the time being, which I would view as the correct message.
Clearly, option Y positions us to stop easing at forthcoming meetings.
That is my best guess of our future policy path, given the forecast, the sentiment, the anecdotal information, and the rapid creation of liquidity in the system at this point.
I am quite frankly opposed to giving a deliberate hint of an intermeeting move.
<START>I think that's going to cause us difficulty not only in coming weeks, but well beyond because people will be wondering in the future if an intermeeting action is on our minds.<END>
So, I believe that that would be a mistake.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig, MR. HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I support your proposal.
As I said earlier, I see enough weakness and risk in the economy looking forward beyond this quarter to justify a 50 basis point cut.
<START>And I am relieved that we are not doing more than that because in my view that would introduce some of the problems you noted.<END>
<START>It most definitely would introduce moral hazard issues with regard to the market and what it would expect from us, which would be inappropriate.<END>
So, I am comfortable with your recommendation.
3/20/01 94I have two questions.
When you spoke of an intermeeting move, did you have in mind a conference call with the Committee to go forward with such an action?
Secondly, in the press statement coming out of this meeting, would you anticipate any reference to the market or would the market not be mentioned?
If nothing else, we're going to get ourselves in this trap-- CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
In the draft language, the only reference to the market relates to equity wealth effects.
At this stage there is no reference to stock prices.
MR.
HOENIG.
Okay, thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I agree with your proposition, Mr. Chairman.
I think a 50 basis point decrease in the fed funds rate is appropriate at this time.
And since I believe the risks are still on the down side, I favor retaining the balance of risks language in the direction of weakness, as you indicated.
I, too, have become uncomfortable with the possibility that observers might get the impression that the Committee’s decisions are driven by what the markets expect and by the direction of stock prices.
I’d like to dissuade them of that view.
Therefore, I think it’s important that our press statement indicate that our action was taken to counteract the real economic effects of falling stock prices, as you suggested.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, I support a 50 basis point cut in the funds rate and I also support a statement that the risks remain weighted toward economic weakness.
I, too, share your concern about a 75 basis point cut at this time.
To me the recent data on employment and spending do not suggest that things are as bad as the stock market, or 3/20/01 95for that matter consumers in general, seems to think.
This makes it likely that at least part of the market’s decline represents a return to more rational stock valuations.
Under these conditions, a 75 basis point cut in the funds rate now could provide a false sense of security to the stock market.
People might be led to believe that the Fed is attempting to validate recent historically high valuations in equity markets.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation.
I'm coming at this largely in the way Ned Gramlich described earlier.
<START>It seems to me that the real federal funds rate should be moving lower, and a 50 basis point cut seems appropriate.<END>
I don't know if that will turn out to be sufficient but I do think it will prove to be constructive.
I share your concerns about the potential of a false dawn here, though obviously none of us can see the future very clearly.
But another possibility--and perhaps a better bet at least in my mind--is that rather than a V-shaped recovery we will get initially just a very, very modest recovery.
It may be similar to the type we had in the early ’90s, when for a time there was a lot of concern about the fragility of the economy and the sustainability of its performance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I can endorse your recommendation.
I'd like to speak to each of its three parts.
First, a cut of 50 basis points does seem to me to be appropriately targeted at the real economy.
<START>Any more would appear to be targeted inappropriately at the stock 3/20/01 96market--and I endorse your general concept of why that is not the role of a central bank--and any less would clearly be too little in my judgment, given the risks.<END>
<START>On the balance of risks statement, the language is written in the context of our goals of price stability and sustainable growth.<END>
<START>Therefore, if we're seeing growth in the foreseeable future that is likely to be below our estimate of appropriate trend growth, then we can legitimately continue with a statement that says the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness.<END>
I believe this is an important element of interpretation.
<START>If in fact the economy were growing appreciably but from a very low base and we still thought that growth was unacceptably slow because it was below trend, then it would be legitimate intellectually to say that the risks are toward economic weakness.<END>
With respect to the hint of an intermeeting move in the press release, I am concerned about adding some new language whose presence or absence could be something that the market is looking for after every meeting in the future.
We did that in December.
I think it worked well.
We did not do it at our last meeting and that was okay as well.
So I don't think the market has gotten into the habit of looking for this kind of language to indicate future policy moves.
However, it is always important, and in fact it’s common sense, to suggest that we are attentive to the incoming data.
<START>So, given the degree of risk and uncertainty, and given the amount of time between now and the next scheduled meeting, I think it is probably better--though it is not an easy judgment to make--to include a sentence that suggests we will be particularly attentive to incoming data.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
3/20/01 97MS MINEHAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
All I can say is “Wow!” Your summary was a real tour de force, especially with respect to the stock market and the undesirability of fulfilling ever-greater market expectations.
<START>I agree with the 50 basis points, I agree with the asymmetry, and I share your concern about a move of 75 basis points or something more than that.<END>
I'm in agreement largely because, first of all, I think an easing move is necessary and secondly because I believe taking measured steps is appropriate.
It may well be that further ease will be necessary, but I'd like to do that also in limited steps.
<START>And to me the best part of a measured process like that is that it could focus the “addicts,” as you called them, a bit on saving themselves rather than looking to us to do the job.<END>
<START>I am, however, very worried about your recommended nuances in the statement.<END>
In my view we always have the option to move between meetings.
We’ve done so in the past, the quite recent past.
That is part of everybody's understanding of how we operate.
Everyone knows how long it is between this meeting and the next meeting, everyone knows we’re vigilant, and everyone knows we’re focused on incoming data.
<START>If we add nuances to the statement this time, I think we are going to provide the addicts with even more reason to focus on us rather than themselves for a solution to their problems.<END>
And I don't think that would be good at all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, I come out exactly where President Minehan did.
I certainly support the 50 basis points move.
I thought the reasons you gave at the end of your statement really iced the case, although I have to confess that I 3/20/01 98wasn't sure for awhile exactly where you were going to come out.
But cutting the funds rate as you proposed is what I think we clearly need to do.
I can support an asymmetric directive.
On the economic merits that makes sense to me.
But I have very strong reservations and would oppose adding new language about the possibility of an intermeeting move.
<START>I just don't think it would buy us a lot, and it could be dangerous in terms of the market dynamics and the expectations it could create.<END>
The word that comes to my mind in thinking about it briefly here is “tantalizing.” As Cathy Minehan said, everyone knows that we can always make an intermeeting move;
we've done it fairly recently.
I don't see much to be gained by underlining that.
So I would support all of your recommendation except for that element of it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I can support your recommendation, particularly the first part of it.
I must confess to being even more thrown off than President Broaddus was in thinking that you were taking us someplace very different than you did.
I spent the first three-quarters of your presentation making frantic notes about how to disagree gracefully!
I was thinking that a move to validate market expectations and further confirm the moral hazard associated with not letting the market adjust would be the worst possible outcome.
<START>I must admit that I substantially share Cathy’s and Al’s concern about the second part of the recommendation, namely to hint that we would be inclined to an intermeeting move.<END>
I don't view that as necessary.
In fact, I believe we could make matters worse for ourselves by doing that, though it’s hard to judge without seeing the language you have in mind.
So I would hope that either now or after we see the proposed 3/20/01 99language we could talk a bit more about the wisdom of including that as part of the decision today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I agree with the easing move today of 50 basis points, but I’m troubled by two things.<END>
<START>One, when we use the word “weakness,” we may think slower growth but others hear decline.<END>
And I think that's a troubling message.
If what is heard out there is that we expect further declines in economic activity, the question then arises, “Why aren't we doing even more?” I don't know how we can communicate this concept of slower growth.
The second part of that concern is that at some point, of course, we will reach a position where we feel that with this move, or lack of a move, the risks are balanced.
And I don't see how we say that if the economy is perceived as growing at less than its potential--if it’s not at full employment or not at capacity or some such notion.
<START>But we're going to have to get to that point, given the lags in the effects of policy actions on inflation, well before it is perceived by the public that what we are observing in fact represents a situation of balanced risks.<END>
Finally, I question putting emphasis on high frequency data reports or giving the public the impression that some information is going to come out in the next six weeks that is going to carry so much weight with us that we may take an intermeeting action.
That may well be the case;
we've done it before.
But I don't see the value of signaling that we're going to be very heavily preoccupied or focused on some report because that just heightens the interest of the Fed watchers.
The wire service types will be saying, “Which one of these reports is the one that if it flashes in the right color, 3/20/01 100whatever that color is, is going to trigger an action?” At some point we need to think about how we start communicating that we have a long-term focus on maximum growth, which involves sustaining price stability.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, as one of the golfers in this group, I thought the analogy Mike Kelley gave before was excellent.
To continue it, I guess I would describe your proposal as hitting a shot to the green.
I'm not sure where it landed but we are carrying several clubs with us and one of them surely is a sand wedge.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
On the green?
[Laughter] MR. MOSKOW.
I meant toward the green, since that's the way I usually play golf!
[Laughter] But, seriously, I thought your statement was excellent.
I do think we need to ease.
I believe we should be measured in our actions, as I said in my comments and as Cathy Minehan mentioned as well.
In my view, 50 basis points should be enough for now.
I agree that we need to avoid trying to fulfill the ever more extreme market expectations.
<START>We can't hope to keep up with such expectations, and even if we were to cut the funds rate more than 50 basis points today, it's not clear that the markets would be affected in anything but the short run, as you mentioned.<END>
Also, I support retaining the asymmetric language.
<START>Even with the 50 basis point easing, the risks remain tilted toward weakness.<END>
I am uneasy about the language regarding an intermeeting move.
I'm not sure exactly what we gain from it or how it helps us in moving forward.
Perhaps we could have more discussion on that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
3/20/01 101MR. MEYER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My position is very similar to that of Presidents Minehan, Broaddus, and Guynn, a little stronger than President Moskow’s.
<START>I support your recommendation for a 50 basis point decline in the target funds rate today, along with a statement that the risks remain unbalanced toward economic weakness.<END>
But I would very strongly prefer to avoid any direct or explicit hint in our statement of an intermeeting move.
I haven’t heard much support for a 75 basis point move, so I won't argue the case for 50 as opposed to 75.
A 50 basis point move today along with a statement of unbalanced risks as always, as has been pointed out, holds open the possibility of an intermeeting move.
But hinting more directly at such a possibility in the statement, especially if we repeat something like the words in our December 19th statement--in effect using a code that will be interpreted as an inclination toward an intermeeting move --would, in my view, be a mistake.
It would leave market participants speculating day in and day out about whether we were in or about to hold an emergency meeting to cut the target funds rate.
It could aggravate the market's response to every newly reported indicator and it would leave equity prices continually buffeted by such speculation.
This type of uncertainty in my view has no up side.
My preference to avoid a direct hint of an intermeeting move also reflects my preference for policy decisions to be taken at our regular meetings.
To be sure, there are circumstances when an intermeeting move is a valuable part of our toolkit and, Mr. Chairman, you have used this tool sparingly and wisely in the time I've served on this Committee.
I am confident you will continue to do so.
Still, I do not believe it would be 3/20/01 102wise to set policy so as to leave the impression that an intermeeting move has a very high probability or to tell the markets that we are so inclined.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For a while now I've been stuck on the same question that I think the meeting is stuck on.
<START>I have felt that from the basics what I'd like to do at this meeting is to move the funds target down 50 basis points and retain the bias, but if there were some way to do a little more, I felt that was appropriate.<END>
There are two ways to do a little more.
One is to go down 75 basis points.
Some have talked about that;
I would have gone down 75 and retained the bias toward weakness.
The other way is what you suggested, Mr. Chairman, to go down 50 with a hint of more.
Let me try to do a benefit/cost analysis on this.
I see two advantages in your approach.
One is that it is flexible and decisive, as Bill McDonough described very well, and in that sense more effective than going down 75.
Also, it can be more targeted to the real economy and not the stock market, and I think that's an advantage as well.
As for the costs, you've all been very eloquent about the cost side of it.
The cost that a number of people have mentioned is the heightened sensitivity to the Fed and what its next policy move might be.
<START>I think every one of us feels that there is already way too much sensitivity out there.<END>
<START>By hinting of an intermeeting move, we are not making that problem any better, so I do see that as a cost.<END>
But I will still support the approach you recommended.
<START>Among unsatisfactory alternatives I think it’s probably the best.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
3/20/01 103MR. MCTEER.
I support your recommendation and I hope we will be flexible and willing to have an intermeeting discussion if the data suggest the need for that.
But I share the reservations of those who would rather leave the reference to that possibility out of the language of our press statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let me suggest that we take a look at the draft language before we vote, because the language I’ve chosen does not in my judgment raise precedential issues.
This is a very rare occasion.
If indeed it got to the point where this kind of wording became a new, separate part of the decision we had to make on an ongoing basis, I would vote against it.
I think that would be too much.
But I believe current circumstances are very unusual, and in my judgment we gain from the type of statement that is in this early draft.
In that regard the proposed language does not in my view set any precedents in that it is unlikely to be used again.
I think this is one of those extraordinary periods in monetary policy history where we’re at a very important crossroads.
And being sensitive to it I think is useful.
The cost over the long run, which has been well articulated here and I believe quite correctly, is not something that concerns me because I don't think we're going to be doing this again.
The operative sentence is obviously the last sentence of paragraph three.
Has everyone looked at it?
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Excuse me.
Could I ask a question of Don?
Do you happen to have the language of the similar sentence in December?
People are going to compare the two.
MR.
KOHN.
Right.
3/20/01 104MR. MEYER.
This is just a little stronger it seems to me because we didn't say “especially” monitor, we said monitor “closely.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, I purposely didn't want to use exactly the same language for precisely that reason.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Was adding “especially” the whole difference?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Yes.
What was the language-- MR. KOHN.
I don’t think I have the-- MR. KELLEY.
I have the language we used in December if nobody else does.
MR.
PARRY.
Why don't you read it?
MR.
MEYER.
The discussion will all be on what “especially” means.
MR.
KELLEY.
Would you like me to read it, Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Yes.
MR.
KELLEY.
The comparable sentence in the press release of December 19th read:
“The Committee will continue to monitor closely the evolving economic situation.” MS. MINEHAN.
At the time we put that sentence in our press statement, I know I did not feel that it committed us to--or any way was a formal nuance regarding--an intermeeting move.
But the fact is that the sentence exists and we did take an intermeeting action.
So it seems to me that the pairing of the two is a lot more powerful now.
In my view we can’t take any comfort from the reaction to our press statement in December;
that is not a valid basis on which to judge what would happen now if we use something close to that sentence in these circumstances.
3/20/01 105VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
I think the key question is the one the Chairman himself raised:
Is this precedential?
Does it say that we have to do something in the future?
I think the answer to that is no.
We are essentially looking at what the market reaction is likely to be.
My view is that we need this in our statement in order to show that we are vigilant because I share the Chairman's basic view that we are at a most unusual, maybe once-in-a-lifetime, moment in the course of monetary policy formulation.
And that's what drives the need for us to say something along these lines.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
When I spoke earlier, I believe I said this is a judgment call.
Clearly, the tone of this discussion suggests that there are judgments on either side.
If we look at this language in the context of the whole paragraph, I think it gives us the right kind of flexibility without over-committing us.
As I said before, I would be very concerned if we were moving toward having to vote on this sort of additional language at each meeting, but we are not in that mode.
You clearly are not putting us in that mode, Mr. Chairman.
What you are suggesting, as the language says, is that conditions are evolving very rapidly.
<START>And I think it is quite legitimate for a central bank to say that in such a circumstance, with economic conditions evolving very quickly, the financial situation is quite fragile both domestically and internationally.<END>
So, guess what?
We are going to be vigilant and we are going to be monitoring developments especially closely.
Though it seems to me a judgment call, it is not unreasonable to ask the Committee to communicate that message to the market.
On the one hand, it is an obvious statement in that we're always looking at incoming developments closely.
On the other hand, given the fragility that we've seen and the interplay of various developments to 3/20/01 106which the statement alludes, I think it is really quite intelligent of the central bank of the United States to state clearly that we are watching.
It does not commit us to do anything.
Indeed, as the data unfold, we may do nothing.
But it tells the markets that we are indeed awake.
Yes, there is a risk that the markets will look to every number and react to it, but we can ultimately manage that.
If we don't react, then the market will learn from that.
So, in some sense I think this gives us the right degree of flexibility.
Though obviously I'm not downplaying the risk on the other side, by and large to me this is the better option.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, my preference would be to leave out that sentence for several reasons.
First of all, we are never relaxed.
Quite frankly, I've never relaxed and I don't think anybody else around the table has ever relaxed about the economic situation.
We follow developments very closely.
If the economic situation does evolve rapidly and it calls for action, then I don't doubt that we will step up to the plate and do what is necessary.
But my concern about this language is that lots of routine data come in and if some measures come in a little on the weak side, that may cause a reaction.
This language will prime the market to watch every piece of information that becomes available and will increase the market’s volatility.
All sorts of minor developments that don't call for any action will be looked at from the perspective of whether it will trigger the Fed to act or not.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
But it is up to us to act or not act.
MR.
POOLE.
Oh, I understand that.
But I'm talking about my forecast of how the market will read this.
3/20/01 107CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>I don’t disagree with you actually, and I’m not sure that I view that as a bad outcome because in effect what we will be telling the market is that we don’t agree with it.<END>
In other words, we’ll get a lot of those views initially and when we don’t act, things will calm down.
The other day, for example, I had to make a statement up on the Hill to try to shoot down the view that there was going to be an intermeeting move because one of our former colleagues got exuberant, as has been pointed out, and had forecast such a move.
When I made that statement, everything calmed down.
In other words, if people want to get stirred up, in my judgment we should let them get stirred up.
<START>But the point is that if we don’t move on that stirring, it actually reinforces the view that we are not responding--and should not be responding--to the stock market or to people on the street whose basic view is that our role is to bail out their poor investment judgments.<END>
I don’t think that’s the role of a central bank.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, when I was listening to your comments, I thought you were going to put words in the statement that said we might move in the intermeeting period.
In reading this draft, I’m quite relieved that you are not doing that.
So, I can live with this sentence.
I would take out “especially” if I had my choice.
SEVERAL.
Yes.
MR.
HOENIG.
I can live with this sentence because if I can’t live with this sentence, I can’t live with the sentence that precedes it either.
I don’t think it says that we necessarily are going to move in the intermeeting period.
I would take out the word “especially” so it is more parallel to our statement in December and not less.
Other than that, I’m fine with this.
3/20/01 108CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I agree with Tom Hoenig’s comment.
I, too, in hearing you, thought that this statement would be much starker about an intermeeting move, but I’m comfortable with this wording.
I would also agree with Tom, though, on taking out the word “especially.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, we have a majority now in favor of the statement.
Let me see if I can get a vote in effect, not a formal vote, on the word “especially.” Why don’t I quickly go around the table on that point and then we can close this discussion.
Just indicate “yes” or “no” on the word “especially.” Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Yes.
MR.
HOENIG.
What does a “yes” vote mean?
Does “yes” mean “especially” is in or out?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If “especially” is in, the word is “yes.” If it is out, the word is “no.” Okay?
I’m sorry, the Vice Chair is yes.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
No. CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
No. CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
No. CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer?
Oh, you’re already-- MR. MEYER.
I can’t vote “no”?
3/20/01 109CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
No. You don’t get a vote!
[Laughter] You already voted “no” on the whole sentence.
MR.
MEYER.
Okay.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The others have already expressed their views so the word “especially” is out.
I ask the Secretary to read the appropriate directive and let’s vote on it.
MR.
BERNARD.
This language is on page 11 of the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 5 percent.” And for the balance of risks sentence in the press statement:<END>
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Shall we vote?
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Hoenig Yes Governor Kelley Yes Governor Meyer Yes President Minehan Yes President Moskow Yes President Poole Yes 3/20/01 110PRESIDENT MINEHAN.
I’m glad Governor Meyer and I got to vote on this one!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, you had already said “no” on including the sentence.
If you vote against the whole sentence, then voting on a word is irrelevant.
MS.
MINEHAN.
One can’t vote against “especially” doubly?
I was looking forward to voting.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay, what was your vote?
MS.
MINEHAN.
No. [Laughter] SPEAKER(?).
For the record!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would like to adjourn this meeting temporarily so that the Federal Reserve Board can meet and adjudicate the requests of all twelve Reserve Banks on the discount rate.
[Recess] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Board has approved the requests of all twelve Reserve Banks for a 50 basis point reduction in the discount rate to 4-1/2 percent.
Finally, our next meeting, as all of you know, is scheduled for May 15th.
And that is the official end of this meeting.
Luncheon is served and Don Winn will fill us in on a few issues that I think you might find interesting.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 90
