Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 24, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 24, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles, Black, and Ford, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, 1/ General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Ettin, Prell,Scheld, Siegman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market transactions.5/24/83Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Divisionof International Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Burns, Koch, Parthemos, and Stern,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Dallas, Atlanta, Richmond, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMs. Arak, Messrs. Bisignano, Lang, and Soss,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofNew York, San Francisco, Philadelphia, andNew York, respectivelyMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New YorkMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of the individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Stevens, Economic Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank ofClevelandTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 24, 1983MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 3.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Open to questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 4.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a broader question than just exchangerate conditions. I detect among bankers in my District a rising levelof nervousness about these [foreign] debt problems, with talk ofmoratorium and things like that. Is there anything you can share withus about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a observation and asking for information.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what I could say that'svery meaningful. I agree with you. There is a rising sense ofnervousness underneath the surface and I think a lot of it is relatedto a perception that Brazil is not doing very well. That perceptionhas some foundation; I certainly [don't have] any confidence in theBrazilian situation. If they need more money, they are out ofcompliance with the [Fund requirements. They] must be able to make aFund drawing on May 31 and aren't going to be able to make it through[unintelligible] and the question is [unintelligible]. There is somefeeling that the Brazilians may not be the most avid people in theworld in following through on the strong program. I think that's alot of it. But it's also true that Venezuela is stumbling arounddoing nothing [about] their big problems. Other countries in LatinAmerica pretty generally have a problem. On the more positive side,Mexican payments are proceeding on schedule. One sees reports thatthey're going to need some more money. I don't see any indication ofthat, assuming that the oil price doesn't go down again. And while Ithink production is still declining in Mexico, there is a possibilitythat they have a little money in the bank and may begin to bring insome more and we may begin seeing some improvement before long. Thereseems to be a little more confidence in exchange markets in theMexican situation doing a little better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the perception that Brazil is not doing well and expresses doubt about the Brazilian situation. They also mention the problems in Venezuela and other countries in Latin America. On the positive side, they mention that Mexican payments are proceeding on schedule and express a possibility of improvement in the Mexican situation.


Passage number 6.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think part of the better Mexicanperformance is due to the enormous disorganization. The agencies havenot been spending the money. In the second half of the year [FinanceMinister] Silva Herzog is expecting that they're going to be undermore pressure and it's going to be much harder for them to hit theFund targets on the public [sector and public expenditures].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is based on the author's belief that the better performance by Mexico may be attributed to the disorganization and lack of spending by the agencies. The mention of Finance Minister Silva Herzog expecting more pressure and difficulty in meeting Fund targets further reinforces this viewpoint and does not introduce any disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we shall see. But at the moment ifthere is any room for confidence, it's in the Mexican situation; forthe rest of them the situation is deteriorating. Yugoslavia is notdoing all that well. And, obviously, the interest rate level in theUnited States [unintelligible] with all our debts is one factor[unintelligible] the situation. Brazil is the focus of concern at themoment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The passage discusses the situations in different countries, stating that the Mexican situation is the only one that appears to inspire confidence. However, it mentions that Yugoslavia is not doing well and the interest rate level in the United States is also a factor. It then specifically highlights Brazil as the current focus of concern. This indicates a difference of opinion or conflicting views on the situations in these countries.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
MR. PARTEE. Sam, I didn't quite follow on the swaps. Areyou talking about the special swaps with the extension to August 23.This is not our regular swap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee does not understand or agree with Sam's explanation of the swaps.


Passage number 9.
MR. CROSS. No. This is a special swap, which is a part ofthe BIS-U.S. facility including [the Federal Reserve] and the U.S.Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the nature of a special swap and the entities involved.


Passage number 10.
5/24/83MR. PARTEE. Our maturity date is supposed to be the 23rd ofAugust.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the maturity date.


Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage indicated by Mr. Cross's response.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The indications are that they can meetthat; they may need a little help in August because they do have tomake up each payment they didn't make in August. How big is [thepayment] in August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about a payment that needs to be made in August.


Passage number 13.
MR. CROSS. It's $1.85 billion less what they pay next week.It would be $1.5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement of fact regarding a specific amount of money. There is no indication of disagreement or contention present in this statement.


Passage number 14.
MR. TRUMAN. They have another drawing on the Fund at thattime too. It's about $1.2 billion over and above what they have[unintelligible] in the meantime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about an additional drawing on the Fund.


Passage number 15.
MR. MARTIN. Lloyds Bank had indicated a substantial cutbackin their overseas committing process. Is that shared by NationalWestminster or other British or European banks. That's a pretty bigbank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward question and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 16.
MR. TRUMAN. I wasn't sure how to interpret that report. Infact, I was told the report indicated that they were cutting back notin Latin America but in other parts of the world, including NorthAmerica. [Unintelligible] it's relatively small. A 25 percent cutisn't going [unintelligible]. It applies to new lending but I thinkthat includes rollovers, so it includes as new lending what would ineffect replace loans that have matured on the bank's books. Putagainst the context of the fact that new lending to developingcountries in 1982 meant [decreases] in lending--[loans to] developingcountries in 1982 dropped by 50 percent--that cut is a pretty modestcut. That comforts me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible]. Unless there is someobjection, we will roll over the [swaps] as needed in the context thatMr. Cross described. We haven't anything other than that, do we.SPEAKER(.). No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying that unless there is an objection, they will roll over the swaps as described by Mr. Cross. The response from the speaker confirms that there is no objection or disagreement.


Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Sternlight" without providing any further details or information about him. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 19.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that someone named Mr. Sternlight made a statement, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicts being mentioned.


Passage number 20.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is only introducing the subject of questions.


Passage number 21.
MR. WALLICH. You refer to variations in the level ofborrowing and in the demand for excess [reserves]. Can you say whatthe market tends to think is our present target. Do they think it isany part of the money supply or do they think it's the funds rate orthe level of borrowing or free reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply asking for clarification on what the market perceives as the present target.


Passage number 22.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I tend to believe that they think of it as afree reserve target, Governor Wallich. And they probably think of itas centering around zero or very slightly plus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their belief without any opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 23.
MR. WALLICH. So they attach more importance, apparently, toexcess reserves than the FOMC technique seems to give them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply stating an observation that the individuals being discussed attach more importance to excess reserves than the technique used by the FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee) seems to give them.


Passage number 24.
5/24/83MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in fact, they do. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The statement is simply confirming that "they do."


Passage number 25.
MR. BLACK. Peter, why don't they think it's a federal fundsrate target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a direct question asked by Mr. Black and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 26.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't think they regard it as afederal funds target in the sense of pre-October 1979. I think theywould feel, with some reason, that if we are aiming at free reservesor borrowing we are aiming at something that has a likely range ofvariation in the federal funds rate but not a federal funds target inthat very narrow sense where the Desk pin-pointed within 1/8 point orso a particular funds level and intervened every time that there wasever so little a variation from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is describing the opinions of Mr. Sternlight, and there is no direct mention of any disagreement or contention. He is simply stating his belief about how the target for federal funds has changed over time.


Passage number 27.
MR. BLACK. But, given the variation in the apparentborrowing target every time the federal funds rate threatened todeviate, I am beginning to think that we are putting more emphasis onthe federal funds rate than on anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black expressing his personal thoughts and observations.


Passage number 28.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think they see it as a federal funds range[once removed] but not a tight target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is expressing his own opinion or interpretation of how "they" see something.


Passage number 29.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I can see that distinction: that theywouldn't think it was as tight as it was before October 1979. I amrather surprised by the answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses surprise but does not argue or object to the answer given.


Passage number 30.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When is this debt ceiling [issue] supposedto be cleared up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about a specific topic.


Passage number 31.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The Senate should be taking it up in theFinance Committee today. I think the Treasury desperately needs themto finish and then Congress can finish action by the end of this week.They will literally run out of money early next week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is simply stating a fact and expressing his opinion about the urgency of the Senate taking action. There is no opposing viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 32.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we are going to get a whole bunch ofofferings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a future event without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 33.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Then we could get a whole bunch, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 34.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Any other question." This is because it is a neutral statement that does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 35.
MS. TEETERS. I have just one minor question on the[repayment of] the German marks. Was that under the debt ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 36.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The Carter bonds. Yes, I think they were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Sternlight's opinion on the matter.


Passage number 37.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions.[Without objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The phrase "Without objection" suggests that the ratification is likely to happen smoothly without any opposing views or objections.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
]MR. ZEISEL. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The presence of the phrase "Mr. Zeisel" indicates that there is someone speaking or making a statement. However, since only the statement's title is provided ("Statement--see Appendix"), we cannot determine the specific content of the statement or whether there is any disagreement or contention within it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
]MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, Bill Ford and I both happen tohave the same question, we just found out. Jerry, you referred to thefixed weight deflator. The Board staff forecast officially, at leastin the version I see here, uses the implicit deflator. Just referringto the first quarter of the year, with that implicit deflator risingto a 5.8 percent annual rate and the CPI and the WPI either flat ordeclining, we are getting major different signals now on what is5/24/83really happening on the inflation front. So, our technical questionto the staff, Jerry, is: Which of these different indicators of pricemovements do you consider to be the more meaningful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Balles is questioning Jerry's use of the implicit deflator as opposed to the fixed weight deflator, leading to different signals about inflation. This suggests disagreement or confusion about which indicator is more meaningful.


Passage number 40.
MR. ZEISEL. Well, the lower one, always the lower one. Thedeflator for the first quarter was distorted by very sharp swings innet exports, particularly the importation of fuels, which was downsharply. We expect that figure to move back into line in the secondquarter. We think the CPI and the fixed weight price index are abetter measure of what was happening to fundamental price movements inthe first quarter. And those were quite good indeed; they were in the2 to 3 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and stating their own perspective, but there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 41.
MR. FORD. What about military procurement prices.Procurement is picking up. Is that captured in any of the otherindexes or is this the only one that really captures what thegovernment is paying for all this defense [spending].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 42.
MR. ZEISEL. Theoretically, both capture it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement or presenting a theoretical concept. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument being expressed.


Passage number 43.
MR. FORD. The WPI ought to capture some of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. FORD is simply stating an opinion.


Passage number 44.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes, it should. The attempt certainly is madeto capture the actual increases in prices. The deflator is a bit moresensitive to shifts in weights. The rising increases in theproportion of defense spending would affect that index somewhat more.But actually over the last half year or so defense spending haslagged. There has been no increase since the third quarter of lastyear, and we are rather expecting a surge in outlays because this wassupposed to be the big year for procurement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply provides an explanation and analysis of the relationship between the deflator and defense spending.


Passage number 45.
MR. FORD. What I'm hearing is that the government is reallypaying up for spare parts and things like that because capacity toproduce has been run down in a lot of specialized activities. Do youhear anything like that--that now's the time to be selling nuts andbolts to the government.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question posed by Mr. Ford about the current situation of selling nuts and bolts to the government.


Passage number 46.
MR. ZEISEL. It seems sad that when capacity is way up pricesrun up sharply and when capacity is down prices run up sharply. Itsounds like a Catch-22 situation. I hadn't heard that particularargument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not depict any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Zeisel's observation about a situation that he finds sad or unfortunate, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting perspectives being mentioned.


Passage number 47.
MR. BOEHNE. I don't have any fundamental disagreement withJerry's forecast. He has done his usual good job; however, it doesseem to me that there has been at least a subtle shift in thedirection of how the errors might be. At the last meeting I wouldhave agreed with the Greenbook, but I was thinking that if theGreenbook were wrong, perhaps there would be less growth. But itseems to me now that the risks have shifted. I think the Greenbook isright but if it is wrong, then there will probably be more growth.There comes a particular point in a recovery where the dynamics of arecovery set in and it's somewhat greater than the individual sectorsof housing, consumption, etc. I get the sense that these dynamics arenow at work. One sign that I look for in a recovery is when businesspeople stop complaining about high [interest] rates and they startsaying: Why don't you just keep things the way they are. When theystart saying that, it means things are getting better and they don'twant anybody to rock the boat. And that has been the dominant theme5/24/83of what I've been hearing. I think we are in that period where thedynamics really are beginning to take hold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 48.
MR. RICE. Jerry, I think I heard you say that the expansionover the next year and a half through 1984 would be [at a rate] justbelow the median for previous expansions. Would you still say, inlight of the present data that we have, that the strength of therecovery so far is below the postwar average significantly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply asking for clarification and confirmation of a statement made by Jerry.


Passage number 49.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes. The first year is when we get a major kickin output and our projections fall short of the average for the firstyear of recovery; it's about 70 percent or so. Our projections makeit up in a sense in the second year when on average recoveries beginto lose some of their steam and we are maintaining the same rate ofincrease in the second year as in the first. We have increases of4-3/4 percent in both the first and second year of the recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage simply presents information about projections and rates of increase in the first and second year of a recovery.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's through the year that you'retalking about. I thought we saw some pictures yesterday that said therecovery so far is about average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing agreement or confirmation by referencing pictures seen the previous day.


Passage number 51.
MR. ZEISEL. Well, we have [only] the first quarter; I'maddressing myself to our projections of the first year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Zeisel is simply stating that he is discussing their projections for the first year after having only analyzed the first quarter of data.


Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose you address yourself to the firstsix months, recognizing your projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a hypothetical scenario and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 53.
MR. ZEISEL. The only thing we have to date, Mr. Chairman, isthe first quarter and that was a rather modest increase of 2-1/2percent, which is well below the typical rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the increase in the first quarter, without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have industrial production and youhave auto sales figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents two separate pieces of information without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 55.
MR. ZEISEL. Incorporating the first and second quarterstogether probably brings us fairly close to the average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 56.
MR. PARTEE. Those monthly figures, you remember Jerry, wereplotted against a shaded area. We were more or less in the middle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply describes a visualization of monthly figures.


Passage number 57.
MR. ZEISEL. For industrial production and employment--thefigures for which we have monthly data--that's correct. They'rereally quite consistent with the average recovery at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the figures for industrial production and employment are consistent with the average recovery at this point. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 58.
MR. BLACK. Jerry, if you exclude the CCC payments from thefourth quarter and also from the first quarter so that you get finaldemand of roughly the same magnitude in both quarters and make someallowance for the point that John Balles made about the possibleoverstatement of that implicit price deflator, wouldn't it look a gooddeal stronger. It would look somewhat stronger than average if itlooked about average before you made those adjustments, wouldn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents disagreement or contention. Mr. Black suggests that excluding CCC payments and adjusting for the possible overstatement of the implicit price deflator would make the final demand look stronger. However, the speaker expresses skepticism and seeks confirmation by asking if it would look somewhat stronger than average.


Passage number 59.
MR. ZEISEL. As I recall, excluding the CCC gets yousomething in the neighborhood of 3 to 3-1/2 percent for the lastcouple of quarters. I don't have GNP excluding CCC; I have the finalsales excluding CCC. That was 3.3 percent in the fourth quarter, 3percent in the first quarter, and we're [estimating] 2.7 percent inthe second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Zeisel is simply stating the numbers and figures he has regarding the GNP and final sales excluding CCC.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
5/24/83MR. BLACK. But if in fact the point that John raised hassome validity, as we're inclined to think it does, and you made thoseadjustments, I would think real final sales may well be higher in thefirst quarter than they were in the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "if in fact the point that John raised has some validity" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or uncertainty about the validity of John's point.


Passage number 61.
MR. ZEISEL. Well, final sales certainly are stronger in thefirst quarter when one makes that adjustment and certainly weaker inthe fourth quarter because CCC outlays were enormously high in thefourth quarter. So, you get a somewhat more stable pattern. Finalsales trail off a bit in our projection in the second quarter largelybecause of the net export situation. Basically it's a situation,depending on what you take out, where we seem to get a pattern that'sreasonably stable, excluding CCC, at around 3 percent over the lastseveral quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents an explanation of sales patterns without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 62.
MR. GUFFEY. Jerry, part of your forecast beyond the secondquarter is premised on the weakness of the dollar. What kind offactors are you taking into consideration to project that the dollarwill indeed weaken later in 1983 and 1984.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Jerry about the factors he is considering to forecast a potential weakening of the dollar in the future.


Passage number 63.
MR. ZEISEL. I think I'll let Mr. Truman answer; it's hisforecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Zeisel is deferring to Mr. Truman to answer the forecast.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
MR. TRUMAN. I'd say right up front, Mr. Guffey, that thereis clearly room for some skepticism about that element of theforecast. We are forecasting for the year a current account deficitof $35 billion, which would be more than twice the rate we've ever hadbefore, and by the end of the year a current account deficit of $60billion, which would be four times the [highest] annual rate we'veever had before. And our sense is that the market will look atnumbers of that sort, which will start coming out in the latter partof the year, with trade deficits of over $70 billion per month at anannual rate, and say that that will be unsustainable and that therewill have to be some corrections. We do not predicate this on much,by the way, in terms of trade in the United States falling relative toabroad or otherwise. One can argue that these kinds of forecasts,while they are high relative to market forecasts and to conventionalforecasts, are not out of the range of what people talk about. TheAdministration has relatively similar forecasts and they have more orless made them public. Our sense in talking to people in the market,although they know that some economists are forecasting these numbers,is that they're not going to react to them until they in some sensesee them. And as Sam noted in his report, the fact that the currentaccount moved back not toward zero but something like $7 billion at anannual rate from something over $20 billion in the second half of1982, largely because of oil which in many respects is a spuriousfactor, is one reason why the dollar at least in the short run hasstayed quite strong. That factor has, if anything, moved in the otherdirection in the short run. I would make one other comment. Much ofthe change in net exports in the second quarter is the resumption ofoil imports and, in fact, the two surprising things about the firstquarter were the decline in oil imports, which we obviously did notfully anticipate, and the remarkable growth in non-oil imports. Ifyou look at those numbers, which are really big numbers--and [sparked]by oil, which dropped to $20 billion at an annual rate--if anything,the outlook that we have now is more pessimistic for the currentaccount than it was two months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses skepticism about the forecasted current account deficit and suggests that the market will view the numbers as unsustainable and in need of correction. They also argue that the forecasted numbers are high compared to market and conventional forecasts, but not out of the range of what people talk about. This indicates a difference of opinion or disagreement about the accuracy and significance of the forecasted deficit.


Passage number 65.
5/24/83MR. MORRIS. I don't understand why the market is notanticipating this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion or lack of understanding.


Passage number 66.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, if you talk to traders, they say: "Ofcourse, our economists are forecasting X, Y, and Z (and those tend tobe numbers that are smaller than ours) but I never listen to oureconomists anyhow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Truman is simply expressing his approach to listening to economists' forecasts.


Passage number 67.
"MR. CORRIGAN. You have imports rising by $60 billion betweenthe first and fourth quarters of this year. How much of that is oil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 68.
MR. TRUMAN. Between the first quarter and the fourthquarter. Twenty-five billion or so. Of the increase from [$313] to[$373] billion, a little less than half of that is oil, which is arebound. The price is there. You just add them up, price-adjusted alittle lower than you would [otherwise] think in the second half. Butmost of it is a rebound in quantity as we had a mild winter and inaddition they were running down inventory, if you believe the APInumber that reports a rebounding already in April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My question has been taken care of byRoger. I just have a lot of skepticism about that projected declinein the dollar, if one assumes interest rates stay in this range, giventhe enormous interests on the part of foreigners in our securitiesmarkets and less confidence in European securities. A lot of theEuropean bankers we spoke with talked in terms of a very highpercentage of their portfolios staying in U.S. securities. Combinedwith the interest rate spread outlook and the safety haven aspects, wemay very well see next year the same kind of disappointment withregard to the dollar value that we expected in the last year. Thebulk of the market had expected a decline in the dollar in the last 12months and it didn't materialize. Nobody can say for certain; it'sjust that I personally have some skepticism that we should count onany decline with any degree of certainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses skepticism and doubt about the projected decline in the dollar. They question the assumption that the decline will happen, pointing to the interests of foreigners in US securities markets and the lack of confidence in European securities. The speaker also mentions the opinions of European bankers who have a high percentage of their portfolios in US securities. Therefore, the speaker does not agree with the expectation of a decline in the dollar.


Passage number 70.
MS. TEETERS. Tony, how much of that is flowing into Treasurysecurities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a question asked by Ms. Teeters regarding the amount flowing into Treasury securities.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not very much, because central bankshave not been adding to their holdings. And [private] foreignersdon't tend to hold a very large portion of U.S. Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "Not very much, because central banks have not been adding to their holdings." implies that there is not much contention or disagreement. However, the following statement "And [private] foreigners don't tend to hold a very large portion of U. S. Treasuries" suggests that there might be a different perspective or disagreement on the topic of who holds a large portion of U.S. Treasuries.


Passage number 72.
MR. MARTIN. We've had some Middle Eastern sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a fact about Middle Eastern sales without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 73.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, putting it all together, therewas some reduction in some of the central accounts. Some of the OPECcountries have a big reduction. Of course, in France's holding, thatfamous surplus, it is not very clear where it is anyway. As I thinkChairman Volcker said last week, our biggest trading partner is"errors and omissions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements are simply describing various reductions or uncertainties in different accounts and countries.


Passage number 74.
"MR. MARTIN. I'd like to join Tony in that caveat by addingthe awareness I'm sure we all have of the continued interest inAmerican companies by European and other investors who feel thateither a stake in an American company or the acquisition itself hassome great advantages, particularly when they buy in below book or atreasonable multiples of earnings. That's another factor, despite thestrong dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply adding onto a point made by another person, expressing agreement and providing additional information on the topic.


Passage number 75.
5/24/83MR. TRUMAN. Foreign purchases of U.S. Treasury securities involume at present are quite small, although they have been larger thanusual recently. They were almost $6-1/2 billion net last year and infact they were about $3 billion net in the first quarter of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is providing factual information about the volume of foreign purchases of U.S. Treasury securities, without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 76.
MR. PARTEE. It's really a question, isn't it, Ted, of howeasy it is to finance the deficit from abroad. There can't be muchquestion that there's going to be a large trade deficit and the longerthe dollar stays high the larger the trade deficit will be. But whatwe don't know is how forthcoming the funds from abroad will be tofinance this deficit. If they are very, very eager to come here,maybe we don't need a lower price.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of opinion and uncertainty about financing the deficit from abroad.


Passage number 77.
MR. TRUMAN. For the last year we had an $8 billion currentaccount deficit and that's a coincidence. But in the second half ofthe year when that turned into a $20 billion current account deficit,annual rate, we had some weakening of the dollar. I started out myanswer to President Guffey by saying that obviously there is room forskepticism on this point. The other side, though, as you saidGovernor Partee, is that if the dollar doesn't go down, theneverything else being equal [unintelligible] the growth forecast willbe considerably less ebullient than we have it now, by something onthe order of 1/2 percent, as Jerry said in his briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a statement by Mr. Truman discussing the current account deficit and the potential impact on the dollar and economic growth forecasts.


Passage number 78.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I might make a general comment thatsome of you will not agree with, I'm sure. I think that one of themost disruptive forces in this whole question of a world recovery isthe strength of the dollar. The LDCs are paying their interest ondollar-denominated debt in dollar interest rates while they earn inweaker currencies. It adds to their problem. For commodity prices,including oil, it's the same kind of situation. And I think it willcontinue to be a drag on our economy in terms of exports. It'scertainly a drag on the other industrialized countries. We tend to bevery asymmetrical in our view of monetary policy with regard to theexchange rate. We are perfectly willing to tighten monetary policywhen the exchange rate is down to a point that concerns us anddisturbs us. But for some reason, we have what I would perceive as alarge measure of indifference to using monetary policy to restrainwhat is clearly a very damaging rise in the level of the exchangerate. This is a view, of course, that is common abroad. And I findprobably a greater gulf in intellectual thinking between theforeigners and ourselves in this area than in almost any other area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their opinion and observations regarding the strength of the dollar and its impact on various aspects of the economy. There is no direct indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 79.
MR. WALLICH. I think one needs to factor into the exchangerate situation the possibility at least of another boiling up of theinternational situation and the impact on the banks. As things aredeveloping, our banks are likely to be more vulnerable if somethinglike that were to happen, partly because of the heavy involvement inLatin America and partly because they seem to have made lesspreparation in provisioning against losses than some European banks.So there might be deposit withdrawals in such a case. Now, whetherthat means also withdrawals out of the dollar into another currency orjust a move into U.S. Treasury bills, that is what one has to try tothink through as one tries to anticipate the effects of such a crisis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich, discussing the potential impact of an international crisis on banks and the possibility of deposit withdrawals. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
MR. KEEHN. On the domestic side I can confirm that the goodnews is even arriving in the Middle West but with one caution. Thecapital goods side is still exceptionally weak. The people I talk to-8-5/24/83who are in the very heavy side of capital goods see no improvement nowand they really are very discouraged about the outlook, particularlywith low operating ratios. Some of the people who have never reallybeen concerned about exports before--never relied on those markets--see this as an opportunity. And because of the exchange rate, theyfeel that they are precluded from any relief on that side. So, thepeople in heavy capital goods are still pretty discouraged about theoutlook. But other than that, I think the general environment in theMiddle West is significantly better than the last time we met.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The people involved in the capital goods industry are described as being discouraged about the outlook, while others who have never relied on exports see it as an opportunity. This suggests a difference in perspective and opinion regarding the current state of the market.


Passage number 81.
MR. ROBERTS. I just wanted to ask a question about inventorychange. My understanding is that the first quarter still had asignificant drag from inventory liquidation. I see your numbers herechange dramatically from the first quarter of 1983 on to, say, thefourth quarter 1984--$64 billion. If we took out the inventoryreduction in the first quarter--to kind of pursue Bob Black'sanalysis--you'd have a still stronger picture there contrasting withthe fourth quarter. And in view of your forecasted elimination of theliquidation of inventories, that suggests a lot of strength. Is thata valid assumption. Are you fairly confident about the change ininventories that you are projecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question for clarification and confirmation of assumptions.


Passage number 82.
MR. ZEISEL. One can never be confident about a sector likeinventories because there is so much of the visceral in it. What is areasonable level of stock is very much in the eyes of the businessmanand his expectations about the outlook. We are assuming a reasonablyconservative inventory posture over the next year and a half, largelybecause we feel businessmen first of all have been badly burned intheir inventory policies recently, and secondly because the cost ofholding inventories remains relatively high given our assumptionsabout interest rates. Essentially, we're saying that inventoryinvestment is not going to be a big force for expansion. The behaviorof inventories recently, as typically, has been the major factorturning the economy around. We've had a rather typical decelerationof inventory liquidation, which gives us an increase in GNP. That wasa big factor in the first quarter. Excluding inventory liquidation--that is, looking at final sales--it was a 1.3 percent increase. Wenow are assuming that inventories will stabilize beyond the secondquarter and start rising but at a relatively moderate rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting the speaker's opinion and assumptions about the inventory sector.


Passage number 83.
MR. GUFFEY. I'd just like to complete a thought that led tothe question to Jerry with regard to the dollar. There is a potentialthat we will have just an inventory liquidation/consumer spendingrecovery without the capital expenditures coming on stream.Traditionally, I understand, those have been very short cycles. Withthe [possibility] that there isn't any strength that might come fromexports, I just want to raise a note of caution about all the euphoriaand the good numbers that have come out in the last 30 days. Thepotential for this being an inventory liquidation/consumer spendingrecovery that lasts only through the third or fourth quarter perhapsis a real potential. I don't think we should become all that euphoricyet that this is a sustainable recovery through 1984. I'm a littleconcerned and not as sanguine about the numbers that we've seen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is expressing caution and concern about the potential limitations and sustainability of the current economic recovery.


Passage number 84.
MR. PARTEE. I would agree more with Ed Boehne than anybodyelse who has spoken up to now. On inventories, Ted, I think we can'tsay precisely what path the inventory change is going to followquarter-by-quarter, but it seems extremely likely that it's going to5/24/83move up from a large negative number to zero or a small plus, andthat's a big algebraic change in the GNP when it occurs. It mightoccur this quarter or it might occur next quarter; it's hard to knowwhat the pattern will be, but it's ahead of us for sure. And it seemsto me that consumer spending just has to be pretty strong, with theincrease in the value of financial assets that consumers hold--it'shundreds of billions of dollars in improvement there--with the changein sentiment, which is one of the biggest that we've seen in years inthe surveys, and with the tax cut coming on in another five weeks,which adds another $30 billion to the hopper. It seems to me all thathas to mean a pretty strong consumer sector. I'm surprised the retailsales data are as poor as they are. Indeed, when you read theRedbook, where almost all of [the Reserve Banks] commented on retailsales, things don't look anywhere near as weak as the nationalstatistics. That is, the year-over-year increases range from a low of6 percent, as I recall, to up in the 13 to 14 percent area. I don'tknow quite what's wrong, but in any event I think there's bound to bethat increase in consumer spending and the inventory improvement. Andwith those I think some capital spending will come along. That comeslate in cycles anyway, Roger; it isn't one of the things that appearsearly. And by the end of the year I think we may be looking at a muchimproved capital spending situation. Maybe it won't help the Midwestso much because it seems to be in high tech and automated equipmentand so forth. Nevertheless, if anything, I think our staff has beensurprised by the strength in capital spending this early on. But ithasn't been a [heavy capital] goods kind; it has been computers andthe like. So, I think the outlook is really quite good and I agreewith Ed that whereas I might have been inclined to say the risks wereon the low side of the staff forecast last time, I think they'reprobably now on the high side of the staff forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 85.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would agree with Chuck and Ed too. I thinkwhat we are getting now are some of the typical internal dynamics ofthe business cycle process, with dynamism in one sector revivingconfidence in another and the whole thing building up into a morecumulative cyclical process. And in this connection, I was interestedin Jerry's comment in speaking of 1984. I don't think I can quote himexactly but he said something like this: That present high levels ofreal interest rates, which are assumed to be a consequence of themonetary policy we're pursuing, will be a major restraint on privatedemand. Another way of stating the whole idea is that if we follow apolicy which keeps interest rates from rising during the course of thedynamic cyclical process and that's fed by additional fiscal stimulusas time goes on, we may well be fueling a much larger economicexpansion than anybody is forecasting now. Those are two differentstatements, looking at the same phenomenon in a different way. Noneof us knows for sure whether we ought to regard present real interestrates as a major restraint on private demand or as a level of interestrates that will accommodate a substantial increase in private demand.And I think as one looks at what has been going on in the past sixmonths one is inclined--or at least I'm inclined--to the latter viewrather than the former. We are getting a very, very dynamic response,particularly in those areas that are most credit sensitive likehousing. So, we may be seeing a revival here of the usual cyclicalprocess, which will give us a much bigger increase at present levelsof real interest rates over the next two years than we're nowforecasting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the views expressed by Chuck, Ed, and Jerry and states that there are two different ways of looking at the phenomenon. However, the speaker acknowledges that none of them know for sure whether present real interest rates are a restraint or will accommodate a substantial increase in private demand. Overall, the speaker seems to lean towards the latter view.


Passage number 86.
-10-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 87.
MR. WALLICH. I share the view that the risks this time arefor excessive boominess to the economy. I just want to make a verysmall point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing agreement with the view that the risks of excessive boominess in the economy are high. He clarifies that he only wants to make a small point.


Passage number 88.
 In the Redbook--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard that word for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions that they haven't heard the word "Redbook" for a while, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 89.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't exactly say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident as Mr. Partee acknowledges that he did not say something, but there is no indication of him contradicting or opposing any previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I interpret this as a getting into the 5,6, 7 percent range at some point and I would think that would beexcessive. Now, what I wanted to ask is: The Redbook contains aspecial exercise on the construction industry. To me it showed theenormous diversity of conditions and how much of an artificial number,essentially, the average of all these different local conditions is.I was wondering whether it had been of any use to the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich believes that reaching a 5, 6, or 7 percent inflation rate would be excessive, while the Redbook exercise showed him the diversity of conditions and the artificial nature of the average inflation rate.


Passage number 91.
MR. FORD. Don't push them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is simply advising someone not to push the individuals in question.


Passage number 92.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have to answer that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement suggesting that the reader does not have to answer a particular question. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 93.
MR. ZEISEL. I will. I think it was of use in the sense thatwhile a diversity of opinions was represented, one did get a centraltendency both about the residential construction activity and housingstarts. The forecasts that were quoted appeared to range very closelyto our own expectations for 1983 in terms of housing starts. And wegot some confirming indication about expectations for commercial andindustrial construction--that is, that they were turning down and thatexpectations were rather weak. We found them generally useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 94.
MR. MARTIN. Henry, let me comment on that, if I may. If wehad gotten a different response from the disparate remarks District-by-District and metropolitan area-by-metropolitan area, we almostwould have had to reject the survey results because housing marketsnationally are a mosaic of little markets and submarkets. You mustget this kind of result or someone is not doing his homework. This isa typical analysis and response of varying markets around the countrywith varying backed-up demand, different migration patterns, anddifferent local economic base conditions. I found it quite a validsurvey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 96.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I've been skeptical for some timethat this upturn was going to be as modest as I think most people wereassuming, for a couple of very basic reasons. One is that a sharpdownturn like we've had is typically followed by a pretty sharpupswing. And then we've added so much to the money supply that evenif one assumes a pretty significant increase in demand for money, itseems to me that there is enough liquidity out there to finance apretty good pickup. Chuck and Ed and Lyle and Henry touched on therecent burst of statistics, which lends further support to that. So,I am in agreement with them about the strength of the economy. Ithink the staff has made the revisions in the correct direction byraising the projections. Specifically, I think the second quarter mayeven be significantly higher than they're projecting. But the mainconcern that I would have is that if we're right in our supposition-11-5/24/83that this is a strong recovery, we may well find that thoseprojections of price increase in 1984 are unduly optimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the other individuals mentioned and only expresses a concern about price projections for 1984.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 98.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm impressed at the breadthof the expansion that is underway. I'm not depressed about it, asHenry seems to be. I think we have plenty of room to get an awful lotof unused capacity on the scene; that decline in unused capacity is avery positive phenomenon. But in reference to capital goods, I thinkwe've overlooked the fact that in the months of March and Aprilmachinery orders exceeded the level of shipments, which I think israther unusual for this early in the cycle. As I read the numbers, Ithink the capital goods sector is doing better for this stage of thecycle than I would have expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin. How is your capital spendingdoing down in the oil fields.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the performance of capital spending in the oil fields.


Passage number 100.
MR. BOYKIN. In a general sense, we pretty well agree withthe Board staff's forecast. Also, I think the risk is that it mightbe slightly low. Attitudinally I'm hearing much of what Ed Boehnesaid. In general there's a better feeling, but we still have a bit ofa mixed picture. If you look at the middle corridor of our District--that is, through Dallas, Austin, and San Antonio--it looks prettygood. But if you get a little to the west or a little to the east,where you encounter the energy or energy-related activities, you stillsee the concerns on the coast in petrochemicals and refineries. Whilethere is some improvement, there still are a lot of expensive rigssitting there in the Sabine River. If you get out in the west Texasarea, I think they have some very significant special problems andthat is still going on. Of course, along the border of the RioGrande, it's still pretty depressed, with unemployment up 25 to 30percent and that sort of thing. But in spite of the special problems,I do feel that we are seeing a recovery. Part of our problem is thatwe find ourselves in a little different situation than we're used to.We're usually feeling good about everything. But I think energy istempering our judgment a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker generally agrees with the Board staff's forecast and acknowledges that there is some improvement in the overall economy. They do mention specific areas with concerns and special problems, but there is no expressed disagreement or argument within the passage.


Passage number 101.
MR. BLACK. I thought people always felt bad about westTexas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Black about people's feelings towards west Texas.


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I would need to see the passage in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide more context?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
MR. MARTIN. This discussion is so different from ourprevious one. It certainly is gratifying to hear what I think is awell founded positive outlook. I won't call it optimism because ithas some aspects to it that I don't think apply. So, let me be Dr.Doom here for a minute and remind everyone that Wachovia has raisedits prime rate, that Bankers Trust has raised its broker loan rate,and that while one must allow for a good deal of difficulty theTreasury is experiencing because of Congressional inaction--if that'sthe correct term--on the debt ceiling, nevertheless, over the last fewdays there has been some upward pressure in the markets. Maybe thisis very transitory as far as interest rates are concerned. But if welook at the LDC debt question vis-a-vis these firming rates and assumeanything like even a 75 or 80 or 90 basis point increase in thatburden, we are looking at countries with $90 billion or $84 billion or-12-5/24/83$40 billion or whatever projections you'd like to use by the end of1983. If we consider how much of that debt is nonsovereign debt butis private debt, how much of it is carried by our banks and how muchis carried on a variable rate basis, [we see the impact] of the driftin rates on additional funds being advanced in those giant workoutsituations.If we consider the vulnerability of those countries who areoil exporters--to shift my ground here a little--if prices decline onthe petroleum products substantially more, these countries are payingon a weighted average basis higher interest rates. Yes, thatcertainly is offset to some degree by our ability to absorb someimports in some cases. The IMF constraints, as the Chairman andothers commented earlier in this meeting, [impose] great difficultieson some of the countries--even those who are taking them seriously andattempting to comply. And then, of course, finally there are thepolitical implications of compliance and the political implications ofhigher rates on the variable portion of the debt. It comes out to bequite cumulative. So, while I share the positive outlook with regardto our own economy--I have some reservations still in the housing areabut share generally the outlook--I think we must inject into ourdiscussions here, and we already have, the extreme complications andextreme sensitivities and vulnerabilities on the international side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin expresses a more negative outlook, referring to himself as "Dr. Doom," and discussing the potential negative impact of rising interest rates and LDC debt on countries, as well as the difficulties and vulnerabilities on the international side. This contrasts with the previous positive outlook mentioned by someone else in the discussion.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 105.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think there's a good deal inwhat Preston says. We are not expecting, even without a financialshock in the international area, boom conditions. Certainly thesecond quarter growth may run as much as 5 percent or more, but westill would look for something more in the neighborhood of 4-1/2percent growth over this year and well into the next year under thebest of circumstances. Even though we're not getting into monetarypolicy discussions now, I want to take issue with what Bob Black said.I don't see that the money supply has increased that much. M2 and M3are either in their cones or a little below. The credit aggregates,both narrow and broad, are in their target areas. The fact that M1 isbehaving in the screwy way that we all expected and that there seemsto be a permanent shift toward holding a large savings component in Mlbalances in NOWs and Super NOWs should not [lead us to] generalizethat there has been that big an increase in the money supply. I hadthe feeling that for good and rational and sufficient reasons wedeemphasized Ml. And now our psychology and our thinking as well asthat of the markets seems to be creeping back to a situation whereeverybody is paying attention to Ml and these weekly numbers. I wouldjust take exception to the generalization that, in terms of a stimulusto the economy, the money supply has increased that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the near term,I'm inclined to the view that we'll probably do better than the staffforecast in terms of real growth and maybe even in terms of inflation.But I'm not nearly as sanguine about 1984, certainly. I think forsome of the reasons Mr. Martin and Mr. Solomon suggested on theinternational front, we're by no means out of the woods there. But inaddition to that, I must say in looking at the budget process and thebody language that it is associated with, it doesn't seem to me that-13-5/24/83any real progress has been made on the so-called structural deficit--maybe some, but certainly nothing to write home about. But on top ofthat I do think we have to recognize that there is a lot of pent uppressure out there to raise prices. I think we're going to be able toavoid a manifestation of that pressure, perhaps for a period of time,simply because the productivity/unit labor cost phenomenon is workingalmost perfectly right now. That's not going to last forever. So, asI say, the near term looks fine, but I'm just not sure about 1984.And, looking at the staff's implied forecast, it gets a little hardfor me to imagine out in 1984 how we really can keep those interestrates where they have them with underlying conditions what they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan expresses skepticism about the staff's forecast for 1984 and suggests that there are several factors that could impact the economy negatively. He also expresses concern about the lack of progress in addressing the structural deficit and the potential for rising prices.


Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not sufficient to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 109.
MR. ROBERTS. I think I'll wait for the monetary discussion.I want to respond to Tony. I disagree with him about 100 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they disagree with Tony about 100 percent.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
MR. BALLES. One more question, Mr. Chairman. I certainlyshare the feeling around the table here that the business outlook isclearly better this time than at the time of the last meeting. It'scertainly true in the West. I'm getting a little concerned, though,about the inflation outlook and whether it will be as favorable as thestaff forecast has it. I'd like to turn to you again, Jerry, on thatone. Our staff is not as optimistic as your people are. I hopeyou're right. I understand that your forecast for the deflator as weget out into the balance of this year is dependent on some improvementin productivity which seems to be fairly significant--about 3 percentgrowth, if I remember the figures correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles expresses concern about the inflation outlook and questions the forecast from Jerry. He mentions that the staff is not as optimistic as Jerry's people are, implying a difference of opinion.


Passage number 112.
MR. ZEISEL. About 3-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a percentage without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 113.
MR. BALLES. 3-1/2 percent. Also, if my recollection iscorrect, that's pretty high in the range of historical experience; ifnot, tell me so. I'd like to know what makes you so confident thatwe're going to get this good accomplishment in productivity; I hope wedo, but it's apparently essential to getting this good outcome on theinflation front that you people are predicting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is simply asking for clarification and expressing his hopes and concerns.


Passage number 114.
MR. ZEISEL. The productivity performance over this year--Ithink it's 3.6 percent that we are forecasting--is really a cyclicalrebound in productivity that reflects the more efficient use of bothcapital and labor as output increases. And it's not an unusualperformance. The underlying trend productivity that we have is notreally much better than what we had been having recently. We'vejacked up our trend productivity just a bit. We've been using afigure of about 3/4 of a point--a very, very poor productivity trend--until fairly recently. The underlying figures seem to suggest alittle improvement. Now we're using something like one percent;that's really not very much better. And our forecast does not assumea large productivity increase in 1984. We get back down toward thetrend of about 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent toward 1984. So, we're reallynot leaning on any very significant improvement in our fundamentalproductivity trend to get our inflation forecast. It's really afunction more of the fact that we have a weak labor market, which weproject will continue through the entire forecast period. We have hadvery good price performance. Wage negotiations have a tendency to be-14-5/24/83backward-looking and they are now looking back at very small increasesin the cost of living. And we think that will be helping the overallperformance of wages and, therefore, labor costs and prices over thisperiod. In addition, of course, we have been and still are benefitingfrom the strength of the dollar and its implications for both importsand the competition of those imports with domestic producers. So, wehave had a lot of things going for us and they are still going for us.And we think the inflation outlook is really very good, at leastthrough this year, and we're assuming no deterioration in 1984 but nofurther improvement either. We stabilized our price projection at3-1/4 percent in 1984 as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an analysis and forecast of productivity and inflation, explaining the factors that contribute to the outlook. There is no mention of conflicting views or opposing opinions.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you have a rather pessimisticproductivity increase for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses a personal opinion about a productivity increase for the next year. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 116.
MR. PARTEE. I think so too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I think so too" indicates agreement and there is no indication of disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 117.
MR. ZEISEL. It's back fairly close to the long-term trend,which is a relatively poor trend performance. I hope you're right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement by saying "I hope you're right."


Passage number 118.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as there is no specific information provided about Mr. Ford's thoughts or opinions.


Passage number 119.
MR. FORD. I'll very quickly report on our region. We arefairly optimistic about the near term. I come out with an overallfeeling much like Jerry Corrigan's that the next two or three quarterslook fairly decent. Current performance is pretty positive all theway around on employment. Most people are starting to notice that weare really getting into a very heavy wholesale buying center role downin Atlanta. All the merchants for hundreds of miles around come downto our merchandise mart operation and buy, and one can really see whatis going to happen in the next few months. At least the sentiment ofthe buyers is up; the buying of clothing for fall and winter andspring is way up over last year. And our taxable retail sales [gains]are well up into the double digit range, contrary to the nationalfigures. As somebody said earlier, and I agree with it, the Redbookdoesn't seem to agree with the national figures at all. Our Districtcertainly doesn't. Two areas of great concern to us are the areathat's adjacent to Bob's territory, which until the oil bloom came offwas always one of our greatly optimistic areas and now that hasreversed. There the drilling came down and all the people in oil andenergy-related activities are very deeply concerned about the declineof drilling, defaults on the loans, etc. Relating to that is thebanking stability picture. Most of the concern expressed around thetable has been about the international concerns. We are stillexperiencing very severe difficulty. Governor Partee, I don't knowwhy you're smiling up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an overview of their region and explaining that they are optimistic about the near term. They also mention some areas of concern but do not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 120.
MR. PARTEE. You have a couple of big ones coming up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply mentions that there are a couple of big things coming up without any indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 121.
MR. FORD. Yes. You should all be aware of the fact thatthere is to be more excitement in Tennessee in the next few days, asGovernor Partee and some of you may know, because the Tennesseebanking situation really is quite desperate. There is a substantialnumber of banks--even a few beyond the Butcher bank empire--that lookpretty shaky to us. And when you look at the national figures forbanking--. We've just finished looking at the FDIC summary of thewhole industry and I was amazed to see something like a 72 percentincrease in write-offs in 1982. Write-offs for the whole industry net-15-5/24/83of recoveries went up from under $4 billion to $6-1/2 or $7 billion.I don't know whether any of the staff people really follow thesenumbers but usually the huge increase is the year after the recession.So, I'm beginning to wonder what the poor bankers are going to have towrite off in 1983--if they had to go up from under $4 billion inwrite-offs to almost $7 billion in 1982--with the lags in recognition,if they are forced with all that's going on in the international areato put in bigger provisions for any of the Latin American and EasternEuropean [loans].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the banking situation in Tennessee and the increase in write-offs in the industry. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or disagreement between speakers.


Passage number 122.
MR. WALLICH. German banks wrote off $4 billion and that'sprobably not including Luxembourg. Now, that's a [banking] systemabout 1/4 the size of ours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about German banks writing off $4 billion, with a mention that this figure may not include Luxembourg. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 123.
MR. FORD. Yes. From the reports I've been hearing fromDresdner, Commerce, and so on, it sounds as if they feel that they'vetaken the heavy hit and really worked hard at cleaning up their books.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about what he has heard from reports.


Passage number 124.
MR. WALLICH. Most of that is for domestic [loans]; 1/5 isfor international and 4/5 for domestic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is simply providing information about the allocation of loans, stating that most of the loans are for domestic purposes (4/5), while 1/5 are for international purposes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
MR. FORD. So, I'm as concerned about the condition of someof our banks as the rest of you are concerned about the condition ofthe international banks. I'm not sure [about the latter]. In themacro picture I come out where Jerry does. The next few quarters lookpretty good to me. The big question is the one we were raising aboutwhether the staff will be right. I've never wanted to pray harderthat they're right. But I must say I share some of the skepticismthat has been voiced about whether we can continue to keep inflationdown as well as they say we will. I hope they're right, but thatforecast is hard to visualize against the monetary and fiscal backdropthat we have right now.May I ask one question. Someone was talking about countingon a $30 billion tax boost. Where is this fiscal [legislation]. Isthat tax reduction in the bag now or is somebody talking about tryingto recapture some of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford expresses skepticism about the ability to keep inflation down as projected by the staff. He shares some of the skepticism that has been voiced. This indicates a disagreement or difference in opinion about the forecasted inflation rate.


Passage number 126.
MR. ZEISEL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage, as the passage is incomplete and lacks specific information or context. The phrase "MR. ZEISEL" does not provide enough information to analyze if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 127.
 Well, that's the third stage of the--MR. FORD. I know what it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses that they know what the third stage is, without indicating any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 128.
 The question is--MR. ZEISEL. Yes, the tax reduction. There have beendiscussions of capping it or removing it and so on. It seems ratherlate at this point to accomplish very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about discussions that have been had regarding the tax reduction and the opinion that it may be too late to accomplish much at this point.


Passage number 129.
MR. PARTEE. I assume the new withholding schedules have goneout to corporations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of assumption by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 130.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The new withholdings schedules went out afew days ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the new withholdings schedules being sent out.


Passage number 131.
MR. FORD. So it is in the bag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 132.
MR. ZEISEL. Well, I would say certainly 90 to 95 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion without any opposing views.


Passage number 133.
MR. FORD. So, it's the indexing that's up for grabs now,the way you read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that the indexing is the topic of discussion or debate without indicating any specific disagreement or contention.


Passage number 134.
-16-5/24/83MR. ZEISEL. That's certainly one fairly large source ofadditional funds that is up for discussion. I think there will besome attempt possibly to replace the withholding of interest anddividends with some other kind of increase in taxes and so--SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there may be an attempt to replace the withholding of interest and dividends with some other kind of increase in taxes.


Passage number 135.
 Part of the banks--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to move on here a little.Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think we have to move on here a little" indicates a desire to redirect the conversation or discussion rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I don't have any additional insightsto put on the table. I just want to say that I come out very much inthe middle of this discussion that we've had so far. I'm impressedwith the vitality that the economy has shown recently. And if thingsgo the way they should go, I would expect that the expansion willcontinue at a healthy clip for the reasons pointed out by Chuck andLyle and others around the table. It seems to me that that's the bestbet for the present time. But I think that we ought to be prepared tobe disappointed. The consumer it seems to me has every reason to beexpanding his expenditures, but the consumption sector may not performthe way we would expect at the present time. We've been disappointedby the consumer before--surprised on both the up side and the downside, as a matter of fact. And I think we should remember that theconsumer did not respond to last summer's tax cut the way we expected.Also, while I agree that it's too early to expect a big boom in thecapital goods sector, the outlook for the capital goods sector isworrisome to me. I recognize that the most recent figures for capitalequipment spending have been very encouraging, stronger than anybodyexpected. But we haven't seen any indication that capitalexpenditures for heavy equipment and so forth are going to perk up,and I'm just not convinced that they will. Also, we have to keep inmind the possibility that the dollar will not decline and that exportswill not expand--the scenario emphasized by Roger and Pres and Tony.So, in short, I think we have to be prepared for the downside outcome.But I have to say that I come out in the middle and, therefore, Iwould tend to go along pretty much with the staff's forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Rice agrees with some points that have been made, such as the vitality of the economy and the potential for continued expansion. However, he also expresses concerns, such as the consumer sector's potential underperformance and the uncertain outlook for the capital goods sector and exports. Therefore, there is disagreement or contention regarding the overall outlook and potential risks.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we can turn to Mr. Axilrod quicklyfor an interim review of the long-run objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting turning to Mr. Axilrod for an interim review of the long-run objectives, indicating a willingness to seek input or guidance.


Passage number 138.
MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really can be verybrief and give a short summary of where the evidence seems to lead.It's very hard to come to any conclusion that M1 is behaving moreconsistently with historical patterns than it has been in the past.We feel that it is very probable that the so-called interest rateresponsiveness of M1 has gone up, largely because of the increasingrole of NOW accounts, which have a savings component and probably abit more interest sensitivity in relation to that savings component.But we have not seen any sign of a usual cyclical increase in thevelocity of Ml; and in fact we are thinking, of course, that in thesecond quarter we are still seeing a decline in that velocity.Looking at the range itself, the odds seem to favor Ml not coming inwithin that range. I would suggest that it may be a little premature,if the Committee were inclined to change the range, to do so. Therewill be a full review in July and a lot may depend on where we happento come out in June--whether in fact we get a huge reversal of thisMay upsurge or whether it's beginning to tell us that we really are ona much higher track than we expect.-17-5/24/83With respect to M2, it seems to me that the assumptions thatthe Committee made when it established the February-March base haveheld up. The bulk of the shifts do seem to be well behind us, thoughthe increases in MMDAs recently have been running a little higher thanwe had assumed. But, of course, they are very far below the pace ofJanuary-February and even below the March pace. In some sense, theoddity in M2 now is the weakness of the non-transaction component.But assuming that does return to something closer to normal, therewould seem to be little problem at this point in the longer-term M2range. Thus, that too looks as if it is certainly sustainable pendingthe full-scale review that the Committee will be making in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their analysis of the evidence and making suggestions based on that analysis.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You didn't say anything about M3 andcredit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 140.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it's hard to read that [unintelligible],Mr. Chairman, which pertains particularly to Ml and M2. So we hadinterpreted that as the Committee's main focus of attention. M3 andcredit are running well within the ranges. We wouldn't see anyparticular problems at this point with those ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a perspective on the interpretation of data regarding M1, M2, M3, and credit ranges.


Passage number 141.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would interpret your comments assaying that at least for technical reasons there is no need to reviewthe M2, M3, and credit aggregates. There may be some reason to reviewthe Ml aggregate but you're saying it's a little premature. I wouldsay implicit in our activity so far is that Ml is getting relativelyless emphasis; that does not mean no emphasis. I suppose we remainsomeplace in that vague area. That is what I am proposing. I see nostrong need to change it [unintelligible] being consistent with thatemphasis before the next meeting if you want. Maybe we can just leaveit at that--that we don't change anything--unless there's some strongfeeling otherwise. People are going to look at Ml and we're going tolook at it, but it doesn't get the same mechanical emphasis that ithad 6 months or 9 months ago or whenever it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their interpretation and proposing a course of action without any evident disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 142.
MR. RICE. I don't think we ought to make any commitments tolook at it even next time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is expressing his opinion that they should not make any commitments to look at something, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented or direct disagreement from others.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will look at it automaticallynext time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply suggesting a future action of looking at something automatically next time.


Passage number 144.
 And we don't need--MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 145.
 I know it's the midyear review, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean we'd necessarily change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that it is the midyear review but suggests that there might not be a need for any changes.


Passage number 146.
MR. RICE. But I don't think we need to look at it with a[predisposition] toward changing it at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice expresses his opinion that there is no need to consider changing something at the present moment.


Passage number 147.
MR. PARTEE. The comment has to do with both the range andthe weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee regarding a comment related to range and weight.


Passage number 148.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no information or passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 149.
 We may not--MR. PARTEE. That is, there is no need to change the rangeright now and no need for a [predisposition] to change the weight.That's what you're saying. That seems to be the staff's view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the staff's view on the issue.


Passage number 150.
-18-5/24/83MR. AXILROD. Yes. We have not seen any return to normalhistorical patterns yet, which is one of the Committee's criteria forgiving it more weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the committee's criteria without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 151.
MR. RICE. We're not likely to have any additionalinformation on which to base a change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Rice without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. It will have to bejudged at the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely expresses uncertainty and defers a judgment to a future meeting.


Passage number 153.
MR. RICE. It's hard to [imagine] what new we could knowabout M1 between now and then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing the speaker's opinion that it is difficult to think of any new information that could be known about M1 in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 154.
MR. BALLES. I don't really disagree with what has just beensaid, Paul, but I am a little concerned--and I'd like to hear yourview--about what the market's reaction is going to be if we in factcome in this month with a 24 percent increase in Ml, as the Bluebooksuggests. We're going to have a hard time convincing markets thatwe're not off to the races and an overexpansion of money. I think,Paul, that we will have to do something more than just sit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles expresses concern about the potential market reaction to a 24 percent increase in Ml, while Paul's opinion on the matter is not mentioned.


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'm not prejudging what our short-rundecision will be. All I'm saying is that Ml does have the same weightthat it had before and that we not bother to change the range now. Itdoesn't mean no weight. We have to decide that after the coffeebreak. If there is no strong objection to that, maybe we can just goalong and [hear Mr. Axilrod's comments regarding our] immediatedecision and then we'll have the coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating a perspective and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 156.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or response made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 157.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about the wording in thedirective; we can worry about that later. I would only add onecomment, for what it's worth. We had illustrated for us here theother day by some staff something that has been going on for sometime. With the exception of Japan, the experience in almost allleading foreign countries looks like ours: rapid growth in M1 for thelast 6 or 9 months, particularly rapid growth in currency for somereason or another, and relatively slow growth in broader aggregates.It's very strange. You could almost lay these sheets of paper on topof each other. Of course, other countries have had a different kindof business picture; it vaguely resembles ours, but they don't have astrong recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observation about the financial situation in foreign countries compared to their own.


Passage number 158.
MR. FORD. These are countries that aren't having all thisderegulation business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, simply states that these countries are not participating in deregulation.


Passage number 159.
 So it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, some of that is going on elsewheretoo, but I don't think at the rate of speed it's going on around here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 160.
MR. TRUMAN. That's primarily only in Canada.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of fact without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 161.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a very strange picture. They alllook alike, although the figures aren't exactly alike.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply describes the picture as strange and states that the figures in it look alike, even though they are not exactly alike.


Passage number 162.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you have a guess as to why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 163.
-19-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 164.
 I guess any speculation one makes aboutthe United States can be pushed off on M2, the disinflation process,relatively higher real interest rates--MR. FORD. What do you make of it. I infer from what you'vesaid that except in Canada it's not due to deregulation, so that wouldmean that the staffs of other central banks can't be telling them whatours is telling us about it all being due to shifts and stockadjustments, etc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a speculative observation and seeking confirmation or agreement from the person they are speaking to.


Passage number 165.
MR. PARTEE. The staff doesn't say that with regard to Ml.And Ml growth in Germany is 14.7 percent; in Switzerland it's 14.9percent; and in the United Kingdom it's 12-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating different growth rates of M1 in different countries.


Passage number 166.
MR. FORD. Yes, but my question is: How are they explainingit. We're explaining it away as shifts in demand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is simply asking a question and providing an explanation for the scenario described.


Passage number 167.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can only say what [unintelligible] forthe future. If we don't have a great explosion of inflation in thenext year around the world, the monetarists had better run for cover.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a conditional statement about the future and suggests that if inflation does not occur, those who support the monetarist approach to economics may be proven wrong.


Passage number 168.
If we do,--MR. ROBERTS. If we do, there will be other people thenheading for cover.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a conditional statement, stating that if a certain action is taken, there will be other people heading for cover.


Passage number 169.
MR. PARTEE. At least nominal GNP ought to go up very sharplyaround the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a belief or opinion that the nominal GNP should increase globally.


Passage number 170.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there has been a substantialamount of intervention by central banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage states a fact about the amount of intervention by central banks. It does not present any disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states the title or position of Chairman Volcker without providing any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 172.
 The Germans--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional context.


Passage number 173.
 The Germans, EMS countries. And thatdoes tend, depending on how they--usually they don't sterilize--[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement seems to be providing a general observation or fact about the Germans and EMS countries.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the Germans think that that's partof the reason, but I'm not sure you can explain it that way in Canadaor the United Kingdom or Switzerland. I don't know whether we havethe low countries in here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about whether the same reasoning can be applied to countries like Canada, the United Kingdom, and Switzerland, suggesting a lack of knowledge rather than disagreement with the German perspective.


Passage number 175.
MR. AXILROD. One thought we had in reference to PresidentFord's question was that as you get into a noninflationary period oryou become convinced that inflation is down, cash in some sensebecomes more valuable. It's not going to lose its value as fast. Andin any event, interest rates come down and the opportunity cost ofholding it [declines]. And that would affect Ml. On the broaderaggregates, what I was trying to say here--and it may hold in Europe,though I haven't examined it closely--is that we could also begin tosee people moving into longer-term assets before their rates drop toorapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is some speculative discussion about the potential effects of a noninflationary period and the value of cash, there is no clear contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One of the really curious things aboutthis to me is why currency is going up around the world. That onelittle component has had a very strange experience here and [abroad].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "why currency is going up around the world" suggests that the speaker finds it strange or unusual for currencies to be appreciating globally. This implies that there may be opposing viewpoints or differing opinions about the reasons behind this phenomenon.


Passage number 177.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's more anxiety.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is more anxiety, but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 178.
-20-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, currency could be explained partlyby anxiety about banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions that anxiety about banks could partly explain currency.


Passage number 179.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, isn't the interest return onM1-type accounts in most European countries still very low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a question seeking confirmation or clarification from Steve.


Passage number 180.
MR. AXILROD. Oh yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply expressing agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 181.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They haven't changed the way we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states that "they" have not changed the way "we" have. It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 182.
MR. AXILROD. I'm not sure, but I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about his understanding of a statement, indicating that he may not have a definitive answer or position.


Passage number 183.
MR. TRUMAN. Only in the United Kingdom is there an interestreturn on Ml. The other countries don't have that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact provided by Mr. Truman.


Passage number 184.
MR. AXILROD. Ours is 5 percent or 5-1/4 percent on NOWaccounts. I was not assuming Super NOWs as a very important factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about their interest rate on NOW accounts and clarifying that they are not considering Super NOWs as an important factor in their discussion.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a suggestion to take a break, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 186.
[Coffee break]MR. ROBERTS. [Unintelligible] discussion, I have a feelingthat it is time to do something about the excessive rate of growth inMl, which I happen to feel is still an important measure of what ishappening in the economy. I believe, based on the contacts I have inthe marketplace, which I am sure are not as extensive as others, thatthe market is quite conscious and sensitive to this excessive rate ofexpansion. As I look at the situation, we have M2 conveniently withina band only because we conveniently redefined the base. It might beinteresting to redefine the base for Ml and thereby get it in the bandand growing at about a moderate pace from here on out. That probablywould be appropriate in view of the strength of this economy that weall have commented on. I just think that if we have to face somemodest adjustment here in interest rates, we ought to face up to itearlier rather than later. We have an economy that is walking alongvery well through the so-called real interest rates that are believedto be too high; I don't think that some modest adjustment here wouldbe bad. And if it begins to contain some of the excessive rate ofexpansion in Ml, I think that probably would be productive as we lookahead for either holding the interest rates in the long term orleading us to some reduction, as against having to face up to this afew months later after short-term interest rates have already gone upwith the rise in the private sector and long-term rates have gone upperhaps because of changes in inflationary expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is one person expressing their opinion and proposing a course of action based on their belief.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make one preliminary comment andthen ask you a question relative to others. I don't think thesenumbers on page 8 [in the Bluebook] mean a great deal, except as aforecast, in terms of the operative decision as to what we are goingto do in open market operations. It is now May 24th. Whatevernumbers come out, growth is pretty much in the bag now for May andJune. I think we ought to keep that in mind so that we don't putundue emphasis on a number a half percentage point higher or lowerthan another number used.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a preliminary comment and then asking a question relative to others. They are expressing their opinion that the numbers on page 8 of the Bluebook do not hold much significance in making decisions about open market operations. They are stating their belief that growth for May and June is already determined, so the specific numbers should not be given too much importance.


Passage number 188.
MR. ROBERTS. June is projected at a very low rate; it maynot be in the bag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that June is projected at a low rate and may not be certain.


Passage number 189.
-21-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean that we know what it is. Ijust mean it is going to be what it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing acceptance of the fact that something will be what it is, without claiming to have knowledge about it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
MR. ROBERTS. We can't change it at this point. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

In the passage, Mr. Roberts states that "we can't change it at this point," suggesting that there is some disagreement or discussion about changing a certain thing.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean at all that we know what itis. I know that the staff has projected a low number in June. And Iwould just remind you, looking at the quarterly figures, that what weset forth the last time, reading down, was 9, 8, and 6 to 7 percent.We're below for M2 and M3 [and above for] Ml. Credit, as near as weknow is running around 9-1/2 percent; we didn't have a quarterlytarget for it but it's within the annual target as nearly as we knowanything about credit. Now, having said that, do you want to quantifyyour comment in whatever way you want to quantify it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and clarifying their previous statements.


Passage number 192.
 As I say, Idon't attach much significance to a half percentage point differencein these numbers, but are you talking about some borrowing level or--MR. ROBERTS. I would like to see us raise the borrowinglevel from $250 million to something like $500 to $750 million, ifthat would be the amount that would curtail the rate of growth in bankreserves that's accommodating this big expansion in Ml. And if thatraised the fed funds rate to 9 percent, I don't think that would beanything that would prevent this economy from continuing to expand ata sustainable pace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 193.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to inject a quick comment, I thinkthat probably would raise the federal funds rate just above 9 percent.At what point would you be happy, if I now ask you to quantify it theother way. If [growth] got below that in alternative C, would you notgo that strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on a specific point.


Passage number 194.
MR. ROBERTS. Alternative C is about right, as I see it. Iam thinking in terms of about 6 or 7 percent incremental money growthfrom this point forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Roberts, agrees with Alternative C and states their belief in incremental money growth. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 195.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll make one other comment and then I'llgo to Mr. Morris. I am not sure that it is quite right to say weredefined the M2 base. Obviously, we did in a technical sense but Ithink that it's largely an element of judgment. If you put in theJanuary-February base for M2, with the kind of adjustments that thestaff took a stab at, you wouldn't get a much different trend for M2during January and February than you got in the surrounding periods.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that they believe defining the M2 base involves an element of judgment.


Passage number 196.
MR. AXILROD. It would be a little higher if you went fromthe fourth quarter. It would really be within a 6 to 9 percent range;I think it is somewhere around 8 or 8-1/2 percent. If you went fromQIV to May making those adjustments [rather than from] January-February, it would be a bit higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing the potential impact on percentage numbers depending on whether adjustments are made from the fourth quarter or from January-February.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, you may not find itsurprising that Mr. Roberts and I differ rather dramatically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of words such as "differ rather dramatically" suggests that Mr. Morris and Mr. Roberts hold contrasting opinions or stances on a particular matter.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're establishing the outer limits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact or action without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
MR. MORRIS. I think the staff paper on the behavior of M1was very good in that it pointed out that not only is the velocity of-22-5/24/83M1 not currently predictable but we have no basis for assuming that itwill be predictable in the foreseeable future, because we have had achanged concept--one which blends transactions balances with savingsbalances in unknown proportions. And I think our current posture oftelling the market that we are not targeting Ml but are watching it iscreating instability in the marketplace, which is counterproductive toour objectives. I think we have seen responses in the marketplace toM1 numbers which, while they are not of the magnitude of earlieryears, are certainly not very productive. And it seems to me that thetime has come to tell the market that, at least for the foreseeablefuture, we don't have any basis for confidence that we can predict thevelocity of M1 and, therefore, we are abandoning Ml and are not goingto watch it. We will publish it weekly for historical interest only.It seems to me that the time is right. I thought it was right inFebruary to get rid of Ml but it seems to me that the evidence sinceFebruary should lend some weight to my case that we ought to startmoving away from consideration of Ml as a target or as something thatwe watch--whatever that means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with the current posture of telling the market that the velocity of M1 is unpredictable and argues that this is creating instability in the marketplace. He suggests abandoning M1 as a target and no longer monitoring it.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a difference of opinion.You say it's high, so abandon it; other people say it's high, so webetter give it some weight. What would you do operationally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply presents different opinions regarding the subject matter without any strong opposing arguments or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 202.
MR. MORRIS. Operationally, we have target ranges for M2 andM3 and we can operate on those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a statement about the operational target ranges for M2 and M3 without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What would you do on borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the statement "What would you do on borrowings." This statement is simply asking for information or advice on how to handle borrowings.


Passage number 204.
MR. MORRIS. At the last meeting I didn't have any confidencethat the current level of interest rates would support a broad-basedexpansion but I think the evidence of the last month or so is that, atleast for the time being, we can produce an expansion at the currentrates. I would design the instructions to the Manager to say maintainthe current level of interest rates. And if the $250 millionborrowing level is what the staff says [would do that], I would acceptthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided ("Mr. Wallich") is incomplete, making it impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement. Please provide a complete passage or more context for a proper analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
MR. WALLICH. I think we have to distinguish between givingdifferent weights to the different aggregates and watching them. Ifwe give different weights, we say that each of them is potentiallymisleading. So we give more weight at the present time to M2 and M3,put a little weight on Ml and, therefore, are saying that we are notgoing to trust M2 and M3 and the debt variable fully either. They areall slightly wrong and the most likely right number seems to liesomewhere in the weighted average. This doesn't seem to me a verylogical procedure when you have specific reasons to distrust one ofthe aggregates such as we have, I think, to distrust Ml. There arereasons why people will hold more of their money [in Ml], whether indemand deposits and currency or even in NOW accounts, than they wouldat much higher rates of interest and higher rates of inflation. And Iwould be willing, while watching Ml and not ignoring it, neverthelessnot to give it any weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich suggests giving different weights to different aggregates (M1, M2, M3) and not fully trusting M1. However, he states that this approach is not logical because there are specific reasons to distrust M1. This implies a disagreement about the appropriate weighting and trustworthiness of the aggregates.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a semantic distinction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply pointing out that the distinction being discussed is a semantic one, which suggests a neutral observation rather than a disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 208.
-23-5/24/83MR. WALLICH. No. I think the time may come when theargument that now leads to ignoring Ml loses some of its strength; andthen if Ml still continues strong, one would have to say one had madea mistake and that there was something to it. But at the present timeI think that the more reasonable argument is that there is somethingamiss with Ml and that therefore, while watching it, one is not actingon its signals. The strongest reason for proceeding that way, itseems to me, is the high level of real interest rates. If Ml wereeffective in the usual way of generating expansion, it would be bydriving down interest rates. It hasn't done so. So I conclude thatthe usual transmission mechanism from Ml to aggregate demand somehowis not operative at this time. There is a further very minor point tobe made on that same side. The divisia aggregates, which computemoney on the basis of the moneyness of the aggregates rather than justadding up demand deposits and savings deposits and calling it allmoney, in the last few months universally seem to have shown a lowerrate of growth than the unadjusted regular aggregates. I have noparticular faith in this technique, but it is an interesting device inthat, since it seems to support what I think reasonable for otherreasons, it is something worth factoring into this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea that Ml should be ignored, stating that there may be something to it and that they believe there is something amiss with Ml. They provide reasons for their view, such as the high level of real interest rates and the lack of a usual transmission mechanism from Ml to aggregate demand.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What would you do operationally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for someone's opinion or decision on what actions they would take in a given situation. There is no disagreement or contention evident.


Passage number 210.
MR. WALLICH. At the present time I would follow Bill Poole'sold rule that when the aggregates are not very clear follow interestrates. That rule, of course, leaves open the question of whichinterest rate--the one that happens to prevail or a different one. Atthe present time I wouldn't change interest rates, so I would go withthe same borrowing assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is discussing their approach to determining interest rates and borrowing assumptions, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only includes a name, "Ms. Horn," which does not provide any information that can be agreed or disagreed with.


Passage number 212.
MS. HORN. I want to start with M2. M2 is growing quite inline with a number of our expectations and with my expectations, andif it is growing a bit slowly, I think that has to do with theprecautionary components [unintelligible]. So the signal that I readfrom M2 is a fairly good one for staying on the current course.However, I do read Ml, although I can't explain why it is doing whatit is, as giving a signal. [It influences] the direction of myuncertainties in dealing with policy matters so, because of the signalwe might be getting from Ml, I would like to see a little tighteningup from the current position. I suppose, although I am not willing toargue over $50 million, that takes me from $250 to $300 million [onborrowing]. But the point I want to make is more that that is thedirection in which I think we should be erring because of what Mlmight be telling us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 214.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I come out somewhere near Karen, althoughI start at a different place. I don't know what in heaven's name tomake of these money supply numbers. I have read the staff documentwith great interest and I think it does point out an important reasonwhy we have had so much growth in M1 here--that is, we have a muchhigher interest elasticity of [money] demand, almost twice as high asthe model suggested for the period 1959 to 1974. So, I assume fromthat that we aren't anywhere near as expansive as the 9, 10, or 11percent growth rates in Ml would indicate over the past year or so.-24-5/24/83But I don't know how much expansion we have had on the basis of themoney numbers, so I tend to retreat to basics under uncertainty ofthis kind. I start with the proposition that if I could shape therecovery in any way that I would want to, I would like to haveeconomic growth come out just the way the staff thinks it's going to,at somewhere between 4 and 5 percent both this year and next. If weget that, we will have improvement on the employment front, we willreduce excess capacity, we will get an investment process started butwe will have, I think, continuing progress on inflation. My worry isthat we are going to get more than that for reasons I have alreadyindicated. And I add one more factor, and that is that I think fiscalpolicy is much more likely to be more stimulative than we are nowtalking about rather than less. I think we are not going to get abudget resolution; we are going to end up with lots of appropriationbills and they are not going to be easy to veto. But I am in ahorrible dilemma, in terms of deciding what we ought to do as regardspolicy. I think that the international debt situation argues very,very strongly for not letting interest rates rise. Unfortunately,that international debt situation is still going to be here a yearfrom now. And so, if I am right and at some point down the line wewill need to think about raising interest rates, I guess it would beeasier to raise them a little now, rather than to let the internaldynamics of the cycle begin to take hold and then raise them a lotmore later. So, in terms of operational procedures for the moment, Iwould be inclined to argue for something like "B minus"--I think "C"is much too tight--with initial borrowings at maybe $350 to $400million or somewhere around there. I don't care whether the federalfunds rate range is 6 to 10 percent or 7 to 11 percent. And I wouldcontinue to use M2 as our principal target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's own thoughts and uncertainties on the topic.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
MS. TEETERS. I would tend to go along with $250 million inborrowings, which presumably would keep the interest rate where it is.I have many of the [worries] that have been expressed, particularly inthe international scene. And I don't think we can get a sustainedrecovery with 8-1/2 percent rates of interest and 10-1/2 per cent inlong-term rates. I think rates should be lowered in order to sustainthe recovery; I can stay where we are at least until July, but mypresumption is that sometime over the next several months we are goingto have to lower the rates in order to keep the economy going. Theother thing that I think is probably going to happen is that with thereduction in the first-quarter GNP we are going to have a quarter--probably the second or third, as Chuck said--in which the inventorieswill go in the other direction, and we could get a very strong one-quarter [expansion]. If that happens, I hope that we won't panic andthen raise the rates in order to offset something which is a perfectlynatural development. If anything, I would like to see the borrowingsaround $200 million rather than $250 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. While Ms. Teeters agrees with the idea of $250 million in borrowings to keep interest rates stable, she disagrees with the current high interest rates and argues that they should be lowered in order to sustain the economic recovery. She also disagrees with the possibility of raising rates in response to a strong one-quarter expansion. Instead, she suggests keeping borrowings around $200 million.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement regarding Governor Partee.


Passage number 218.
MR. PARTEE. Well, to give my conclusions first, I would leantoward snugging up a bit now. I also think that we are going to havea couple of good quarters in GNP; the dynamics are such that I don'tknow what might come from that in terms of later on and, therefore, Ithink a little precautionary snugging would be in order. I would alsopoint out that Ml is very much a fact, whether we want to look at it-25-5/24/83or not. The only way that we can really deal with this would be tostop publishing Ml--suppress the numbers on the basis that Ml has noinformation content--and I don't think anybody would propose doingthat. It is something that people look at. I am also impressed bythis world-wide increase in M1 that has occurred over the last sixmonths and it may be telling us something after all, as Ml was tellingus something three or four months ago about a recovery that wasstronger than almost anybody expected. Now, it didn't come inanything like as strong as normal relationships would have predicted,but in fact the economy acted more like Ml would have suggested thanmost judgmental forecasters would have expected three, four, or fivemonths ago. And this may be now a world-wide event.I also have a problem because I don't trust any of the otheraggregates. M2, I think, is very much affected by the IRA/Keoghaccounts, which are a direct substitution in the short run for tax-exempt savings balances. M3 reflects the pattern of demand on themarkets, and I think it is a simple reflection of the fact thatcorporations are trying to do some restructuring. I have always beenmore comfortable with total credit but what I am not comfortable withabout total credit is our estimates. Just a couple of months ago wewere told that, by golly, total credit is running very low--well belowthe lower end of our range. Now, somehow, in the last six weeks, welearn that no it isn't; it is 9-1/2 percent, which is up in the range.And by the time we get another iteration of that, when the Julynational income numbers come out, we may find that it is at the top ofthe range. It is a very unstable figure from the standpoint ofestimation even though it is a pretty stable figure from the point ofview of its relationship to the economy. So, I don't think we candisregard Ml and I don't think we can disregard the fact that theeconomy seems to be pretty strong under foot. Therefore, I would snugup without changing operating procedures--which I think is what TedRoberts was really proposing in taking Ml [into account] as a driveron providing reserves again. I'd snug up to maybe $300 million [onborrowings] and try to come in on the low side of alternative B on theaggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own opinion and analysis of the situation, but there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would keep the borrowing level at$250 million, for what it is worth. It isn't worth very much,obviously. I would use the M2 and M3 targets under alternative A; infact, if I had my druthers, I would round them on the up side and makethem 8 and 7 percent. We have a strange situation where we arerunning short of our March-to-June targets by about 2 points and wehave not been offered an alternative that comes closer to returning tothe original targets. For March to June we had put M2 and M3 at 9 and8 percent, [respectively].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author expresses disagreement with the current borrowing level and the alternative targets offered, stating that the original targets are closer to what they believe should be used.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're running lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not mention any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It simply states that something is running lower.


Passage number 222.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I can't [bring] myself to pay thatmuch attention to M1, as I believe some of you do, when I contrastthat monetary aggregate, whose meaning we all seem to agree we don'tunderstand these days, with the reality of the international situationthat we're living with. I think it's just sheer irresponsibility onour part [to use] crystal ball wizardry to have our decisioninfluenced so significantly by what is happening to this famous Ml. I-26-5/24/83come out quite clearly for no tightening, no snugging up, and stayingwhere we are in terms of borrowing levels. I do not see any evidenceyet that a boom is going to materialize where we would have to say:Well, it's a question either of tightening now or tightening three orsix months from now. I don't see that the choice is between them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about the importance of paying attention to M1 (a monetary aggregate) and their belief that it should not significantly influence decision-making. They also state that they do not see any evidence of a potential economic boom that would require tightening borrowing levels. The passage does not involve conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention stated or implied in the passage. The passage only mentions "Mr. Boehne" without any additional information or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 224.
MR. BOEHNE. I think we are getting ahead of ourselves on thecase for snugging up. It just seems to me that that is entirely toopremature. The only real argument for doing it is what we are seeingfor Ml and that does seem to me an awfully thin reed on which to basesnugging up. Our sentiments have changed about the economy. It doeslook better than six weeks ago, but there is considerable room for itto look better without our worrying that we have a boom. We stillhave lots of unused capacity even if one allows for all the structuralproblems; we are still in the very early phases of the recovery. Itis broader-based, but I don't see any evidence that it is running awayfrom us in any way that is going to prove to be a problem. Add tothat the international situation, which I think if anything argues forlower rates. Even though there may be a case down the road where wewould have to raise rates for domestic reasons, it seems to me that wewould want to be pressed to do that rather than anticipate it. If welook at the various measures of monetary policy that we have--realinterest rates, M2, M3, and credit--and add all those up, everythingis on the side it seems to me for at least staying where we are. Theonly thing that is on the other side, for snugging up, is Ml and thatjust isn't much to base it on. So, I come down for staying where weare. Operationally, I would keep borrowings at about $250 million; Iwould carry forward in about the way that we have been conductingpolicy in the last several weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is arguing against tightening monetary policy, while others may hold a different view and argue for tightening. Mr. Boehne presents his reasoning, including emphasizing that the economy has room for improvement and that the international situation argues for lower rates.


Passage number 225.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A comment on the case for snugging up: Itprobably is [unintelligible] rest on Ml alone. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement seems to be incomplete or unintelligible, so it is difficult to determine the exact intended meaning.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 226.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I started out where a lot ofpeople are. Internationally, the case is overwhelming that we wouldbe better off with lower interest rates and a lower exchange rate.But looking at this domestically, I must say that I do get some sensethat there may well be a case for some snugging up or whatever youwant to call it. I would lean in that direction not because of M1 asmuch as I would because of the economy. I do think that the risks areon the side of the economy being stronger rather than weaker than thestaff's forecast. And I am very much inclined to the view that a moremoderate and balanced recovery right now works in the direction ofmaking that recovery more durable and more sustainable, partly becauseI do think it works in the direction of minimizing the risks that someof those pent up pressures on prices, that I at least sense are there,could be unleashed. In some very practical ways the question that weface right now is: If we do snug up a bit, does that assist in[achieving] our longer-range objectives for the economy. In part Itry to answer that by asking myself the question: What will happen tobond rates if we do snug up a little, recognizing that they havealready increased 50 basis points in the last two weeks. On the otherhand, what would happen to bond rates if we didn't do anything. Insome ways I think that is the $64 question. My instinct is that inthe current circumstances a gentle move in the direction of snuggingmight well produce the result of helping to stabilize long-term-27-5/24/83interest rates; and we have had experience in the past to suggest thatsome increase in short-term interest rates early on in a businessrecovery can be reversed. I think that happened in the mid-1970s in away that did not inhibit the early phases of recovery. So, I wouldcome out in the direction of, say, putting borrowings around $400million in the expectation that the federal funds rate might move uptoward the 9 percent range--again, not because I'm paranoid about Mlbut because of the way I'm looking at the economy and the way thatover time I think that might help us rather than hurt us in terms ofour long-term objectives for the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention between the speaker and the "internationally" acknowledged case for lower interest rates and a lower exchange rate. The speaker expresses a different perspective, stating that they lean towards tightening monetary policy due to their assessment of the domestic economy and their belief that a more moderate recovery would be more sustainable.


Passage number 227.
MR. KEEHN. I would be in substantial agreement with whatJerry has said. It seems to me the last time we established thedirective based on a reasonably uncertain economic environment--thoughthe news looked good at the time--and since then it certainly hasgotten a lot better. I think we now have a reasonably broad-basedeconomic recovery in place, with certain cautions, and on top of thatwe have a highly stimulative fiscal policy that's going to get morestimulative as the year goes along. Certainly that will be the casenext year as we get closer to the election. And though all the papersI've read support the thought that Ml has changed, nonetheless,nothing persuades me that it is no longer useful in any way. I thinkwe have to begin to establish a framework in which we are focusingslightly more attention on that. I'd be in favor of some modestsnugging up, and alternative B or B+ in terms of the percentages wouldbe reasonable. But I would be inclined to establish a borrowing levelof, say, $400-$450 million as a way of establishing a higher level offocus on it and beginning to snug up a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their agreement with what Jerry has said and expressing their own perspective.


Passage number 228.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I take alternative B with a $250million borrowing level as being maintenance of the currentconditions. And although I recognize the concern of some about Ml, itseems clear, at least to me, that the informational content of Mlgives very little guidance for policy in the period ahead. That doesnot suggest that I want to join Frank Morris to bury Ml; rather, Ithink it will become an important guide sometime in the future, butcertainly not between now and July. Having said that, I still have aconcern about the sustainability of this recovery over the long hauland I think the international situation suggests somewhat lowerinterest rates. Neither of those [considerations] seems to me to bepersuasive enough to ease in the period ahead. Thus, I come out witha $250 million borrowing level from now until July and I hope that weget some more good news that we can react to in July. I'd like to saythat I have some real questions about what kind of directive we mayadopt, but I guess that's for later in this discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, expresses his personal views and opinions without opposing or contradicting any other statements or ideas.


Passage number 229.
MR. RICE. Just operationally, Mr. Chairman, I agree witheverything that Roger just said. I would support alternative B and aborrowing level of $250 million, and I take that to be consistent withmaintaining the situation substantially as it is at the present. Iwould not want to take any action that would have the effect ofraising interest rates at the present time. I think it's too early tostart pushing up interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. All the statements made by Mr. Rice are in agreement with what Roger said, and he expresses his support for alternative B and a borrowing level of $250 million. Mr. Rice also states that he would not want to raise interest rates at the present time.


Passage number 230.
MR. BALLES. I think the case for a touch of snugging up hasbeen pretty well set forth here already by, among others, Chuck andJerry. And I won't take the time to repeat those arguments. I dofear that if we let this upswing in the economy get too far ahead of-28-5/24/83us in terms of regenerating inflationary pressures or expectations, wewill live to regret it. I don't think we've ever made mistakes, ormany mistakes at least, in the past by being too easy duringrecessions. I think our mistake historically has been to hang on toease too long after the upturn is underway. I would be concernedabout just plain market reactions to the announcement of a 24 percentincrease in M1 in May; I think we might get a bigger case of bondyields rising than we did after that little flurry following lastFriday's announcement. We may not think that there is much content inM1 but I'm afraid the market may not be as convinced as we are.That's one of the psychological problems we're dealing with. And forthose who are hasty to condemn Ml as having no informational content,I would raise the same question about M2. It too is a differentanimal than we used to have and we'd be ill advised to forget that.Coming down to the bottom line, my snugging would be defined in termsof perhaps a borrowing assumption of $300 to $350 million, justleaning a bit in the direction of "B minus" but certainly doingnothing very drastic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. A "touch of snugging up" is being advocated for in the passage, but there is no direct contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their concern about letting the economy grow too quickly. They also mention the potential market reactions to a significant increase in M1 and question the informational content of both M1 and M2. However, these are not points of contention or disagreement, but rather concerns and observations.


Passage number 231.
MR. FORD. I'm with the group that wants to snug moderatelyfor one reason: I'll confess to paranoia about Ml, especially whenit's happening on a global scale and in countries which don't have theinstitutional problems that we have to explain it away. I do thinkthe worldwide expansion of money as conventionally measured is ofenough significance to warrant conservative action on the part of ourcentral bank. With regard to the timing, I think we have to rememberthe lags related to what we do now. If we wait until we can see thereal economy exploding in front of us, then we're doing what we alwaysdo--we're too late. What we do today basically affects what willhappen in the economy one year into the recovery. And that's why weshould do it now, not later. So, I'm for a slight snugging, withperhaps a borrowing requirement of somewhere around $400 million--enough to let short-term rates go up to give a signal to the marketthat we are not going to ignore completely all of what is going on inthe monetary area and in the real economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The author states that they are in favor of moderate tightening (snugging) and explains their reasoning for this position. There is no disagreement or contention evident in this passage.


Passage number 232.
MR. MARTIN. I would join those who would oppose abandoningMl. I don't believe the market makers will abandon that measure. Idon't think they'll take it off the tape in their offices because wesay we are abandoning it. Even it they were convinced we wereabandoning it, they may not abandon it. Some Wall Street types thinkthey are a good deal smarter than we are anyway. I don't think thecommentators will abandon discussion [of Ml] in the media. Once anewspaper reporter learns something--and they only learn a verylimited number of somethings--he or she will continue to work thatstory or alleged story of what will be seen as a conflict between themonetarists' analysis of markets and whatever analysis prevailedwithin these walls. I myself feel we should give Ml some weight asidefrom the media considerations. When it varies as much as it is now, Idon't think we can ignore it; a 24 percent growth rate in May ispretty hard to ignore.One comment I would like to make with regard to the recovery:I am just as encouraged as anyone else. I am a natural born optimist,but I did pick up on Jerry's comment that we are talking about apercentage increase and we started at a very low level. Thosebankruptcies that occurred in the recession--the four-year recessionor whatever it is being called--are rather permanent removals from the-29-5/24/83business population. If we seem to be forthcoming with regard torecognizing that a sustainable recovery requires lower long-term ratesand we continue to express our view with regard to irresponsiblefiscal policy, it seems to me that we can make a reasonable case foractions in the direction of less accommodation now, if these aremodest moves. The kind of move I would support is perhaps raisingborrowings to a $350 million level; I am a "B minus" type here. If weindicate that we recognize that long-term rates may be positivelyaffected thereby, if we admit our awareness that autos, housing, andconsumer credit are all vulnerable to high rates, knowing thatconsumer credit rates have been so sticky in coming down, and if wecouple that with public statements that our longer-run goal is toavoid overcreating credit or money, however measured, at this time, itseems to me that a modest move in this direction might be salutary interms of long-term rates and in terms of our credibility out there inthe market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 234.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I came to the meeting pretty wellconvinced that the policy should be steady as it goes. I will have toconfess that I have had a change in attitude in listening to thedebate. I think those who are arguing for some snugging or someleaning against what is happening probably make sense. And havingcome some distance, I would continue on that line and I would arguefor about $400 million on the borrowing assumption rather than $300million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker initially states his opinion but then admits to a change in attitude after listening to the debate. The change in attitude suggests a willingness to consider different perspectives, rather than a disagreement or argument.


Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given passage only mentions "Mr. Black" without providing further context or information that could indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I deliberately waited until BobBoykin had spoken before I made a statement, because not very long agohe made a glowing compliment about my statement by saying he wouldhave agreed with it all until he heard you speak. And that sort ofwiped me out, so I thought I would wait this time. I suppose it won'tcome as a real surprise to anyone that I think we ought to continue togive greater emphasis to Ml. One of the reasons we abandoned Ml isthat we felt MMDAs and Super NOW accounts would affect Ml; I thinkthat was proper. But the growth rate has fallen off pretty sharply inrecent weeks and the original reason for shifting away from Ml to M2seems to me to have largely dissipated. There remains the argumentthat the demand for Ml balances may have increased because the OCDsintroduced an element of elasticity in the demand and also an elementof savings. I think there is some substance to that, but we are notreally going to know the answer to that for many, many months down theroad. And there's a risk that it might not have changed thatsignificantly. In view of that, I think we have to weigh the risks indeciding what policy ought to do. To me there is some risk that if wedo not move somewhat now, we may have some unwinding of this goodeffect we have had on inflation. And I would be particularlyconcerned about the adverse effect on long-term debt markets. So, Iwould favor going back to the old procedure, of course, where weadjusted our borrowing target automatically as Ml varied off thetarget. But I know we are not going to get that. I would next fallback to "C," which I also know we are not going to get. So, if I werevoting, I guess you all would probably push me up to maybe "B minus."But I definitely think we ought to make some move now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the decision to shift away from M1 and argues for a return to the old procedure of adjusting borrowing targets based on M1. They also suggest potential risks and express concern about the adverse effect on long-term debt markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 237.
-30-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously have a difference ofopinion, but for the most part the difference of opinion is notnumerically huge. I am impressed, domestically, by the actual andpotential strength [of the economy]. It's moving pretty fast now,with inventory still negative in the last figures; I don't knowwhether they were negative in April or May, but we've had a lot ofinventory liquidation and some increase in final demand. We'll get ashift in inventories at some point and consumers are very confident,if one believes these surveys at all. Ordinarily, I don't give themmuch weight, but they surely are going through the roof right now witha tax cut of some size coming up in thirty-six or thirty-seven days.The conflict is quite clear in all the comments people havemade. I don't think there's much question about the short-termoutlook, which I take to be six months or so, for the economy.There's a question of its sustainability or certainly its balance.There are questions about investments and questions about exports,which are very real. And I think that's partly a reflection of thebudgetary problem. We have a straight-out conflict between thedomestic and international considerations. I don't know that we couldhave much more of a pronounced conflict there. That is clearly fed bythe budgetary situation. We cannot control the budgetary situation;therefore, we have no satisfactory policy by monetary policy alone.We have problems in the credit structure that have been mentioned andwould be eased by easier money, but that also creates a conflict. Iam left with no answer in monetary policy except a compromise in anunsatisfactory situation. I am not so bothered by this Ml; whether wecount it or not, I think we weigh it a little--more than a little. Idon't ignore it myself; I don't know that I'm pulled by it. But whenthe movement gets large enough, I don't see how we can totally ignoreit. It lends a little weight to whatever decision we make.I come out on the side of a little snugging up, which weshould be prepared to reverse if things come out satisfactorily interms of the aggregates or if there are any real signs that it isintolerably--that is a strong word--or even less than intolerablyaggravating the international situation, or the business situationlooks as if it has much less momentum than it appears to have at themoment. I don't know how to quantify that. But if we do anything, wehave to go to $350 million, I suppose; we've practically been thererecently by accident and $250 million is rather a minimal level ofborrowing. I think all we are talking about is putting some verymarginal pressure on the market. How the markets will react, I don'tknow. The danger is that they will overreact. Rather, that is adanger but there's a danger in the other direction, as Mr. Corriganmentioned. I would suggest that we just compromise somehow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges a difference of opinion and mentions conflicting views on the short-term outlook, the sustainability of the economy, investments, exports, and monetary policy. The speaker also mentions the danger of overreacting or underreacting in the markets.


Passage number 238.
MR. PARTEE. Peter, what kind of funds rate do you expect tobe associated with a persistent $350 million of borrowing--if theborrowings were put up to $350 million and kept there rather than justaccidentally being there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or disagreement between parties. It is a question asking for Peter's expectation regarding a specific scenario.


Passage number 239.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as you said, we've been there but tobe aiming at it [is a distinction]. Whereas I felt aiming at $250million was associated with funds of 8-1/2 to 8-3/4 percent, I'dexpect to see funds trading more toward the 8-3/4 percent side andmaybe edging above that on occasion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and expectation about the funds trading at a higher interest rate.


Passage number 240.
-31-5/24/83MR. RICE. Funds have been up to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about funds being up to 9 percent.


Passage number 241.
 I don't know ifyou directly associate it with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They were only up to 9 per cent, I think,during the statement period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states a lack of knowledge about a certain association and provides a statement about a percentage during a specific period without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 242.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, for a weekly average, it only got upthere in the week in early April when there were those special end-of-quarter pressures. Other than that, I think the highest it recentlyreached was 8.80 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply stating some statistics about the interest rate without any conflicting opinions or differing points of view.


Passage number 243.
MR. RICE. And that was associated with the temporarymovement to $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a fact.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the borrowing was all fouled upthere; it was much higher, wasn't it. We had the statement date andthe aftermath of the statement date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion about the borrowing being "fouled up" and asking for confirmation about the higher value, but there is no conflicting statement or disagreement presented.


Passage number 245.
MR. AXILROD. The funds rate/borrowing relationships havebeen quite variable. One week in late April we had borrowing of $678million and the funds rate averaging 8.58 percent; the next week wehad lower borrowing, of $435 million, and the funds rate was averaging8.80 percent. And then last week we had $550 million borrowing and afunds rate averaging 8.59 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the borrowing and funds rate data for different weeks without any conflicting information or opinions present.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't realize the borrowing levels hadbeen quite that high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing surprise or a lack of prior knowledge about the borrowing levels being described.


Passage number 247.
MR. RICE. It doesn't help to snug up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something does not help.


Passage number 248.
MR. AXILROD. Well, there have been lower weeks of borrowing.To make it a complete story, Mr. Chairman, we had $232 million ofborrowing with a funds rate of 8-3/4 percent and $252 million withfunds at 8.70 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides factual information about the borrowing and funds rate, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A perfect inverse correlation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is a perfect inverse correlation. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 250.
MS. TEETERS. What interest rate are you aiming for. If yousnug up, where do you want the rate to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for information regarding the desired interest rate and any potential adjustments.


Passage number 251.
MR. MARTIN. Maximum 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Maximum 9-1/2 percent" is simply stating a maximum percentage without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 252.
MS. TEETERS. That's too much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that "That's too much" without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it would be unlikely to go thathigh and stay that high with the kind of borrowing we're talkingabout. I wouldn't say it wouldn't touch there on occasion but I thinkwe're talking more 8-3/4 to 9 percent. But I don't have anyparticular objective in mind. I don't want to shock the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 254.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would object to a directive thatwould get the funds rate in the 9 percent range. I'd go to 8-3/4percent maybe--ranging above and below 8-3/4 percent. That's a prettysmall range, obviously. But when it touches 9 percent, there is somemagic to it, it seems to me, particularly if it touches 9 percent andremains there for any period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's objection and preference regarding the funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 255.
-32-5/24/83MR. FORD. Yes, the market might understand what you'retrying to do if it got to 9 percent. Seriously, isn't it slicing thebologna a little thin to say we're going to snug up 1/4 percentagepoint or less than 1/4 point if we average it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "isn't it slicing the bologna a little thin" suggests that the speaker disagrees with the idea of making such small adjustments to interest rates.


Passage number 256.
MR. GUFFEY. There was a time when we used to do it in 1/8point [increments], Bill, as you may remember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about how something used to be done in the past.


Passage number 257.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's going to be a strongmarket reaction if the fed funds rate gets to 9 percent. The primerate would definitely go up. There will be loud cries from abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely presents a viewpoint or prediction about the potential market reaction if the fed funds rate reaches 9 percent.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not so sure the prime rate would go upwith a funds rate of 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply expresses uncertainty or doubt about the possibility of the prime rate going up with a funds rate of 9 percent.


Passage number 259.
MR. ROBERTS. The prime rate may be going up anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply states a possibility or speculation that the prime rate may be increasing. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument provided.


Passage number 260.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know that Wachovia--SEVERAL. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 261.
]MR. BLACK. It was a half point lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple statement of fact and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
MS. TEETERS. I thought the $250 million was associated with8-3/4 percent. You're definitely pushing it over 8-3/4 percent, itseems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters believes that the amount of money in question is associated with 8-3/4 percent interest rate, while the other person is arguing that it is pushing over that percentage.


Passage number 263.
MR. FORD. You're back to adjusting by eighths, Mr. Volcker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Ford is suggesting a return to adjusting by eighths and addresses Mr. Volcker.


Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know exactly what it will be. Mr.Axilrod just gave you a swing of one half percentage point, whichseemed to be inversely correlated with the level of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is mainly informational in nature regarding the uncertainty of a future event and the correlation between a given swing and borrowing levels.


Passage number 265.
MR. AXILROD. Well, borrowing in the week to date isaveraging $350 million and funds are trading at 8-5/8 to 8-3/4 percentgenerally. Who knows. The relationship to borrowings has been quitevariable, so I don't think one can really be extremely precise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and expressing uncertainty about the relationship between borrowings and interest rates.


Passage number 266.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though the numbers are small, weshould not ignore the fact that there will be significant reaction, Ithink, in the dollar exchange market. There may or may not be somereaction in the bond or stock markets; I don't know about those. Onecan't be 100 percent certain, but the probabilities are that the primerate would go up if the funds rate is moved up as much as half apoint, and it just seems to me that we're going much too far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is stating various possibilities and uncertainties without any conflicting points of view.


Passage number 267.
MR. BOEHNE. What are the expectations in the markets aboutwhat the Committee is going to do, Peter--snug up or stay the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is simply asking for information about market expectations.


Passage number 268.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think they're debating that verypoint with probably a majority thinking no change. But there would besome who would expect some snugging.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing different perspectives or opinions on a particular point.


Passage number 269.
MR. RICE. The market seems to be expecting no change at all.I think Tony put his finger on the main risk. When the market sensesthat we are snugging up, they will help us; they will conclude thatthat is what we want and will add impetus to it. We're going to getan upward bias, which I think is the wrong thing at the present time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 270.
-33-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think one can say the marketexpects no change. A straightforward reading of the market says theyalready anticipate it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents an opinion or perspective about the market's expectation.


Passage number 271.
MR. ROBERTS. And with respect to the exchange rate, it hasbeen going up while rates have been going down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that the exchange rate has been increasing while interest rates have been decreasing.


Passage number 272.
MR. RICE. Henry Kaufman put out the word: No change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply describes Mr. Kaufman's statement without any opposing opinions or conflicting information.


Passage number 273.
MR. BOEHNE. I would think that a prime rate increase thatcould be linked, rightly or wrongly, with a snugging up by the Fedwould have a definite detrimental effect on these expectations of goodthings to happen. I think things are sort of at an even keel and ifbusiness and mortgage markets thought that the low rates were over andthat rates not only were not going to stay about where they are butwere going to back up, that would have a major negative impact onpsychology.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his belief that a prime rate increase could have a detrimental effect on expectations and psychology if businesses and mortgage markets believe that low rates will not stay where they are and will increase.


Passage number 274.
MR. ROBERTS. It doesn't follow that the prime wouldautomatically go up, though, because there has been a big swing awayfrom negotiable CDs to money market deposit accounts as a source ofmoney. The spread can change between the funds rate or the CD rateand the prime and in the meantime business loan demand is very soft.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a different possibility or alternative explanation without contradicting the previous statement.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the CD rate this morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple question asking for information about the current CD rate.


Passage number 276.
MR. AXILROD. It was at 8.80 percent yesterday. It's on thissheet; I'll give it to you in a second. It's 8-3/4 percent, roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod simply provides information about the interest rate.


Passage number 277.
MR. ROBERTS. Is that 9ish reserve adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question and does not involve any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 278.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the response "Yes" by Mr. Axilrod, which suggests that he disagrees with or has a conflicting opinion on something that was previously mentioned or discussed. However, without further context from the passage, it is not possible to determine what the specific disagreement or contention is about.


Passage number 279.
MR. ROBERTS. So, it's [a spread of] 150 basis points.That's not uncommon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 280.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, as a technical comment on marketreaction--and, of course, no one can assess market reaction with anyprecision--if $350 million were where the Committee wanted to putborrowing, I'm not sure that would be noticeable at all in the market.We've been running very close to it. We hit it exactly. The freereserves number that's implied after you take out seasonal borrowing,which the markets tend to do, is slightly positive. [Unintelligible.]The odds on missing it on the high side are somewhat lower than whenwe're working with a minimal number because with a minimal number it'shard to get below it and it's easier when we miss to be on the highside because banks' borrowing tends to be higher. So, technically,I'm not sure with $350 million that hardly anything would be noticed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a technical comment on market reaction and offering their perspective on the potential impact of a $350 million borrowing on the market. They are not contradicting or disagreeing with any other argument or statement.


Passage number 281.
MR. GUFFEY. Then what's the point in doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning the purpose or point of doing something.


Passage number 282.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's why we should go to $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Corrigan suggests a course of action and does not involve any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I doubt that we ought to be easing rightin the face of all this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage expresses doubt or questioning about a certain action but does not indicate any disagreement or contention between multiple parties.


Passage number 284.
MR. MORRIS. Well, the real issue is what level of the fundsrate we should be shooting for.-34-5/24/83SPEAKER(.). Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with Mr. Morris's statement.


Passage number 285.
MR. MORRIS. Given the instability in the relationshipbetween the funds rate and borrowing, that's the issue. That's wherethe action is going to come from in the marketplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is explaining that the issue lies in the instability between the funds rate and borrowing and that is where the action will take place in the marketplace. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 286.
MR. GUFFEY. I'd certainly hate to go to Williamsburg aftersnugging up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 287.
MR. GRAMLEY. They didn't invite you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 288.
MR. FORD. You don't have to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that suggest contention or disagreement between individuals or parties. It is a simple statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 289.
MR. BALLES. I don't know, but there might be some who wouldview this snugging up as a way of either heading off further increasesin long-term rates or helping to bring them down. That has to be thekey thing. Let's not kid ourselves that the funds rate is going tomake or break the economy. What's going to make it or break it is thetrend of long-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Balles suggests that snugging up could help bring down long-term rates, while others might disagree and believe that the funds rate has a significant impact on the economy.


Passage number 290.
MR. ROBERTS. Which are going up now.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roberts simply states that something is going up, and the speaker's response is not provided.


Passage number 291.
 It depends on what you think--MR. BALLES. That affects foreign borrowing--the wholebusiness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not expressing any contention or disagreement. It is acknowledging the fact that the answer to the question depends on the individual's perspective or opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 292.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're going to be perceived as goingagainst the consensus view of all the governments, including our own,to encourage a worldwide recovery, because people judge that theinflationary problem is considerably reduced--that there's noimmediate prospect for that in the near-term future. We are alsogoing to be perceived as discouraging recovery because of the impacton the international debt burden. And I just think the symbolism ofthis is wrong. It's out of all proportion, I would admit, for a lousy$100 million difference in the borrowing level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there will be different perceptions about their actions. The first sentence suggests that the speaker's view goes against the consensus of governments. However, in the next sentence, the speaker acknowledges that their actions may also be seen as discouraging recovery due to the impact on the international debt burden. Therefore, there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 293.
MR. WALLICH. There's a certain inconsistency between sayingwe want to snug up because the economy is strong and then sayingmoreover that that's going to hold down the long-term rate or bring itdown. That isn't going to slow the economy that needs slowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is pointing out what he perceives as an inconsistency in the argument being presented, but he is not expressing disagreement or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 294.
MR. BALLES. I don't view it as inconsistent, Henry, becauseI happen to believe that long-term rates are heavily influenced byexpectations of future inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing his personal belief, so there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement present.


Passage number 295.
MR. FORD. It could be perfectly consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Ford.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm afraid Mr. Axilrod is correctthat if it's below $350 million, it will be perceived as an easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that Mr. Axilrod's statement is correct.


Passage number 297.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would want my own prescription in that caseto be reinterpreted as pushing a level of initial borrowing that wouldget the funds rate up to somewhere in the 8-3/4 or 9 percent range.I'd like the market to notice it. I can certainly understand whypeople who look at the present unemployment rate, excess capacity, andso on are saying: No, this is not the time to do it. And I canunderstand Tony's concerns. But I think we're going to be faced with-35-5/24/83these same concerns a month from now, 3 months from now, and 6 monthsfrom now; and they're going to be worse then they are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges different viewpoints and expresses understanding for them.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to write a directive. I'mnot crazy about the one that's in here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their preference for a different directive without arguing against the existing one.


Passage number 299.
MR. PARTEE. I really think we ought to look at alternativeII, Paul. It has more promise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his opinion and suggesting an alternative option (alternative II) that he believes has more promise.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that but I don't likealternative II either. I wrote something here but I don't knowwhether people will like it: "The Committee seeks in the short run toincrease slightly the degree of reserve restraint, recognizing thatwhile M2 and M3 are expected to remain somewhat below the rates ofgrowth of 9 and 8 percent established for the quarter and within theirlong-run ranges, transactions balances have been increasingsubstantially more rapidly than desirable. The action was takenagainst the background of evidence of some acceleration in the rate ofbusiness recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they agree with a certain point but also express their dislike for an alternative option. However, there is no apparent disagreement or conflicting viewpoints within the passage.


Passage number 301.
"MR. ROBERTS. Excellent statement, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is complementing the chairman's statement.


Passage number 302.
MR. PARTEE. I like it.SPEAKER(.). I do too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers express agreement and positivity towards the subject being discussed.


Passage number 303.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it has two serious problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, the speaker expresses their opinion about something without necessarily offering any argument or opposing viewpoint. The statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement, but simply states the speaker's perception of two problems.


Passage number 304.
MR. GRAMLEY. [You think] the "increase" should be"decrease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as the opinion of Mr. Gramley without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 305.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [It] puts more importance on the factthat we're giving attention to Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses the importance of giving attention to ML.


Passage number 306.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to help with that.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 307.
 Well, how could we fail to--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You go out of your way to comment ontransactions money. And you're making Ml respectable again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The phrase "Well, how could we fail to--" suggests that the speaker disagrees or is challenging the other person's assertion.


Passage number 308.
MR. ROBERTS. It's never been otherwise in the market, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement made by Mr. Roberts about the market, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 309.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Look, after Paul's initial Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, the market reaction was that they were paying aheck of a lot less attention to the Ml figures. That changed whenPaul made a couple of remarks that gave the impression that we werepaying more attention to M1 than the market thought. And thatattitude has now come back. It is completely controllable by whatChairman Volcker says and the way he articulates his view ontransactions money or Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a sequence of events and observations.


Passage number 310.
MR. ROBERTS. That may or may not be true. The recentbehavior, the very large increases, may overwhelm comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that the truth of the statement being discussed is uncertain, without expressing any disagreement or contention towards it.


Passage number 311.
MR. GRAMLEY. But this won't get published for 45 days andmeanwhile he can bail us out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents a comment by Mr. Gramley about the potential publication timeline and the possibility of someone bailing "us" out within that time frame.


Passage number 312.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think he's going in anotherdirection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is expressing the speaker's personal opinion about someone's actions or decisions. There is no evident contention or disagreement with other parties or ideas.


Passage number 313.
-36-5/24/83MR. BLACK. I think it's reasonable to assume the elasticityof demand for Ml may have increased to some extent and the demand forM1 also may have increased. But it strains credibility, it seems tome, to assume that that can explain all the burst. It's just toolarge for me to think that it could be all of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that they find it difficult to believe that the assumed increase in demand can explain the entire burst.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 314.
MR. MORRIS. I think the use of "transactions balances" asyou proposed is misleading in the sense that it assumes we can measuretransactions balances. Part of the problem with Ml is that it's now ablurring of transactions balances and savings accounts. And how do weknow transaction balances are up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, disagrees with the proposal of using "transaction balances" and argues that it is misleading to assume that transactions balances can be accurately measured. He also mentions that there is a confusion or blending of transaction balances and savings accounts in the concept of M1. Furthermore, he questions the certainty of transaction balances being on the rise.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can refer to Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 316.
MR. MORRIS. Sure. Say that because that's what you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is expressing agreement and confirmation.


Passage number 317.
MR. WALLICH. I find it troublesome to chase a number that wecan't have confidence in. It seems to me the weight should be on realinterest rates. If the inflation continues to come down, real ratesare going up anyway at constant [nominal] interest rates. And to havea rise in interest rates at a time when the whole world hangs onwhether these rates can be kept down I think really incurs a verylarge international risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich expresses his personal belief and perspective on the matter, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention with any other person or viewpoint.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's no question that there's aninternational risk. The question is whether it's more now or later.We get more international risk if the economy gets a bit out of handon the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that there is an international risk and raises a question about the timing and severity of that risk.


Passage number 319.
MR. PARTEE. Then we really will have to deal with it, whichwill mean significantly higher rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee, indicating that dealing with the issue at hand will result in significantly higher rates.


Passage number 320.
MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage or the context provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the statement "MR. RICE." Could you please provide more information?


Passage number 321.
 The risk that the economy is going to get out ofhand immediately is not--MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with Lyle when he says the problemwith Brazil, Mexico, and so forth is going to be with us a year fromnow just like it is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 322.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but if we can get through 1983,there's going to be a big difference. I don't see why a slightlystronger recovery, if it's accompanied by continued low inflation, isgoing to cause us to raise interest rates later in the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a belief that a slightly stronger recovery with continued low inflation will not lead to the raising of interest rates later in the year.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's slightly stronger and accompaniedby continuing good news on inflation, it won't. Maybe interest rateswill come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a possibility or speculation about the future.


Passage number 324.
MS. TEETERS. I think you're pushing them up a quarter at atime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is expressing her belief or opinion about a certain topic.


Passage number 325.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're not going to come down if theFed is tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a straightforward statement, without any specific contention or disagreement. It conveys the idea that a certain outcome (coming down) is unlikely to happen if a certain action (Fed tightening) occurs.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're talking about what we're doingover the next three or four weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the speaker and their conversation partner are discussing their plans for the next few weeks. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 327.
-37-5/24/83MR. RICE. We will not be lowering interest rates in the nextthree to six weeks no matter what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there will be no lowering of interest rates in the next three to six weeks regardless of what happens.


Passage number 328.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we tighten now, I doubt if we'regoing to end up changing our position six weeks from now or wheneverthe next FOMC meeting is. We'd have to see some major change in theeconomy, a weakening, which we're not going to see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt about the likelihood of changing their position in the future but acknowledges that a major change in the economy, specifically a weakening, is necessary for it to happen.


Passage number 329.
MR. RICE. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 330.
MR. WALLICH. Insofar as the economy is influenced by theseincreases in interest rates or the absence thereof, it'll give alittle more stimulation to the rest of the world if we keep rateswhere they are, and to that extent the international situation iseased a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 331.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there will be a lot ofreaction. It will look as though we're trying to spoil the recoverybasically. It will be out of proportion to the modest amount of rise.If there's a clear perception that we are snugging up, people are justnot going to understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is simply expressing a potential concern about how people might react to a certain situation.


Passage number 332.
MR. ROBERTS. The long rates already have started to risewithout our snugging. My guess would be that snugging would bepositively interpreted, particularly in the long markets, and that wewould more likely get a decline in rates than an increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Roberts, is expressing their opinion and prediction about the potential effects of snugging (a term not defined in the passage) on long rates. They believe that snugging would be positively interpreted and lead to a decline in rates.


Passage number 333.
MS. TEETERS. I have never seen the short-term rates go upwithout the long-term rates going up. I've heard your argument manytimes around this table and it has never happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Teeters is simply stating her personal experience and noting that she has heard the argument many times but has never witnessed it happening.


Passage number 334.
MR. WALLICH. Well, for the short run, I think they movetogether. But then we see that after the short rate has beenestablished at some level, long rates may be drifting down; we've hadquite a bit of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Wallich states that short rates and long rates may move together in the short run. However, he also acknowledges that long rates may drift down after the short rate has been established. There is no explicit contention or disagreement presented in this passage.


Passage number 335.
MS. TEETERS. If we want the long rate down at this point intime, we need to lower the federal funds rate, not increase it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 336.
MR. GUFFEY. It seems to me we may be taking a risk reactingto the May Ml figures. If we look at the pattern of April at minus 3percent and May at 24 percent and June projected--whether right orwrong--at only less than 5 percent, we're talking about snugging up inreaction to one month of very high Ml numbers. And we're not certainof what they mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their perspective and caution about reacting to the May Ml figures based on the patterns observed in the past. They acknowledge the uncertainty of the meaning of the figures but do not argue against any specific viewpoint or argue with another person.


Passage number 337.
MR. BLACK. Roger, the staff says 24 percent for May but ifI'm not mistaken, that assumes no further growth in M1 during May.Doesn't it, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 338.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 339.
MR. BLACK. And if we have a reasonable amount of growth, itmight well be above 30 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 340.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, looking at the projection, I see [Mlgrowth of] 4.7 percent for June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the projection of 4.7 percent growth for June without any contrasting opinions or conflicting views.


Passage number 341.
-38-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think whether May is 24 or 30 percent isirrelevant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The writer simply mentions that whether May is 24% or 30% is irrelevant.


Passage number 342.
MR. PARTEE. I do too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. PARTEE is simply stating his agreement with something, without any opposition being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 343.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is that it comes after six monthsof very high growth that we thought might be slowing down and there issome doubt that it's slowing down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or doubt expressed in the passage about whether the growth is slowing down. The phrase "there is some doubt that it's slowing down" indicates a lack of agreement or uncertainty about the situation.


Passage number 344.
MR. PARTEE. It makes April look like the aberration. Beforewe were thinking that maybe April was establishing a new course, andnow it doesn't look that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a change in perspective and shifting expectations based on new information.


Passage number 345.
MR. FORD. April was clearly the aberration. It's not 6months; it's 8 months. Since last August we've had double digitgrowth every month except January, which was 9.8 percent and Aprilwhich was -3.1 percent. So, the trend is clear for Ml. You can't say[May] is a one-month observation. You could say you don't believe inMl, but you can't say there has only been one month of abnormalgrowth. We've had essentially 9 months with one [exception]; ifanything, April is the freak month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 346.
MR. GUFFEY. But it is coming down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 347.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think the key thing, Roger, is how one readsthe economy rather than how one reads Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan expressing his belief that understanding how one interprets the economy is more important than how one interprets Ml (a measure of money supply).


Passage number 348.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "That is correct" is a statement of agreement, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 349.
MR. MORRIS. But I read the economic numbers and I waspleased. Apparently some of you were displeased.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Mr. Morris was pleased with the economic numbers, but acknowledges that some others may have had a different opinion as they were displeased.


Passage number 350.
 You have the ideathe economy is roaring ahead in such an uncontrolled--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a bit of an exaggeration.SPEAKER(.). It's out of hand, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers agree that the economy is growing rapidly, but one of them comments that the statement might be an exaggeration.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 351.
MR. MORRIS. So you're really making a move based on Ml;you're not making a move based on--SPEAKER(.). No, that's wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with Speaker's statement by saying "No, that's wrong."


Passage number 352.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's not fair. That's not fair at all. Theargument that I think people are laying out here is that we now have agood cyclical recovery underway. It's not out of hand at the moment.But I think past cyclical processes strongly suggest that recoveriestend to gain momentum as time goes on. That's not what the staff hasforecast, but I think Jerry would agree that the risks at this pointare on the up side and not on the down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, expresses agreement with the argument being presented and acknowledges that the staff's forecast may not align with the belief that recoveries tend to gain momentum over time. He also suggests that the risks of the recovery are more likely to be positive rather than negative.


Passage number 353.
MR. MORRIS. But we want it to gain some momentum, don't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Morris is simply asking if the speaker desires for something to gain momentum.


Passage number 354.
MR. GRAMLEY. It depends on how much we want it to gain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the outcome depends on the level of desire or effort put into achieving it.


Passage number 355.
 Andthe question is--MR. MORRIS. We have more slack than we've had since the1930s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact or opinion without any contradictory information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 356.
-39-5/24/83MR. GRAMLEY. Everybody recognizes that too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing ideas.


Passage number 357.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be answered as the passage is not provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 358.
 I'd like to see us use up some of that slackfor--MR. CORRIGAN. Frank, I wasn't here; you were. But I have ahunch that exactly this same discussion probably took place sometimearound 1976. And I think it's very apparent where we came out, partlyon the grounds that we didn't have to worry about inflation.SPEAKER(.). I think that's pretty unfair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan challenges Frank by suggesting that a similar discussion happened in the past and implies that the outcome was different. The speaker then expresses that they find Mr. Corrigan's comment to be unfair.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 359.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's really an unfairconclusion. Lyle, let's accept the fact that there is somepossibility that a stronger recovery than what we want may materializelater. At the moment you say it's going along on track okay butyou're worried that later on it may materialize. Does that mean thatyou anticipate that now, given the situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrase "I think that's really an unfair conclusion" which implies a disagreement with a previous statement or opinion.


Passage number 360.
 It can only--MR. GRAMLEY. I always think that monetary policy has to workon a forecast, Tony. I don't believe that we operate just on what wesee in the past 3 months or past 1 month on Ml or anything else. Youhave to ask yourself where you want to go and where you think theeconomy is going. If I thought the economy were falling off a cliffnow, I'd want to drop interest rates a ton. But I don't. I think theevidence has been accumulating month-by-month that this recovery isgaining a lot of strength. Let's cite some numbers. The industrialproduction index has gone up at a 17 percent annual rate sinceDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing his own beliefs and opinions about monetary policy and the current state of the economy. He mentions that he doesn't believe in operating solely based on past data but also considers where the economy is heading. He also provides some evidence (the increase in the industrial production index) to support his belief that the recovery is gaining strength. However, there is no direct argument or disagreement with anyone else in this passage.


Passage number 361.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the midst of a lot of inventoryreduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that there is a lot of inventory reduction happening.


Passage number 362.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's right. We had private final purchases,residential construction plus personal consumption plus business fixedinvestment, going up at a 5-1/4 percent rate in the first quarter.This is not a weak recovery. We've had an increase in new orders fortotal durable goods at a 24 percent annual rate since December and ata 39 percent annual rate of increase for nondefense capital goods.Now, this is a recovery that's gaining momentum. I grant you that ifwe could be assured that we're going to get 4 to 5 percent growth andno more for the next two years, then I would be happy just to sitright where we are. But I don't think that's the outcome that isgoing to happen, so I think we need to take the precautionary movenow. And if we go up 1/4 percentage point or 1/2 percentage point onthe fed funds rate, it isn't going to end the world. It's not goingto be the fact that dumps Brazil off the edge of the precipice. If wehave to go up 200 basis points next September because we didn't go up50 basis points now, Brazil is going to have a lot worse time of it.Obviously, there are risks in going in either direction. But I thinkthe cautious and prudent thing to do now is to snug up just a tinybit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and advocating for a cautious approach to raising interest rates.


Passage number 363.
MR. BALLES. I strongly support Lyle's diagnosis, which Ithink is first-rate. We do have internal dynamics of a businessexpansion going on here; and part of the history is that when thatgoes on, we get price movements associated directly with it. Andthat's my fear--that we may be in the process of getting a greater-40-5/24/83inflation rate than the Board staff has forecast, even though theyhave a lot of logic and plausibility on their side. History wouldargue the other way. And that's what I would like to see us headingoff at the pass by a little snugging up starting now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is expressing his support for Lyle's diagnosis and explaining his fear of a higher inflation rate. He acknowledges that the Board staff has logic and plausibility on their side but suggests taking precautions to prevent inflation.


Passage number 364.
MR. MORRIS. I think the analogy Jerry drew of 1976-77 is farfrom correct. We are now in the middle of 1975 in terms of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Morris simply expresses his opinion that the analogy drawn by Jerry is incorrect.


Passage number 365.
MR. PARTEE. We snugged up in the spring of '75.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating an event that happened.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. And by September it wasgoing down in the other direction and interest rates were going downfor a few months and the economy was rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a series of facts without any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 367.
MR. GUFFEY. But we also had an inflation rate of 7 percentin the CPI in March of '75. In other words, we were then starting atan inflation rate that was much higher than where we are in thisrecovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about inflation rates in different periods.


Passage number 368.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if you want to make a snugginggesture, make it $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 369.
MR. ROBERTS. How about $500 million.SPEAKER(.). [Unintelligible] going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 370.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I could live with that; any more Icouldn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any statement or idea that could potentially generate contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their acceptance of a certain situation or condition.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm disturbed by the fact that we'reprobably already de facto, by the results, at $350 million. If weliterally came out below that, it will look as if the economy isgetting better and Ml is going through the roof and we're easing up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It seems to be expressing personal concern about the potential impact of certain results.


Passage number 372.
MR. BLACK. In the interest of conciliation, after Tony'soffer, I'll come down from $600 to $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black expresses his willingness to lower his offer in order to reach a compromise or conciliation.


Passage number 373.
MR. MARTIN. You're all heart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "You're all heart," which can be seen as a positive or humorous statement.


Passage number 374.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it may depend on how we word thedirective. I don't know whether anybody has any better idea on how toword the directive. I look at mine and it says "increase slightly"and we haven't had that small an increase in which we--. How about"The Committee decided in the short run to increase reserve restraintinvisibly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options and seeking input from others.


Passage number 375.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'll go for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is agreeing with something that was suggested without expressing any form of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 376.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 377.
 I'll go for that too; it's not saying--MR. FORD. By a statistically deviant amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 378.
MR. WALLICH. We could say that we will keep it at the levelat which on average it has been in the last few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a course of action that is based on past trends and does not indicate any disagreement with others.


Passage number 379.
MS. TEETERS. No, we don't want to do that. At one point itwas $1-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS simply states that they do not want to do something, without any opposing views being presented.


Passage number 380.
-41-5/24/83MR. WALLICH. On average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 381.
MS. TEETERS. It still would average out well above where weare now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about averaging out above the current level.


Passage number 382.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard any promising suggestions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they have not heard any promising suggestions.


Passage number 383.
MR. ROBERTS. Stick to your guns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "Stick to your guns" is a phrase that means to stay determined and committed to one's beliefs or decisions. It does not imply or suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 384.
MR. PARTEE. I think the "increase slightly" is what themajority of the Committee is inclined to do. In fact, some wouldfavor a little more than slightly, I gather. It sounds reasonable tome. I like your whole paragraph, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee expresses agreement and support for the idea presented in the paragraph.


Passage number 385.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Including the "transactions" [part].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement related to including the "transactions" part.


Passage number 386.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think it's time to recognize them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that someone believes it is time to recognize something.


Passage number 387.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think it's important for us to keep afacade up that we're using all the monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinion about the importance of maintaining the appearance of using all the monetary aggregates.


Passage number 388.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage, indicated by the "Yes" response from Mr. Partee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 389.
MR. GRAMLEY. I don't want us to say we're deliberatelypushing up interest rates. That's not the kind of indication that'sgoing to be easy to deal with later on. So, I'd like to use that Mlas a cover.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley expresses his disagreement with the idea of deliberately pushing up interest rates and suggests using M as a cover instead.


Passage number 390.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer without further context.


Passage number 391.
 Yes, but that's--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 392.
 And he has the stronger business--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but I don't understand. Youargued very strongly that the reason for your position is not Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "And he has the stronger business" suggests agreement or confirmation. The statement "Yes, but I don't understand" indicates confusion or lack of comprehension but not necessarily disagreement. The following sentence does not introduce any contradictory or conflicting viewpoints, affirming that there is no contention present.


Passage number 393.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response simply affirms the previous statement.


Passage number 394.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's the strength of the economy.Why not say so, if that's the majority view here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests stating the strength of the economy as a majority viewpoint.


Passage number 395.
MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, I would want to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 396.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I can dissent. But if that's themajority view here, then why not say so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their ability to dissent and questioning why the majority view is not being explicitly stated.


Passage number 397.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, his statement does that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley's statement is simply stating a fact or observing that someone else's statement does something.


Passage number 398.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It doesn't say that. He emphasizedtransactions balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that something is not mentioned and then emphasizes a different aspect.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says both. It says that the action wastaken against the background of evidence of some acceleration in therate of business recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about an action taken and stating that it was taken based on evidence of some acceleration in the rate of business recovery. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 400.
MS. TEETERS. And what's the rest of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is an incomplete statement that does not provide enough context to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 401.
MR. PARTEE. The second sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided does not contain any sentences.


Passage number 402.
-42-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the second sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage appears to be a date written in numerical format. There is no content or context to suggest any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 403.
MS. TEETERS. What's the first one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 404.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What's the part about thetransactions [balances]. We don't have copies of it; we can't see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 405.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd take out the last phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit disagreement or contention in the passage. The suggestion to take out the last phrase is merely a personal opinion or suggestion for improvement, without indicating any disagreement with the rest of the passage.


Passage number 406.
MR. PARTEE. "Some acceleration" seems to me a little weak, abit of the wrong tone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing an opinion about the tone of "some acceleration," but it does not present a conflicting viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 407.
MS. TEETERS. Don't forget they keep revising the GNP down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Don't forget they keep revising the GNP down" is a simple reminder or fact mentioned by Ms. Teeters. It does not present any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 408.
MR. PARTEE. "Evidence of a strengthening in the rate ofbusiness recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating evidence of a strengthening in the rate of business recovery.


Passage number 409.
"MR. WALLICH. We can't really say transactions balancesbecause we don't know what is in Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they cannot accurately determine what is included in M1 (transactions balances) due to lack of information.


Passage number 410.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with changing that toMl, if that makes people feel happy. I don't like the word "Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states an openness to change and personal preference regarding the word "Ml".


Passage number 411.
"MR. PARTEE. "Narrow money stock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states the words of Mr. Partee without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 412.
"MR. WALLICH. It just may not be in Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage provides a statement made by Mr. Wallich without any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply states that something "may not be in Ml," without suggesting any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 414.
 There may be some way of writing this toput more emphasis on the fact that M2 and M3 are expected to remain--MS. TEETERS. Well, if they are expected to remain somewhatbelow their rates, why are we raising interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 415.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because M1 has been increasingsubstantially more rapidly and because of the business [picture].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 416.
MR. GUFFEY. Aren't you elevating Ml to a target again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of "again" implies that there has been previous contention or disagreement regarding elevating Ml to a target.


Passage number 417.
MR. RICE. Yes, we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement acknowledging agreement.


Passage number 418.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: In the given passage, the speaker (MS. TEETERS) is expressing their agreement or affirmation by saying "Yes." Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 419.
MR. BLACK. Gosh, I hope so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Black expresses a hopeful sentiment, indicating a positive expectation or desire.


Passage number 420.
MR. FORD. I think there's no danger that the market willthink that's what we're doing now when we adjust the rate by 1/8 or1/4 of a percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Ford expresses his belief that there is no danger of the market perceiving their actions a certain way when adjusting the rate.


Passage number 421.
MR. BOEHNE. Do we really want to convey the notion that M1is re-elevated and also that somehow it's not good that it looks likethe business recovery is getting in line with the average of postwarexpansions and that we ought to raise interest rates because of thebusiness recovery. Somehow that doesn't have a good ring to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is expressing his own thoughts and reservations about raising interest rates based on the perception of the business recovery.


Passage number 422.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would leave out that part about theaverage postwar expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement about leaving out the part about the average postwar expansion.


Passage number 423.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.-43-5/24/83SPEAKER(.). Right.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both speakers seem to be in agreement.


Passage number 424.
 Do I have a notion that the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I put that in there to answer Mr.Moynihan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining why they included a specific phrase ("I put that in there to answer Mr. Moynihan").


Passage number 425.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 426.
 I think we ought to have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no indication here of going backagain if these things drop or the economy dropped. I don't know howwe get that thought in very simply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to express uncertainty or confusion about how to get a specific thought across.


Passage number 427.
MR. MARTIN. Is there any comment on federal funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question asked by Mr. Martin is simply seeking comments on federal funds.


Passage number 428.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would leave in the boiler plate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 429.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way I would write the directivewould be "The Committee, recognizing that M2 and M3 are expected toremain somewhat below the rates of growth of 9 and 8 percentestablished for the quarter but recognizing that this is in thecontext of a somewhat stronger economic picture, decided to maintainroughly the degree of existing reserve restraint but permitting somemodest changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 430.
"MR. MORRIS. In either direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply giving a statement or fact from Mr. Morris.


Passage number 431.
MR. GRAMLEY. That you're offering in the spirit ofcompromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that someone is offering something in the spirit of compromise. This suggests that there is an intention to find a middle ground or reach an agreement, rather than contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 432.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We don't have to have a money marketdirective; we can go back to an M2, M3 target. I think, though, thatwe wouldn't begin to agree on the numbers for the rest of this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests that they can go back to an M2, M3 target instead of a money market directive. However, they also state that they believe there wouldn't be agreement on the numbers for the rest of the period. This implies that there is contention and disagreement on the specific details and figures related to the target.


Passage number 433.
MR. GUFFEY. Is this upsetting to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asked by Mr. Guffey.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 434.
MR. BOEHNE. What if we move up "the evidence of someacceleration in the rate of business recovery" to replace"transactions balances have been increasing" And then the lastsentence would be "The action was also taken against a background ofsubstantially more rapid growth in Ml." That would seem to be moreconsistent with recent directives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, disagrees with the current wording and suggests changing it to be more consistent with recent directives.


Passage number 435.
MR. GRAMLEY. What if we put the two together. "The actionwas taken against the background of evidence of some acceleration inthe rate of business recovery and continued rapid growth of Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting two related pieces of information - the action taken and the evidence of business recovery and growth of M1. There is no disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 436.
"MR. MARTIN. That gets the business recovery first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, seems to be expressing a statement or observation rather than engaging in a debate or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 437.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The word "yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the full context of the passage, it is not possible to provide a more specific explanation.


Passage number 438.
MR. MARTIN. Which is where we all put it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or a shared understanding of where "we" put something without any opposition or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 439.
MR. BOEHNE. Right; that's the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. Instead, Mr. Boehne is affirming a point or statement.


Passage number 440.
MR. MARTIN. Not the Ml first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a partial quote of someone's name and does not provide any information that can lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 441.
MR. BOEHNE. That's what I'm trying to get at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is trying to clarify or understand something.


Passage number 442.
-44-5/24/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states the title or position of Vice Chairman Solomon without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 443.
 A surge in Ml, to which we don't paymuch attention--MR. MORRIS. Well, we say we don't pay much attention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about not paying attention to the surge in Ml.


Passage number 444.
MR. WALLICH. We're very close to targeting on real growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It simply states that "We're very close to targeting on real growth" without any conflicting or conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 445.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context.


Passage number 446.
 And we don't want to--MR. BOEHNE. Which we say we don't want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "we" do not want to do something, indicating agreement or consensus among a group.


Passage number 447.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod is pointing out to me, in thearea of truth in packaging, that in the last 6 weeks borrowing hasaveraged $392 million. This is a terrific snugging up we're talkingabout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 448.
MR. FORD. At $350 million, it's minus $42 million; at $400million, it's plus $8 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "At $350 million, it's minus $42 million; at $400 million, it's plus $8 million" implies a different result or outcome at two different amounts. The disagreement lies in the contrast between the negative $42 million and the positive $8 million, indicating a difference in financial implications.


Passage number 449.
MR. GUFFEY. But in part of that period the funds rate was 9percent or thereabouts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 450.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes." In the given passage, the presence of the word "Yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement. However, without further context or information, it is not possible to determine the specific cause or details of the disagreement.


Passage number 451.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I don't think it's the actual level ofborrowings that matters at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a personal opinion.


Passage number 452.
 It's what happens--MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It's what happens" is stating a general fact or statement without any view or argument. "MS. TEETERS" is likely a name and does not provide any information that could lead to contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 453.
 It's time for me to have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The federal funds rate was above 9 percentthe week of April 6, which Mr. Axilrod left out of this tabulation.The federal funds rate averaged in no week above 8.80 percent during[the rest of] the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The passage presents a disagreement by pointing out that Mr. Axilrod left out the fact that the federal funds rate was above 9 percent during the week of April 6. This contradicts the assertion made by Mr. Axilrod that the federal funds rate averaged in no week above 8.80 percent during the rest of the period.


Passage number 454.
MS. TEETERS. If you put in the first week of April, thefunds rate averages out to exactly 8.75 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the average funds rate in the first week of April.


Passage number 455.
 And if you put inthe borrowing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the first week of April the borrowingswere $1.4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a fact about the borrowing of $1.4 billion in the first week of April. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 456.
MS. TEETERS. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "That's right." It is a simple affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 457.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we increase the borrowingassumption $100 million, we are still reducing the nonborrowed reservepath by $100 million and it depends simply on banks' variable holdingsof excess reserves. We still are snugging up in intention. Whetherit's manifested or not would depend on the excess reserves level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply explaining the relationship between the borrowing assumption, nonborrowed reserve path, banks' holdings of excess reserves, and the intention of snugging up. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 458.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, even leaving out that week ofApril 6 that had the $1.4 billion borrowing, that average that youcite is still affected by a couple of weeks where we had a wirebreakdown or some special event that pulled that average up. Aimingat $250 million, there's just more room for misses on the up side thanthe down side and I think that's the result that emerges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is providing an explanation and sharing his perspective on the topic.


Passage number 459.
MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems that we maintained a higherlevel of restraint than we were aware of or than we decided last time.-45-5/24/83Why can't we say that we accept the level of restraint that hasdeveloped for the last few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich acknowledging that they have maintained a higher level of restraint than expected. The question raised afterwards suggests acceptance of the current level of restraint.


Passage number 460.
MR. RICE. I think that's a good suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Rice thinks the suggestion is good.


Passage number 461.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.SPEAKER(.). It's also offered in the spirit of compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the proposal is offered in the spirit of compromise, indicating a willingness to find common ground.


Passage number 462.
MR. BLACK. Our error has worked out better than we thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that something worked out better than expected, without any indication of disagreement or contention among different parties.


Passage number 463.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Axilrod is suggesting that we goback to the language somehow or another that he suggested in the firstplace--I'm not crazy about it--about anticipating that growth rates ofM2 and M3 will accelerate. That's not very meaningful to me when theyare below where we said we were satisfied before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the language used by Mr. Axilrod and clarifying what is not meaningful to them.


Passage number 464.
 That's--MR. AXILROD. I was mainly trying to change your Ml to an"anticipation" instead of "desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is expressing their intention to change something without any conflicting opinions or opposition being mentioned.


Passage number 465.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the identity or position of Chairman Volcker.


Passage number 466.
 Well, that's an easy change, changing"desirable" on Ml to "anticipating," but I--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think he's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the change suggested by someone else is easy and agrees that the other person is right.


Passage number 467.
 I thinkalternative II comes closer--MR. MARTIN. Certainly "anticipation" takes a bit of theweight away from Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 468.
 Rather than say we've done it because Ml isrunning higher to say we anticipate Ml to have certain behavior takesa little--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what is his first sentence inalternative II. What's the verb, "maintain" generally or "increase"or "decrease".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that instead of claiming something has already happened, they anticipate a certain behavior in the future. The question at the end is seeking clarification about the verb used in an alternative sentence.


Passage number 469.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'd suggest "increase slightly." Wecan change it but I think the operative question, however we explainit, is whether we say "increase slightly" or whether somebody else hassome other words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering a suggestion and acknowledging that the wording can be changed, but the main focus is on the question of whether to use the phrase "increase slightly" or consider alternative wording.


Passage number 470.
MR. GUFFEY. The alternative is what appears: "the existingdegree of restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about an alternative option.


Passage number 471.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's the argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The given passage does not provide any argument or enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 472.
MR. GUFFEY. And if $350 million is what we have, I thinkthat's a little high. The existing degree of restraint is what wehave and what we maintain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is offering his opinion that $350 million is too high of a amount. However, there is no opposing view expressed in the passage.


Passage number 473.
MR. WALLICH. Well, the question is whether "existing" meanswhat we decided last time or what we actually have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification on the interpretation of the term "existing."


Passage number 474.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 475.
 In the context of reading these things, itreads--whether we aim at something a little tighter than last time ornot and can't make it--MR. ROBERTS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply explaining a situation or scenario without expressing any conflicting or opposing ideas.


Passage number 476.
 Why don't we just say---46-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a direct question without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 477.
 The changes have been so modest that--MS. TEETERS. Well, where are you going to start our arguing:between increase or existing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The mention of "arguing between increase or existing" suggests that there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 478.
 Isn't that just--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right. We can explain itdifferently but that's the substantive thing. [Unintelligible] and inmy mind what this is missing is any recognition, if this is what youwant to put in there, that if these aggregates came in low we mightreverse it, or if business came in less than we were anticipating, wemight be inclined to reverse it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea mentioned and suggesting a potential addition to consider.


Passage number 479.
MR. BALLES. That's in alternative I, Paul, if you just wantto borrow the language in the middle sentence there. It's the part inbrackets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a suggestion or clarification being made by Mr. Balles.


Passage number 480.
MR. AXILROD. I don't mean to press it, Mr. Chairman, butthere is some advantage to having the expectation of a pickup, or somesuch wording, because then if it doesn't occur, we could say itimplies something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod during a conversation or discussion.


Passage number 481.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the M2 and the M3 which arereferred to in alternative I are running low now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without presenting any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the M2 and M3, mentioned in alternative I, are currently running low.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would have to be still lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a hypothetical situation or requirement.


Passage number 483.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The advantage of the alternative IIdraft, I think, is that the sentence on Ml is handled better than inwhat you read earlier, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 484.
MR. MARTIN. That I agree with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker explicitly states that he agrees with what Mr. Martin said, indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 485.
 We're really--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It doesn't have to read that we putMl back on a pedestal or as a target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a perspective or opinion and does not involve conflicting viewpoints or opposing claims.


Passage number 486.
MR. MARTIN. Well, it's forward looking rather than ex post.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is simply stating that the perspective or focus of the subject is forward-looking rather than looking at past events.


Passage number 487.
MR. WALLICH. And it still bases the action on acceleratingM2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward observation about the basis of the action being discussed.


Passage number 488.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I think it's ridiculous when youlook at it. It says we're going to tighten up because M2 and M3 aregoing to be more than 3 percent in the next two months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their view that the situation is ridiculous, but there is no specific disagreement with another party or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 489.
MR. PARTEE. And it doesn't have the strength in the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee discussing the economy's lack of strength.


Passage number 490.
MR. MARTIN. It seems to me that if we take your language andmove the business conditions comment ahead of the Ml comment and addthat "lesser restraint will be acceptable in the context of..." we atleast begin to have something to work with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is proposing a suggestion or idea to improve the language being discussed.


Passage number 491.
 It's not completelyconsistent; now we've got to reconcile--MR. CORRIGAN. That might be the way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that something is not consistent and suggests a possible solution.


Passage number 492.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't quite have that operatively.What are you suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 493.
-47-5/24/83MR. MARTIN. After the language in your draft "for thequarter and within the longer-run ranges," why not move up "andagainst the background of evidence of some acceleration in the rate ofthe recovery." Then make your comment with regard to transactionsbalances in the anticipatory way that it's done in alternative II.And then close with the lesser restraint sentence. That is, we wouldhave: "The Committee anticipates that Ml would remain above its long-run range," as in the alternative II language, "but that its growthwould be substantially reduced in the period immediately ahead." Andthen close with "Lesser restraint would be acceptable...." Now, thatisn't completely consistent; it needs a little editing once you tackit all together like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a reordering and editing of the draft for better flow and clarity.


Passage number 494.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my problem is that I lose sight ofjust how it--. I understand adding this other sentence; I don't thinkthere's any great problem with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their personal problem without any conflicting views or contradictory statements.


Passage number 495.
MR. MARTIN. The lesser restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only provides a statement from Mr. Martin and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 496.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. The fact is we haven't got muchrestraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: in our society anymore. People feel entitled to say and do whatever they want without considering the consequences. There is a lack of respect for authority and a disregard for the well-being of others. This lack of restraint is evident in the way people communicate online, with insults and threats being thrown around without hesitation. Additionally, it is clear in the way people behave in public spaces, with littering and vandalism becoming increasingly common. Overall, there is a clear lack of restraint in our society that needs to be addressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 497.
MR. WALLICH. Well, the case for adding that increases, Ithink, as we shift to increasing the degree of restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Well, the case for adding that increases" implies that there is a differing opinion or perspective on whether to increase something.


Passage number 498.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only problem with that sentence"Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of morepronounced slowing of growth in the monetary aggregates relative tothe paths...." is that it's fine for M2 and M3 but it's hard topronounce a slowing of growth in M1 relative to the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a concern or difficulty in pronouncing a slowing of growth in M1 relative to the path, but it does not involve any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 499.
MR. MARTIN. You're right. So it should be "M2 and M3"instead of "monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin acknowledges the correction and agrees with it.


Passage number 500.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we could just do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple suggestion or proposal, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 501.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's a rather unusual construction no matterwhat, if we have lesser restraint if M2 and M3 slow further but wedon't say what we're going to do if M1 slows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a particular construction that the speaker finds unusual.


Passage number 502.
MR. MARTIN. That's the beauty of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's the beauty of it" suggests that the speaker appreciates or agrees with something previously mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 503.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's a very seriousproblem with your formulation, Paul, which is not true of alternativeII, which is this: In effect what you're saying in the first sentenceof your formulation is that while M2 and M3 on the one hand aregrowing below the rates established, since transactions balances havebeen increasing substantially more rapidly than desirable we thereforeare increasing slightly the degree of reserve restraint. In effectyou are telling the market that Ml is now more important than M2 andM3. Do you really want to go that far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage shows disagreement or contention with Paul's formulation. The speaker disagrees with the idea that M1 is now more important than M2 and M3 and questions whether Paul truly intends to take that stance.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it says that. It says thatMl is increasing at a rate of 24 percent and I give it some weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own thoughts and interpretation of the information presented.


Passage number 505.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It doesn't say that. It says that Mlis more important than M2 and M3 in terms of the bottom line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a straightforward interpretation of what the passage says. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 506.
-48-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it says that. That's yourreading of it; it's not my reading of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they do not agree with the interpretation presented by the other person and asserts that it is a subjective understanding.


Passage number 507.
MR. WALLICH. Two are going down; one is going up strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. And there comes a pointwhen the one going up strongly outweighs the two. When the two are 1percentage point below where they should be and the other is 18percentage points above where it should be, my weighting says, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a point about the relative weights of different values in a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 509.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The given passage does not mention any specific information or statements made by Mr. Martin, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 510.
 So here we are to the central bank money as theGerman--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's not my view ofdeemphasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or view on the topic.


Passage number 511.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [It is] straightforward. I'm not sureit's going to solve any of these problems; I'm perfectly happy to tryit out. "The Committee seeks to increase slightly the degree of..."--I don't know about that "seeks to"--"taking account of expectationsthat growth of M2 and M3 will remain within their longer-run ranges,recognizing the recent strength of Ml, and against the background ofevidence of some acceleration in the rate of business recovery.Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of....
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents various perspectives and opinions without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 512.
"MR. PARTEE. String them altogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is a simple statement.


Passage number 513.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's missing here, but I hate to say it,is that the Committee seeks to increase only slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that something is missing and expresses their opinion, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 514.
MR. MARTIN. Well, if you put in the reversal language,you'll get some of the members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Martin regarding a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 515.
MR. ROBERTS. I think your first draft is better than any ofthese suggestions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roberts, is expressing his opinion that the first draft is better than the suggestions presented.


Passage number 516.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure if I read anything thatpeople are going to like better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply stating uncertainty about whether something will be liked by others.


Passage number 517.
MR. GUFFEY. To be clear, Mr. Chairman, I would join TonySolomon in opting for alternative II and lifting the bracketedlanguage out of alternative I with respect to the downside risk on M2and M3. It seems to me we're really adopting a money marketconditions directive and the initial borrowing level is the importantfactor. If that's $350 million, that's consistent with what we've hadin the past. And I don't see any reason to include language in adirective that will be made public after the next meeting, 6 weeksfrom now, which says we're going to snug up slightly or we're going tohave slightly greater restraint or any other such language. I don'tsee where we [gain] anything from it. It seems to me that $300million or the $250 to $350 million range of borrowing is what weought to be focusing on without any language about snugging up.Alternative II, with the lifting of the language on the down side,seems to me to do that. And it doesn't elevate Ml to some targetlevel for the Desk to shoot at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is expressing his opinion and support for Alternative II without any opposition from others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 518.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose it will make nobody happy tosay: "The Committee seeks in the short run to increase"--or maybe to-49-5/24/83increase only slightly--"the degree of reserve restraint, recognizingthat, while Ml has been increasing substantially more rapidly thananticipated, M2 and M3 are expected to remain below the rates...."That explains why it's only slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The use of phrases such as "it will make nobody happy" and "only slightly" suggest that the Committee's decision or action may not be well received or agreed upon by others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 519.
MR. PARTEE. I can accept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrase "I can accept it," which suggests that the speaker initially had reservations or disagreement but is now willing to compromise or acquiesce.


Passage number 520.
MR. MARTIN. Would you add the lesser restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 521.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're talking about such narrow ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about narrow ranges.


Passage number 522.
MR. MARTIN. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is unintelligible, so it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 523.
]MR. PARTEE. But you would add the sentence on business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement. It appears to be a simple acknowledgement or agreement with a previously mentioned idea or suggestion.


Passage number 524.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I'm not quite sure what I said. Allright, let's try this: "The Committee seeks in the short run toincrease slightly"--I'd put in "only" before that but it sounds alittle [unintelligible]--"the degree of reserve restraint, recognizingthat, while Ml has been increasing substantially more rapidly thananticipated, M2 and M3 are expected to remain below the rates ofgrowth of 9 and 8 percent established earlier and within their longer-run ranges. The action was taken against the background of evidenceof some acceleration in the rate of business recovery. Lesserrestraint would be acceptable in the context of more pronouncedslowing of growth in the broader monetary aggregates relative to thepaths implied by the long-term ranges and a deceleration of Ml orindications of a little weakening in the pace of economic recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different scenarios and possibilities, but there is no conflict or differing opinions presented.


Passage number 525.
"MR. BALLES. That sounds good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Balles expresses his approval or agreement with something, indicating no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 526.
MR. PARTEE. That's a lot of words for $100 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 527.
MR. GUFFEY. May I ask you, Mr. Chairman, what you believe tobe the advantages of making public 5 or 6 weeks from now the language"to increase slightly the degree of restraint". What advantage enuresto the System by publishing that language after the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: There is a question being posed and the speaker is seeking clarification or explanation of the advantages of a specific action. This indicates a potential difference of opinion or disagreement.


Passage number 528.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that question is not on the top ofmy mind. My first [objective] would be to try to say something thathalfway accurately reflects what we think we're doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a personal thought or opinion about priorities.


Passage number 529.
MR. BALLES. If I may be so bold, Mr. Chairman, to answerthat question: You may not agree with it, but let's not forget,Roger, that this directive will be released right after our Julymeeting but before the Chairman's testimony and hence the Fed watcherswill be really studying that directive to see what nuances they candraw from it. I think it's a particularly important statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering their perspective on the importance of a directive that will be released.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 530.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I don't tend to agree with you, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Well, I don't tend to agree with you, obviously" indicates that there is a disagreement between the speaker (Mr. Guffey) and the other person.


Passage number 531.
MR. PARTEE. It's a suggestion that we're not oblivious towhat is going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that "we" are not oblivious to what is going on, suggesting a shared understanding or agreement among the people being referred to.


Passage number 532.
MR. GUFFEY. On the other hand, you've also incorporated inthis that we want to increase interest rates, or restraint if youwill, because the economy has just come out of an episode where we hadtwo recessions in three years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 533.
-50-5/24/83MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 534.
 But it suggests we are moving in a way thatwould avoid the excesses that sometimes have characterized a certainstage of the recovery and overcreating the--MR. MORRIS. And it also place more emphasis on Ml than on M2and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that the movement being discussed would avoid excesses and place more emphasis on M1 than on M2 and M3. It does not present any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 535.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I disagree with that. I just thinkthat is a plain misreading. It says here we're placing some emphasison it; we are not ignoring Ml when it's huge. We've never saidanything different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is disagreeing with a previous statement but does not engage in any argument or rebuttal against another person's perspective. They simply explain their own understanding and emphasize that it aligns with what is written.


Passage number 536.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What you're saying is that eventhough we have deemphasized Ml, when it's this large we have to takeit into consideration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that even though they have minimized the importance of Ml (whatever that may refer to), it still needs to be considered when it is significant in size.


Passage number 537.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's precisely what we'resaying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the previous statement or sentiment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 538.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I don't agree with that" clearly indicates that the speaker disagrees with something previously mentioned.


Passage number 539.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how you can read it any otherway.SPEAKER(.). For one month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 540.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the given information.


Passage number 541.
 Well, we're increasing reserve restraint when M2and M3 are falling below their--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. They're falling 1 percentbelow. They're expected to fall 1 percentage point below and Ml isgrowing 10 percentage points above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speakers are discussing the current status and expectations of M2, M3, and M1 without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 542.
MR. FORD. I don't see, unless you don't want to snug at all,how we can snug with any less vigor than that statement. If I had agirlfriend that snuggled like that, I'd fire her.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is expressing his opinion on snuggling and using humor to make his point.


Passage number 543.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is an empirically correctstatement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their belief that a certain statement is empirically correct, without expressing any opposing viewpoints or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 544.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it read all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his opinion that something (not provided in the given passage) reads alright.


Passage number 545.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To me, the only thing we could debate hereis whether we put in the word "only" before slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the specific topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 546.
 It just soundsa little--MR. PARTEE. No, I don't think so, because to snug onlyslightly in the short run suggests that a little later you're going todo more. "In the short run we will increase only slightly" seems tohave a little trend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It just sounds a little" indicates a disagreement or doubt about the previous statement. Additionally, Mr. Partee's response challenges the idea that "snug only slightly in the short run" suggests a future increase.


Passage number 547.
MS. TEETERS. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS simply affirms the previous statement.


Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or we could take out the words "in theshort run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. The statement simply suggests an alternative action without indicating any disagreement with the previous suggestion.


Passage number 549.
"MR. PARTEE. You'd have to take out "in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 550.
"-51-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me read it once again and seewhether I've got it straight and see whether anybody can do anybetter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to read something again and see if anyone can improve upon it.


Passage number 551.
MR. BLACK. Don't give them a chance at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Committee seeks in the short run toincrease slightly the degree of reserve restraint, recognizing that,while M1 has been increasing substantially more rapidly thananticipated, M2 and M3 are expected to remain below the rates ofgrowth of 9 and 8 percent established earlier within the longer-runranges. The action"--we could say the modest action--"was takenagainst the background of evidence of some acceleration in the rate ofbusiness recovery. Lesser restraint would be appropriate....
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The committee is acknowledging that M1 has been increasing more rapidly than expected, but M2 and M3 are expected to remain below the established growth rates. The committee believes that a slight increase in reserve restraint is necessary given the evidence of some acceleration in the rate of business recovery. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 553.
"MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 554.
 We seem to be saying that we're tighteningbecause M2 and M3 are expected to remain below the rates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's why the word only would help inthat context.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply suggesting that the word "only" would help clarify or support the idea that tightening is a result of M2 and M3 remaining below certain rates. There is no conflicting opinion or dispute present.


Passage number 555.
MR. WALLICH. It seem to be putting all the weight there onMl.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich expressing his opinion or observation.


Passage number 556.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 557.
 Well, you could say marginally, soyou avoid Chuck Partee's--MS. TEETERS. Slightly marginally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "so you avoid Chuck Partee's" suggests that the speaker disagrees with Chuck Partee's opinion or viewpoint.


Passage number 558.
MR. CORRIGAN. Could we put a phrase before M2 and M3 thereand say "in the context in which M2 and M3 are only slightly belowtheir...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a modification to the sentence structure to clarify and enhance the meaning.


Passage number 559.
"MR. GRAMLEY. I think we'd need to drop the "while," though.The Chairman's point is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley simply suggests dropping the word "while" without opposing or contradicting the Chairman's point.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 560.
 The argument seems backwards--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is backwards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "The argument seems backwards" suggests disagreement or opposing viewpoints with the argument being discussed. The phrase "It is backwards" further emphasizes the disagreement, affirming that the argument is indeed reversed or incorrect.


Passage number 561.
MR. GRAMLEY. --if we say we're doing this while Ml [is high]although M2 and M3 are falling below. We ought to drop the "whilerecognizing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by an individual expressing their opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 562.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Like the way I said it originally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing the preference for the original way of saying something.


Passage number 563.
MR. GRAMLEY. Or leave the order the way it is but take outthe word "while" and just say "recognizing that [Ml] growth...eventhough M2 and M3 are below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 564.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the name of a chairman without providing any context or information that suggests conflict.


Passage number 565.
 I think the result of that is that itgives a little more emphasis on Ml, but I--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A more honest directive would saythat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the result of something and suggesting an alternative directive.


Passage number 566.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's pretty honest as near as I can see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their perception of something as honest.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 567.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it is. I think a morehonest directive would say we are worrying about too strong a recovery-52-5/24/83and even though we don't pay too much attention to Ml, when it gets tobe this big we would pay some attention to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker disagrees with the statement or directive mentioned in the passage, suggesting that a more honest directive would express concern about a strong recovery.


Passage number 568.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "That's what we're saying" is a statement of agreement or confirmation. It indicates that the speaker agrees with or is emphasizing the previous statement, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 569.
MR. BLACK. That's all it says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "That's all it says" indicates that the speaker is merely stating a fact, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 570.
MR. PARTEE. We're going to take a little precautionarysnugging.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a precautionary measure.


Passage number 571.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's comes as close to saying that as Ican devise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement seems to express an individual's opinion or perspective rather than engaging in a debate or conflicting with others.


Passage number 572.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'll be glad to back off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing their willingness to step back or withdraw from a situation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 573.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states "MS. TEETERS", providing information but not expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 574.
 A more honest way of saying it is when theeconomy shows some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see anything dishonest about this.It says as plainly as I can say it what I think we're going to do. Ijust reject that entirely. It can't be much more straightforward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I just reject that entirely" indicates that the speaker disagrees with the statement being made.


Passage number 575.
MR. GUFFEY. What level of borrowing are we talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification on the level of borrowing being discussed.


Passage number 576.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a nice question. I'massuming we're talking about $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that the question is nice and assuming the topic is $350 million.


Passage number 577.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I thought that you had assumed before thatthat's the existing degree of restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Guffey about his own thoughts.


Passage number 578.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is about that, de facto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion about a certain topic.


Passage number 579.
MR. GUFFEY. Then the statement is dishonest in the sensethat we are not going to snug.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states a statement made by Mr. Guffey without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 580.
MR. PARTEE. We're going to try for it this time, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We're going to try for it this time, though" suggests a collaborative effort or determination to achieve something, rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 581.
MR. BLACK. Hitting it intentionally is snugging from hittingit accidentally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a statement from Mr. Black without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 582.
MR. KEEHN. If we went to $400 million, I think that wouldrepresent an $8 million snugging, which is fairly modest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Keehn is stating a possible outcome or opinion, without any contradicting or opposing views presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 583.
MR. BLACK. Do you think we ought to put that "only" inthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of the phrase "Do you think" indicates that Mr. Black is seeking the opinion of someone else. The inclusion of the word "only" suggests that Mr. Black is expressing his own preference or suggestion, which may differ from the opinion of the person he is addressing. Therefore, there is a potential disagreement or contention in this passage regarding the inclusion of the word "only."


Passage number 584.
MR. MORRIS. Why aren't we talking about increasing the fundsrate to 8-3/4 to 9 percent. Isn't that really the issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is suggesting a possible course of action or solution, but there is no opposing argument or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 585.
MS. TEETERS. That's what we're really talking about; that'sright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply restates the speaker's previous point.


Passage number 586.
MR. PARTEE. We usually don't say it that boldly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 587.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but that's the understanding. That's whatwe're voting for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply clarifying and reaffirming what they are voting for.


Passage number 588.
-53-5/24/83MS. TEETERS. That is a 1/2 point increase in the funds rateover what we thought we had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a change in the funds rate.


Passage number 589.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I continue to welcome any suggestions asto how to word this, but I do not think the issue is honesty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only expresses openness to suggestions on how to phrase something, without indicating any opposing views or conflict.


Passage number 590.
MR. MORRIS. It's to snug or not to snug.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any apparent contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple statement or suggestion made by Mr. Morris.


Passage number 591.
 It's under 9 percent or--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we're trying to say here, assuming wesnug however infinitesimally, is that, yes, we'll give a little weightto Ml when it's way above and we'll give some weight to the economylooking stronger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the decision to give weight to Ml and the economy depending on their respective strengths.


Passage number 592.
MR. BLACK. I think it's as close as you're going to get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses an opinion, without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 593.
MS. TEETERS. But the decision is whether to raise theinterest rate or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply mentions a decision that needs to be made regarding raising the interest rate, but it does not indicate any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 594.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The decision is where to put the borrowinglevel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage simply states that there is a decision to be made regarding where to put the "borrowing level," without indicating any conflicting opinions or differing perspectives.


Passage number 595.
MS. TEETERS. That's raising the interest rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states a statement made by Ms. Teeters without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 596.
MR. WALLICH. In a sense the snugging is already behind us.We're now going to aim at what we accidentally hit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or opinion without any opposition.


Passage number 597.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 598.
 I think what the market--MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 599.
 Henry, it was clear last time--MR. RICE. Not in this directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker (Mr. Rice) is simply clarifying a point to Henry.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 600.
MS. TEETERS. --that we were to go to an 8-3/4 percentinterest rate. We made that decision 6 weeks ago; now we're going togo to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. Ms. Teeters mentions that a decision was made to go to an 8-3/4 percent interest rate six weeks ago, but now they are planning to increase it to 9 percent. The change in interest rate suggests some kind of disagreement or contention within the decision-making process.


Passage number 601.
MR. WALLICH. Not if we keep borrowings at $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward assertion.


Passage number 602.
MR. CORRIGAN. Would that language you have there, Mr.Chairman, perhaps be a bit more acceptable if it said "...increaseslightly the degree of restraint. The action was taken in the contextin which M2 and M3 were slightly below their paths for the quarter butMl was well above and the economy was stronger." Does that help atall in terms of how--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question from Mr. Corrigan suggesting a possible modification to the language being discussed.


Passage number 603.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think it helps the syntax of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing their opinion and stating that something (presumably an unspecified subject mentioned prior) helps the syntax of something else. The passage is simply presenting an individual perspective without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 604.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's what we're trying to say.It's very close to what I said originally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and stating that their current statement is very similar to their original statement.


Passage number 605.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I think it pushes M1 a little furtheroff into the wilderness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is expressing their opinion about pushing M1 further away, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 606.
MS. TEETERS. But interest rates went up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that interest rates went up, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 607.
 If the two of themare below and we raise interest rates because they're below, and whenone goes up we raise interest rates---54-5/24/83MR. CORRIGAN. Well, it's saying two things. It's saying M2and M3 are just in a statistically insignificant way below where wewant them to be and, on the other hand, Ml is very strong and theeconomy appears to be strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents two different statements about the current state of M2, M3, and M1 without any conflict between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 608.
MS. TEETERS. So we raise the interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "So we raise the interest rates" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or conflicting views regarding whether or not to increase interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 609.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but I think it says it in a slightlydifferent way than the way it's there now. It pushes M1 further intothe background than it is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement. Mr. Corrigan states that the passage pushes M1 further into the background than it currently is, suggesting a differing perspective or interpretation.


Passage number 610.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Not much" implies that there is not enough information or substance within the passage to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 611.
MR. MORRIS. Not very much further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any form of contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris simply states that they are not very much further.


Passage number 612.
MR. CORRIGAN. I myself would be willing to put it on theeconomy but that gets us into the trap of saying we're going to runpolicy more generally on the economy. I'm not ready for that either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the speaker's personal hesitation and lack of readiness for running policy on the economy.


Passage number 613.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(.). You're going to frustrate theAdministration and Congress for the rest of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply mentions that frustrating the Administration and Congress is going to happen for the rest of the year.


Passage number 614.
MR. MARTIN. The Administration [unintelligible] frustratethe Congress and not the economy. You could drop them both andfrustrate both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that removing both the Administration and the Congress would lead to frustration for both the government and the economy.


Passage number 615.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did Regan say 6 percent for Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply asks if Regan said 6 percent for M1.


Passage number 616.
MR. MARTIN. He won. Poole said 5 percent; we can't get themto agree on how far down.SPEAKER(.). For the year, you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. The speakers are discussing a statement made by someone named Poole, indicating that they cannot agree on how far down the percentage is for the year.


Passage number 617.
MR. WALLICH. Anyone who names this Ml number should mentionthe associated funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 618.
MR. GRAMLEY. To Poole, the lower the money number the lowerthe funds rate, I think.SPEAKER(.). In the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is expressing his understanding of Poole's perspective, and the speaker does not respond with any opposing thoughts or arguments.


Passage number 619.
MR. GRAMLEY [Unintelligible] talk about Poole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions Mr. Gramley and his intention to talk about Poole, without any opposing opinions or conflicting statements.


Passage number 620.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you suggest for Ml, Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question asks for a suggestion, so it is seeking information rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 621.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually having access to the passage or any contextual information.


Passage number 622.
 Well, it's--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Statistically insignificant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that something is statistically insignificant, without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 623.
MS. TEETERS. Statistically insignificant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The statement "Statistically insignificant" is a descriptive phrase and does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 624.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without context or a specific passage to refer to, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the statement "MR. CORRIGAN."


Passage number 625.
 Basically I said you have the operativesentence--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
In this passage, the speaker is stating a fact about their understanding of a specific sentence. There is no indication of contention or disagreement with any other party.


Passage number 626.
MR. CORRIGAN. "This action was taken against the backgroundin which M2 and M3 were slightly below their targets for the quarter,-55-5/24/83while at the same time M1 was growing very rapidly and the economyappeared to be picking up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely stating the facts and observations of the situation without expressing any contradictory opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 627.
"MR. BLACK. That will eliminate the dangling participle too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black suggesting that eliminating the dangling participle would be beneficial.


Passage number 628.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 629.
 If there is one thing we've got to do it'seliminate the participle, even if it--MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that the participle needs to be eliminated, indicating a clear position without any opposing views.


Passage number 630.
 Well, only slightly below--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Couldn't we say "While Ml, which wenormally deemphasize, was growing unusually rapidly".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting a potential alternative statement and asking for verification or agreement.


Passage number 631.
MR. PARTEE. "And the economy, which we pay no attention to,was strengthening".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "the economy, which we pay no attention to, was strengthening."


Passage number 632.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Committee seeks in the short run toincrease slightly the degree of reserve restraint." I think at thispoint I'd be inclined to put in "only slightly." "The action wastaken against the background of M2 and M3 remaining slightly below therates of growth of 9 and 8 percent respectively established earlierfor the quarter and within their long-term ranges, M1 growing wellabove the anticipated levels for some time, and evidence of someacceleration in the rate of business recovery. Lesser restraint wouldbe appropriate in the context of more pronounced slowing in growth ofthe broader monetary aggregates relative to the paths implied by thelong-term ranges and a sharp deceleration of Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply suggesting a potential adjustment to the level of reserve restraint, given the current economic conditions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 633.
"MR. GUFFEY. Why put in that last part about deceleration ofMl. That again is raising its importance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Guffey questions the importance of including the information about deceleration of M1, suggesting that it is unnecessary or overemphasized.


Passage number 634.
MR. ROBERTS. You have to put it in because that's the onlyreason we're talking about snugging.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or reason for discussing the topic of "snugging."


Passage number 635.
MR. GUFFEY. No it isn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states "No it isn't" without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 636.
MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, no.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention indicated in this passage. The response "Oh, no" is a simple statement that does not refute or contradict the previous statement.


Passage number 637.
 But then we have a lot of--MR. BALLES. You've muddied the waters.SPEAKER(.). Making him another God.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "But then we have a lot of" indicates a continuation or addition to the previous statement, suggesting no contradiction or argument. The phrase "Making him another God" is a standalone statement without any immediate response or contradiction from another person.


Passage number 638.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody like "marginally" better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Does anybody like 'marginally' better" appears to be a simple question, without any indication of conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 639.
MR. PARTEE. To seek "marginally" instead of "slightly".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement by Mr. Partee expressing his preference for using the word "marginally" instead of "slightly."


Passage number 640.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 641.
MR. PARTEE. "Increase only marginally the degree of reserverestraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a marginal increase in reserve restraint, but the intended audience may have a different opinion on the matter.


Passage number 642.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd put the word only in. I guess we'reas close as we're going to get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There doesn't appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is indicating that they are satisfied with the current situation or outcome.


Passage number 643.
MR. CORRIGAN. We have to put something in now that says theaction was taken because the Committee was getting hungry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan, indicating the need for taking action because the committee was getting hungry. It does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 644.
-56-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first question will be what theborrowing level is and the second question will be the directive."The Committee seeks in the short run to increase only slightly thedegree of reserve restraint. The action was taken against thebackground of M2 and M3 remaining slightly below the rates of growthof 9 and 8 percent, respectively, established earlier for the quarterand within their long-term ranges, M1 growing well above anticipatedlevels for some time, and evidence of some acceleration in the rate ofbusiness recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the current situation regarding borrowing levels, reserve restraint, and the growth rates of M2 and M3.


Passage number 645.
 Lesser restraint would be appropriate in thecontext of more pronounced slowing of growth of the broader monetaryaggregates relative to the paths implied by the long-term ranges anddeceleration of Ml"--MS. TEETERS. I think you contradicted yourself in the lastsentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 646.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 647.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would it be sufficient in the lastsentence, Paul, simply to say "slowing of the aggregates" and not sayanything about the broader aggregates or deceleration of Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage as the question suggests an alternative viewpoint or opinion regarding the way Paul should phrase his statement.


Passage number 648.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can't say "more pronouncedslowing of Ml." What it says now is "relative to the paths implied bythe long-term ranges [and deceleration of] Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The statement is simply stating that the current situation cannot be described as a "more pronounced slowing of Ml," and instead, it is being compared to the paths implied by long-term ranges and the deceleration of Ml.


Passage number 649.
"MS. TEETERS. It sounds as if you're heading for the bottomof the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone's actions or situation may lead to a negative outcome.


Passage number 650.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me go to the borrowing level. Howmany people want to hold it at $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question to determine how many people want to maintain the borrowing level at $350 million.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 651.
MR. PARTEE. I'll buy $350 million.SPEAKER(.). It's $392 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement by Mr. Partee indicates that he is willing to buy $350 million, while the speaker contradicts him by stating that it is $392 million. This suggests disagreement or confusion regarding the correct amount.


Passage number 652.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'd prefer $400 million, but I'll buy $350million. I'm getting hungry too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley simply expresses his preference for $400 million but states that he would settle for $350 million. The mention of his hunger does not introduce any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 653.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four. We didn't get sixvotes for $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements.


Passage number 654.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.] I'm not sure we're going tohave six votes for anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whether they will have the necessary votes for something, but there is no indication of an argument or disagreement.


Passage number 655.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where all the missing votesare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is about a lack of knowledge or information, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 656.
MR. BLACK. I'd be willing to vote for one that won't hold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black expresses his willingness to vote for an unidentified option.


Passage number 657.
MR. PARTEE. $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a dollar amount and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 658.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we pick up any [votes] at $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about whether or not votes will be gained at a specific monetary amount.


Passage number 659.
MR. PARTEE. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only consists of a single statement from Mr. Partee with no opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 660.
MR. BLACK. No, we didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 661.
-57-5/24/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now try $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or command followed by a suggestion or invitation.


Passage number 662.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 million isn't going to have enoughvotes here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "300 million isn't going to have enough votes here", without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 663.
MR. FORD. You can't vote twice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is making a statement, but someone else may disagree with his statement or hold a different opinion on the matter.


Passage number 664.
MR. MARTIN. Sure you can. Put your right arm up.SPEAKER(.). You just did; now we're getting ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple instruction and response without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 665.
MR. FORD. At least use the left hand and the right hand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply mentions using both the left hand and the right hand.


Passage number 666.
MR. PARTEE. Well, in some ways $350 million is the weightedaverage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of fact or information.


Passage number 667.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's pretty obvious: $350 million is theweighted average. We have to reach a decision. I'll promote $350million again. Any votes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and suggesting to promote $350 million as a decision.


Passage number 668.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You've got $250 million over here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 669.
MR. PARTEE. $350 million again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a financial figure.


Passage number 670.
MR. GRAMLEY. Again as a consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is referring to a previous statement made by Mr. Gramley without expressing any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 671.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four, five, six. Itwould be nice to have another, but I guess it doesn't make anydifference. We'll have dissents on both sides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion about wanting another item, but acknowledges that it ultimately does not matter. The mention of "dissents on both sides" does not imply disagreement within the passage itself but rather suggests that differing opinions may exist outside of the current context.


Passage number 672.
MR. PARTEE. Are you counting yourself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. PARTEE is simply asking a question.


Passage number 673.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've got to get a ruling from the chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that a ruling from the chair is needed, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 674.
MS. TEETERS. In a split, do we have any change from the lastpolicy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "In a split, do we have any change from the last policy" suggests that there may be differing opinions or uncertainty regarding the potential changes in the policy.


Passage number 675.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would go for $350 million ifwe're talking about a [funds rate] level of approximately 8-3/4percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Guffey's opinion about the appropriate amount, $350 million, for a certain funds rate level.


Passage number 676.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anybody can predict [thefunds rate] that precisely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement expresses the speaker's personal opinion about the predictability of the funds rate and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 677.
 It will probably be 8-3/4 percentsometimes and above that sometimes and--MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 678.
 I understand, but I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sure isn't much different from where weare. And I can't promise you it wouldn't go to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It appears to be expressing understanding and agreement with some reservations or uncertainty.


Passage number 679.
MR. GUFFEY. We can operate policy so it won't go to 9percent in the intermeeting period if that's the consensus of thisCommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is suggesting a potential course of action to the Committee and seeking their agreement or consensus.


Passage number 680.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get lots of chances to consult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that you have many opportunities to consult.


Passage number 681.
MR. ROBERTS. Did we have six for $400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. It is a simple question asking if there were six individuals involved in a certain transaction.


Passage number 682.
-58-5/24/83MR. PARTEE. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 683.
MR. GRAMLEY. We had six for $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement mentions a number ("six") and a cost ("$350 million"), without any indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 684.
MR. FORD. Can those who are not voting not be starved intosubmission.SPEAKER(.). No.SPEAKER(.). Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement between Mr. Ford and the speaker. Both individuals provide short and direct responses, indicating agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 685.
MR. PARTEE. It's one of the disadvantages of attending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It merely presents a statement about one of the disadvantages of attending something.


Passage number 686.
MR. BLACK. The thing for you to do is go for $350 millionand then dissent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage indicates the speaker's advice to go for $350 million, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 687.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's go for $350 million and seewhere we come out. Let's have a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 688.
MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey NoPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice NoPresident Roberts NoGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich YesSix to six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. It is evident from the mixed responses of the individuals listed, with some answering "Yes" and others answering "No."


Passage number 689.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, someone's going to have to changethe vote. We're going to have to go with a split vote, since thereapparently are people on either side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It acknowledges the need for a change in voting and suggests a split vote due to the presence of people on both sides.


Passage number 690.
MS. TEETERS. I don't think so; there's only one on the otherside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 691.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see how--. Well, it only takesone to [unintelligible]. There's no higher number of votes for anyother alternative that I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrases "I don't see how" and "There's no higher number of votes for any other alternative that I see" suggest conflicting perspectives or contrasting opinions on the topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 692.
MR. BLACK. Would you vote for [$350] million, Ted. It'sbetter than the alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. While it is not explicitly stated, the phrase "It's better than the alternative" suggests that there are differing opinions or perspectives on whether to vote for the mentioned amount of money.


Passage number 693.
MS. HORN. At least there's a focus on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there is a focus on ML.


Passage number 694.
MR. FORD. I'll verify that you're a snugger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply an assertion by Mr. Ford that he will verify something.


Passage number 695.
MR. BLACK. I'll put a sentence in every one of my talks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contentious or disagreement since it is just a statement by Mr. Black about including a sentence in all of his talks.


Passage number 696.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] get you to vote on$300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage as the sentence is partially unintelligible.


Passage number 697.
-59-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what that means. If it meanswe start out at $350 million, it's all right with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 698.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual content of the passage.


Passage number 699.
 The legal counsel is--MS. TEETERS. Six [to six] leaves it where it was the lasttime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the legal counsel is MS. TEETERS, and that six leaves it where it was the last time.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 700.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, for a $50 million difference,it's ridiculous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker considers a $50 million difference to be ridiculous.


Passage number 701.
MS. TEETERS. That's not what [I'm] against. That's not whatwe're voting for; we're voting to raise the interest rates or not toraise them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker simply clarifies that their opposition is not regarding the topic mentioned previously, but rather voting for or against raising interest rates.


Passage number 702.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll convert my statement; if youthink there's a great relationship, you're voting for an eighth of apercentage point on the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a conditional conversion of a statement, followed by an explanation or clarification of the belief that voting for an eighth of a percentage point on the federal funds rate demonstrates a perception of a strong relationship.


Passage number 703.
MS. TEETERS. That's what you told me last time too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply indicates that the speaker has mentioned the same information on a previous occasion.


Passage number 704.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will sit here until somebody hasa better idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the individuals will remain in their current location until someone comes up with a better idea.


Passage number 705.
MR. ROBERTS. Okay, Mr. Chairman, I give in. I prefer ahigher number but if we can't get any more, I'll go with the $350million reluctantly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roberts expresses his preference for a higher number, but he ultimately agrees to the proposed amount of $350 million.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 706.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we know what it is, we will vote for adirective that says "The Committee seeks in the short run to increaseonly slightly the degree of reserve restraint." We're going to haveseven votes for this. "The action was taken against the background ofM2 and M3 remaining slightly below the rates of growth of 9 and 8percent, respectively, established earlier for the quarter and withintheir long-term ranges, Ml growing well above anticipated levels forsome time, and evidence of some acceleration in the rate of businessrecovery. Lesser restraint would be appropriate in the context ofmore pronounced slowing of growth in the broader monetary aggregatesrelative to the paths implied by the long-term ranges and decelerationof Ml, or indications of a weakening in the pace of economicrecovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The mention of "lesser restraint" being appropriate suggests a disagreement or differing opinions on the level of reserve restraint that should be taken. Some may argue for less restraint in light of certain conditions, while others may argue for maintaining the current level of restraint.


Passage number 707.
"MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


