bt

COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF 7 16th September 1988
ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION |

Meeting on 13th September 1988
(BIS, Room E)

The Chairman (000 - 60) (Interpretation)

First of all I should like to thank M. Lamfalussy and the BIS for
having agreed to help us to run these meetings. We have to end at 17.30 in
order to enable all members of the Committee to be present at the time the
conclusions will be drawn before the next meeting. I shall very briefly
discuss one or two things. First of all we shall formerly appoint the two
rapporteurs. This is a matter that we have discussed with each member of
the group and I wish to ask you to confirm your agreement to the
appointment of Mr. Gunter Baer and Mr. Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa as
rapporteurs. We are going to ask them to come in. They will keep the
minutes of the meeting, minutes which will be kept here at the BIS, they
will not be made generally available. I will put a technical question to
you: would you agree to the discussions being recorded and to being kept in
great secrecy here at the BIS or are you against recording? I leave the
decision to you. It is obvious that the rapporteurs will note the main
points, but some things may escape their attention and it would be very
helpful to them if we had a tape which they could refer to, a tape which
would be kept here confidentially. Would you agree to this, Mr. Governors?

Thirdly, I suggest that we issue neither a press statement, nor
do we hold a press conference, not even for your Chairman. A press
statement might be useful but I am afraid that that would probably waste an
hour and half here amongst ourselves trying to settle on such a statement,
even if it were to be only fifteen lines long. Therefore we are going to
work and if anybody puts any question to me I shall say that we work in a
good atmosphere, that we are all aware of the mandate given us by the Heads
of Government. Never are we going to give the impression that there is

disagreement amongst us. We are a team, we do teamwork to serve our Masters

and that is all. Were we a group of academics, doubtlessly there might be
differences of opinion, but we are not going to dramatise them and we are
not going to turn the meeting of this group into a series, like Dynasty or
Dallas - and one that would be less attractive too. |

| Fourthly, I should like to emphasise the highly confidential

nature of our meetings.
Herrn K.0O. Péhl] (60 - 73)

We should never quote each other. Nobody should quote the
position of anybody in this group, but on the other hand, of course we
should feel free to express our own views on the subject, but never
referring to these meetings. I think that should be the basic rule for our
co-operation. It is unavoidable, at least for one or the other, to make
remarks or to speak on the substance of the discussions at one or -other

occasion, but never quote each other.
The Chairman (74 - 76) (Interpretation)

Each one will speak on his own behalf and nobody will repeat the

views of another member of the Committee.
Mr. M.F. Doyle (76 - 78)

Just one question. Does that mean that we don't get a copy of the

minutes ourselves, individually?
The Chairman (78 - 84) (Interpretation)

You will be able to look them up and read them here. You can even

listen to part of the tape if you wish, but here.
Herrn K.O. Péhl (84 - 90)

I would also suggest that even you as our Chairman are not

obliged to report to the Council of Ministers, because we are in the

0 sf a. ee

PA tt

TRE gE Mea ae, RRR NTR se
. p ’
process of discussions and it would be premature to make any reports before

we have finalised our own report.
The Chairman ? (90 - 96)

Our duty is to have one or two meetings with the European
Parliament but purely for formal reasons and I do not intend to deliver any

subject discussed inside the Committee.
The Chairman (96 - 131) (Interpretation)

Finally, the fourth point on which I seek you opinion is this.
Our work here is entirely confidential and this confidentiality has to be
protected. Confidentiality is very well protected as far as the meetings of
the Committee of Governors are and we would like this Committee to benefit
from the same confidentiality. Unfortunately two days ago there was a press
article which revealed part of the contents of one of the working papers
and this is a great pity. We really have to be disciplined if we wish to
prevent the members of the press from speculating about what we are likely
to say. If there is going to be an open political discussion, this will
take place at the European Council level and before that there is no such
discussion needed. In particular, we should not make available parts of our
documents to the press.

Finally, my last point. I received a letter from M. Giscard
d'Estaing on behalf of the Committee for European Monetary Union and he
says that, together with his Co-Chairman, Mr. Helmut Schmidt, and the
Executive Secretariat of his Committee, he would like to be heard by us.
Now, there are one or two things you can decide. Either you accept the idea
or M. Godeaux, the Chairman of the Committee of Governors, and another
member assisting me, I would receive Mr. Schmidt and Mr. Giscard d'Estaing
to a dinner and I would listen to what they have to say. What do you

prefer? What are your feelings?
Dr. W.F. Duisenberg ? (131 - 134)

I prefer that this Committee does not go into hearings. Now it is

Giscard and Schmidt and then it will be someone else. If you are to be so

-4-

polite as to receive this elderly statesman it would be entirely agreeable

to me.
Herrn K.O. Péh1] (134 - 136)

On an entirely private basis of course and you don't charge us

with the expenses for the dinner!
The Chairman (137 - 159) (Interpretation)

I don't intend to send the bill to the Bundesbank!

As the members of the Committee agree to the discussions being
recorded, is this possible right away?

In order to save time I am going to abstain from introducing the
discussion. Having consulted all the members of the Committee and having
heard you earlier on, and having noticed that you refer time and again to
the Werner Report, and in particular to the definition of economic and
monetary union contained therein, I thought that perhaps it would be a good
idea to look at the contents of this report, at what followed the report
and the reasons why the objectives contained in this report were not
reached. I think it would be a good starting point for the unavoidable
brain-storming we have to engage in at the beginning on the basis of a

two-fold, or rather treble, experience.

The Rt. Hon. Robert Leigh-Pemberton (457 - 496)

-.-.- Some temptation exists then in my opinion, in the absence of
progress in those areas, for perhaps excessive emphasis to be placed by
politicians on monetary and exchange rate co-operation. May I just say that
I am firmly of the view that if in fact progress is to be made it has got
to be parallel progress with monetary and exchange rate co-operation on the
one side and economic progress on the other. I think for these reasons we
need to be on our guard, therefore, against attempts to force the pace of
monetary integration, particularly towards the premature Blocking of
parities which a union would imply. I don' t say that I am against monetary

integration, I am arguing about forcing the pace of it. I think the risk

- 5 -

arises because this aspect of economic and monetary union is probably
technically easier to define and to effect than economic conversions. There
are therefore clear political temptations to go out for it in the hope that
once it is achieved the other necessary successful elements of EMU will
follow. In short, an attempt to force monetary union ahead of economic and
even political union has the danger perhaps of failing, and to that extent
possibly even discrediting monetary union. In these circumstances I find
myself inclined towards the step-by-step approach, not the “petit pas", the
tiny steps necessarily, they could be substantial steps, but steps they
need to be even though they may be less glamorous and concentrate on steady
consolidation of successive advances on all fronts instead of what one
might call a “dash for the grand" concept. May I just emphasise again the
importance that I attach to what I call "parallelism", if I can use that
word to describe progress being made at roughly the same pace towards
economic union as it is made towards monetary integration. I hope that
those few expressions of principle, Mr. Chairman, put a slant onto Werner

as I look at it now which my colleagues may find helpful.
Dr. W.F. Duisenberg (508 - 594)

-.-- Kconomic union to me is more than the internal market alone
when all physical barriers have disappeared. Economic union, because
monetary union affectively implies having one currency, implies also
co-ordination or at least a degree of centralisation of policies in other
areas, i.e. in budgetary and fiscal policy. That is part of economic union.
From the outset, I agree with Leigh-Pemberton that economic and monetary
union is the end phase, that is what we have to strive at, and I am not
against the step-by-step approach towards that end, however long it may
take. But the end should be clear in our minds, that is the first thing for
us to do. ... |

--. The years that have passed and the experience that we have
gained have clearly enhanced the chances of realising Werner after all.
Weaknesses are in particular in the domain of policies where towards the
end of economic and monetary union a degree of centralisation is necessary,
but where it cannot be denied we have deep differences of opinion on the
nature and the measure wherein there has to be a transfer of sovereignty to

a centralised institution, whether it-be in a federal form or completely

centralised. The analysis rightly states that with the transfer of monetary
authorities, the institutional arrangements have been inadequately
precisely defined, and that has been a hindrance to progress in this area.
For example, the FECOM is under the right of directives of the Council of
Ministers and for that reason maybe the FECOM has not been the success
which had been envisaged. ... |

--» The co-ordination of monetary policy is also severely
hindered by insufficient convergence of government finance, whether the
result that too large government deficits or the ways in which they are
being financed in a number of countries - my own perhaps not being excluded
- are a severe hindrance for the further co-ordination of monetary policy.
Identification of monetary co-ordination cannot solve this problem, then
you need to go further. If you try to do that through monetary policy only,
it would create interest rate differentials which could be enormous and
which would create political tensions in the Community and which would be
detrimental economically speaking. We all know through our experiences that
monetary policy alone cannot carry the burden on its own and that budgetary
policy has to give its contribution. The existing procedures of
co-ordination are too free, we need more centralisation there and the
transfer for sovereignty. That is the end goal to which we, I think, have
to work and once we have defined that end goal I am not at all against a
step-by-step approach as long as we know what we are doing and what we are

working for, aiming at.
Mr. M. Boyer (651 - 690) (Interpretation)

--. Since we are moving very quickly from the analysis of the
Werner Report to an analysis of the existing situation, it seems to me that
we should begin by selecting a modest approach, not a maximalistic approach
but a minimalistic approach. We do not yet have enough of an impulse in
respect of our ultimate objectives - single currency, European Central
Bank, fixed exchange rates. What we have is a set of political decisions
and from these political decisions we have to deduce monetary consequences.
The liberalisation of capital movements will expose the European Monetary
System to shocks which will be much greater than any shocks encountered by
the system since 1979. Therefore, one has a feeling that one has to move

forward, but mot so much towards an objective which will give rise to

-7J-

political disagreement, but rather to generate a development which will be
capable of ensuring that the system will at least operate as well as it has
in the recent past, and that it will be capable of absorbing the shocks
which will result from the liberalisation of ‘capital movement -
speculation, etc. Thus, if one wonders if one wishes to go all out for a
quantum leap or whether that would be dangerous, whether a more modest
approach is to be preferred, it seems to me that the latter is to be
preferred - to move very modestly and carefully forward. As we do this
there will be different alternatives, different concepts as to what is a
minimum requirement and what, on the other hand, is perhaps not the
absolute minimum requirement but something over and above that. Then one
might also consider the more distant political future. It seems to me that
our starting point now is not that we have to converge towards an economic
and monetary union which is clearly defined, but rather to try and identify
the monetary consequences of the political decisions that have already been
made, i.e. liberalisation of capital movements and the single market. It is
after this analysis that we will probably be able to embark on a discussion

of the next stages - steps large or small - towards the ultimate goal.
Dott. C.A. Ciampi (766 - 774) (Interpretation)

eee It seems to me, therefore, that the first such intermediate
step would have to be something which would show clearly that the system as
it exists today and which we have to consolidate, bearing in mind all the
dangers referred to by Prof. Boyer, we will have to propose something which
will enable clearly the system to grow still further so as to generate even
more confidence in what we are doing, indicating that we know where we are

going and that we know how we are going there.
Herrn K.O. Péhl (864 - 910)

-.. There are several points in the Werner Report which I think
are still valid. One is the emphasis, which has been rightly said by
previous speakers already, on parallelism. This is very important,
particularly for central bankers (and I am very grateful Carlo that you
said it), that we need of course, if we want to come nearer to an economic

and monetary union, much closer co-operation and co-ordination, not only of

monetary policies, where I think we have made more progress than in other
areas, but we need that also in fiscal policy, in demand management
policies and in macro-economic policies as a whole. We have enormous
imbalances. in some areas, the real economy that is the real problem not the
lack of credit facilities, etc. So we have to emphasise in our report (I
hope that we can reach agreement on that point) what has been said already
in the Werner Report, that you need progress on all levels so to say of
co-ordination. That can, of course, also have institutional consequences,
not only in the field of monetary policy (we are talking about the European
Central Bank, etc.) but what about institutional provisions for a better
co-ordination of fiscal policy, regional policies. Is it conceivable, for
instance, to have a system with exchange rates which cannot be changed any
more or only under very restrictive conditions without having a very
developed system of what we call in German “Finanzausgleich" - I don't know
whether there is an English word for that - transfers of financial
resources. For instance, that is something I would be prepared to subscribe
to in the common report in order to make the politicians and the heads of
governments aware of the consequences of a more fixed exchange rate system.
This is one element of the Werner Report which I think is still valid and
which we can still use. |

The other one - and I think we should use that as a starting
point for our report - is the definition of what we are aiming for. We need
something like that, we have to know what the final goal is before we talk
about steps to get there. I fully agree with what you said, Robin, of
‘course, we should not have any illusions, and I think none of us has any
illusions about what is possible. Before we talk about the steps to come to
monetary and economic union we have to know what it means and I think the
Werner Report provides us with a very good definition both of the economic
union and the monetary union. The definition of a monetary union is very
simple but still valid: it is free movement of capital, full convertibility
of currencies and irreversible fixing of exchange rates. This is a very
simple definition but it has of course enormous consequences if you take it
seriously. We should start with that definition and from there we can maybe
find some proposals, hopefully we can make some proposals, as to how we can
get a little closer to this final stage. I don't want to discuss that at
this stage already. ‘

- 9 _
Mr. M. Rubio (932 - 966) (Interpretation)

... The second point I wanted to make is that it is quite clear
that if we don't have a clear view of the final objective then I think we
-cannot draw a common view. I think that that is no longer the case. We have
a clear view of what we would like to do, clearer than we had then. We also
know exactly what effort that entails, but I do know that it will be
difficult to reach this aim of economic and monetary union. As I said we
have to have a clear definition. From the Werner Report we know what the
objective is supposed to be. It is quite clear, therefore, that we will
have to take certain steps, but these steps, as Governor Ciampi said,
should be steps that will allow us or even force us to take further steps
forward. That brings me to the point of the timetable. It is quite clear
that if we have a timetable, the timetable has to have a certain rigidity.
If it is too rigid it can be counterproductive because if we cannot: stick
to the timetable as we had fixed it for ourselves, that means that the
project which we were supposed to achieve through the timetable might be
endangered as well. You have to have certain constraints, certain
obligations here, because if you don't say anything as to what you want to
do by when, then the whole thing becomes totally vague and it will not be
implemented at all. The progress we have made in the Community so far I
think has shown us that you could not always make progress everywhere at
the same time, that is absolutely impossibly. You cannot make the same sort
of progress in the same way simultaneously with the same number of steps
for all areas where you want to reach progress. I think in the Community so
far we have seen that it was possible to take steps to institute mechanisms
which then led us to make progress in other areas as well. If we look at
all this and if we then ask ourselves what steps do we have to take in
order to ensure this convergence of economic policies, we see immediately
that it is a rather difficult task we have fixed ourselves. What we can do
at least is to try and establish certain mechanisms which will then force
us towards greater convergence in all areas of economic policy. I think
that there we will probably have to follow the example of other small-step
procedures. Look at the European Monetary System, that was also in a
small-steps procedure perspective. Firstly, you took one small step where
you had no institutional implications involved, but this first small step

later on led to a greater convergence of the economic policies of the

- 10 -

various member countries and that in itself would have been quite difficult

to foresee without that first step.
M. J. de Larosiére (980 - 1063) (Interpretation)

--. Therefore we ought to take into account what we have learnt
in the course of our thinking, since there are respects in which we can do
better than we were able to do at the time of Werner. The idea of
parallelisn, which has been emphasised by a number of my colleagues, is a
very powerful idea. We all know that you cannot do everything in the
monetary field if there are no accompanying developments in the economic
field and in the fiscal field and even in respect of the incomes policy.
This idea of parallelism therefore seems to me to be important. After all
facts also go in the direction of parallelism. What I am trying to say is
that as far as the real economy is concerned, we have made progress as
compared to where we stood at the time of the Werner Report. For instance,
freedom of capital movement: there we are indeed much further advanced than
at Werner's time. We have nearly reached our target with a few exceptions
which still have to be dealt with and some of us are going to handle them
quickly. We are about to find ourselves in a system which is totally open
as far as capital is concerned, and the financial economy has also
developed. Our Europe today is not what it was in the 1970s. Our Europe is
full of multinational corporations, banks which are fully integrated and
prepared to act in an integrated market. Therefore there has been forward
movement, there has been progress, and one should not it seems to me
concentrate only on the failures of the Werner plan, because a great deal
that is encouraging has happened.

How to proceed now. I agree with all those that said that first
of all the objective had to be described. You cannot sketch out a road if
you don't know where it is going to take you and I think that this
objective we should not spend too much time on trying to define it because
it is a relatively simple objective. As was said, the Werner Report is
quite explicit as far as the objective of the economic and monetary union
is concerned. One might perhaps elaborate the final scenario a little bit,
but I don't think that this is going to cause many difficulties, I don't
think that it is in respect of that that there are going to be differences

between us, because once you are in the process which will take you towards

- jl -

economic and monetary union you will be taken along and there is not very

much you can do really, although of course you may be more or less

ambitious. What is important is the steps that will take us there and it is >
a re renee pepe rer PYP EPTFE rr ee PP A SSNS

there that, Mr. Chairman, you yourself and the co-authors of this report
will prove to be very helpful. There are mistakes that were made at the
time of the Werner Report which should be avoided and there are certain
other things which ought to be done. What strikes me is that one was not
very careful or meticulous when working out the phases through which,
according to Werner, one would have to go, and one did not describe very
carefully the links between these phases, the interphases between the
phases, and I think that we on the contrary will have to be very
towards our objective. We also have to be very realistic even if this means
that we won't be very global. It was rightly said that Europe is a Europe
of twelve now, it is more heterogeneous, all of us.are not equally open, we
do not all have the same problems in respect of the co-ordination of
economic policy, we are not all in the narrow-band system and I think that
when describing these various phases or various steps we shall have to
allow for the plurality of circumstances which obtain within us. Then we
shall have to be very very detailed as to the description of the

parallelism. I would imagine the following scenario: there would be a first
Ln ereemeny

step in respect of monetary union and to this there would correspond

another step which would aim at co-ordinating fiscal policies - this would
not shock me at all, this would spread out the political responsibilities
more evenly. Then the governors should as much as possible be involved and
responsible for everything that will turn out to be a monetary institution.
I do not believe that the EMCF scheme which is administered by governors,
yes, but the governors are in a state of dependence with respect to the

Council and I don't think it has _ much of a future. The governors must
pepe rennet

therefore be very directly involved. I think that rather modestly at the

outset, without thinking in terms of institutions, we should provide for
certain steps which would result in an embryo being set up which would
begin to operate and which would enable governors to do jointly a number of
things, modest things at the beginning, but this embryo would be such as to
grow as time passes and as progress will be made in more general terms, so
that this embryo will be given more and more monetary responsibilities in

respect of the management of currencies. If we do our work well we ought to

- 12 -

be able to build up something which would be capable of growing, of

developing, which might even pull progress along and encourage it.
Mr. E.H. Hoffmeyer (1123 - 1152)

--. L would agree with Karl Otto Péhl that one shouldn't be too
pessimistic about evaluating the Werner Report. Of course, you can say that
the report was a philosophy, it failed because of bad shocks or wrong
philosophies, fine-tuning, or you have this very fine argument which I
think is highly dangerous that if they had been better politicians they
could arrange again between decisions and the market mechanism. But God
couldn't do that in paradise! I don't think that it is easy to do that and
I don't think you should try to explain to the politicians that that would
be a thing which we could tell them how to do. I think that there is one
feature about the Werner Report and the later experience that is common,
that is that you have a goal and then you think you have some instruments,
either you agree on them and you have an institution where you have the
instruments. Actually they proposed a European co-operation fund and it was
established, but it doesn't work. The curious thing is that this was
repeated in 1979/80, because the decision of Bremen and Brussels in 1978
was also to create an institution, a fund, and at that time there was a
report with Werner but it was cut in half and the first part was thrown
away. 1 think that Padoa-Schioppa was instrumental also in writing the
report at that time, where you dealt with the question of the fund, but it
was not established. So one has to ask the question, why has it been
impossible to create these two institutions in a workable way? One can then
of course come to the conclusion that an economic union has_ been
established in spite of the failure to try to establish these things. I
think we have to be very clear about the definition of an economic union

and how far we have come to realising this objective.
Mr. D.J. Chalikias (1210 - 1214)

--- Countries that do not participate in the exchange rate
mechanism, like my own, should make a firm time commitment for full
participation along with the implementation of policies that will enable

them to join ERM with no measure ? in their economy.

- 13 -
Prof. N. Thygesen (1299 - 1327) —

Mr. Chairman, the Werner Report has been praised for stating the
final objective clearly and that is well justified. I would be more
complementary also on one additional point: it did define a first stage.
Despite its emphasis on parallel progress in monetary and other areas, the
governments also went ahead and established the SNAKE, the mechanism that
kept several of the Community's currencies together in the 1970s. That was
a useful learning experience and the Community would have been worse off if
we had not had that inspiration from the Werner Report. Subsequently, that
developed into the European Monetary System as other countries joined.
There is no doubt that for a long time monetary integration, particularly
now in the 1980s, has tended to run ahead of economic integration. I think
it would be worrisome if we were to draw the inference from the Werner.
Report that progress always has to be in parallel, has to wait for the area
that iS most difficult. At one time it was necessary to move ahead in the
monetary area, even if economic integration was not progressing. I suggest
that we have today a situation where economic integration has to a large
extent caught up with the monetary co-operation that we have and that
therefore this group, and after all although the mandate is one of both
economic and monetary union, it is a Committee largely of central bankers
so it would be expected of the group that it concentrates to some extent on
the monetary aspects of integration, that it considers also the possibility
that monetary integration in the next phase runs a little bit ahead of
economic integration in the broad sense. Governor Hoffmeyer said that if we
have economic integration, an economic union, why is it necessary also to
have monetary union. I think there are additional, separate benefits in
monetary union if by that we understand ultimately a single currency. Some
benefits can only be realised through monetary union. One might imagine
economic union in a wide sense without monetary integration, but surely |
some benefits in terms of removal of risks, lower transaction costs,
possibility of more transparent and efficient markets, are only achievable
if you have full monetary integration. I hope that this Committee will in
its assessment also of Werner be appreciative of the fact that at that

stage one did move ahead in monetary integration.

- 14 -
-. Herrn K.O. P&Gh] (1504 - 1546)

I just want to say that I think that Mr. Doyle put his finger on
the crucial question and that is the question of exchange rates, which is
not mentioned in your paper, which is very good - I appreciate your paper.
This question is not mentioned, it is only mentioned in the context of the
Werner definition where it is said that monetary union means irreversibly
fixed exchange rates and this is certainly the point of no return. We have
to distinguish between a world in which exchange rates are still maybe
fixed but adjustable as in the EMS, or even more or less flexible as in the
case of the United Kingdom, and a world with fixed exchange rates which
cannot be changed at all. In that world that would have far-reaching
consequences and maybe we have to make our governments aware of these
consequences at least in our report. It means, for instance, that there has
to be closer, not only co-operation, but there has to be a common fiscal
policy, even if it is in a federation you need some common budget, for
instance. The Community budget would be much too small in such a system,
you would need a much bigger budget which is not only concentrating on
agricultural policy but also on many other areas of policy -
infrastructure, etc. There is only one consequence: this has far-reaching
consequences for wage policies, for instance. There has to be a flexible
wage policy. There is no chance to have exchange rates as a buffer for
divergent developments. I think there can't be different interest rates as
well and so you need a common monetary policy; that is very close to a
European Central Bank, but it can be conducted also in other ways of close
co-operation between national central banks, but you need a common monetary
policy. As long as you have exchange rates and the possibility of exchange
rate changes, there is not the same degree of pressure for co-ordination.
You can of course have a system in which one country puts more emphasis on
growth and the other country more emphasis on price stability, because that
can be corrected both by interest rate differentials and, as a last resort,
by exchange rate changes. Of course, you need some convergence and there is
also some pressure on convergence if it is a system like the EMS, but it is
by far not the same degree of pressure which you have when you do the last
steps, so to say, in fixed exchange rates.

My proposal, 1 think we have to be a little more practical

because our time is very limited - we have only a few meetings - and we

-

- 15 -

have been asked to make proposals. What I would suggest is that in our
report we start with the little historical reminiscence on what M. Werner
has told us and what we have achieved and what we have not achieved. There
will certainly not be much disagreement amongst us. Then we can spend some
pages on an analysis. ‘of this kind. Then we have to come to the third
chapter, which is by far the most difficult chapter, the one which we are
asked for - to make proposals. The only proposal I have heard this
afternoon is the one by Jacques de Larosiére about the brief at this stage.
Maybe we should at least prepare ourselves for our next meeting and think
about what kind of concrete proposals we will make. Maybe we cannot all
make the same proposals but maybe we can make a sort of shopping list for
our Heads of State and governments of several proposals. I want to be

reluctant today, I don't want to make any proposals but maybe next time!
Mr. M. Boyer (1590 - 1605) (Interpretation)

Mr. Chairman, I told you when I took the floor the first time how
concerned I was with the question of which of the two alternatives we are
to opt for. One was based on economic and monetary union as defined in the
Werner Report, another possibility would be the possibility of finding the
greatest possible common denominator of the members around this table and
to start from that, taking into account of course also the question of what
the greatest common denominator of the governments might be. It is quite
possible that we might agree here on a lot more than would be acceptable
for the governments. Therefore our work would be purely theoretical because
the political differences would be too great to start us even on a small
first step. It would be possible that we might agree here on a definition
of economic and monetary union and then we might just put forward the
various stages that would have to be implemented, taking into account of
course the changes vis-a-vis the time of the Werner Report. But if you try
to go into detail and if you try to really discuss monetary union, leaving
aside the economic factor for the moment, you immediately have the major
problem of fixed exchange rates with no possibility of changing then,

because freedom of capital movement has been granted now. ...
- 16 -
Herrn K.O. Péhl] (1665 - 1681)

In addition to what Wim said it is also the text of the mandate.
It speaks of steps towards economic and monetary union and as long as we
have no better definition of what monetary union is I think we have to use
the definition of the Werner plan. I fully agree with what you said, of
course, but if we would accept your position I think we should stop to talk
about a common currency, a European Central Bank, etc., because by
definition a single European currency means the abolition of exchange rates
- by definition. Then concentrate, a that
opinion actually, on more realistic concepts. One could say as a terminus
tectnicus, maybe we could call it a soft union which is a monetary union
with still the possibility of changes in exchange rates. Not a hard union,
but a soft union. Maybe we can save a lot of time if we concentrate on
that, but we should tell the Heads of State and governments that we are of
the opinion and we have agreed that for the time being there is no
realistic chance for monetary union in the sense of the Werner Report. We
should be honest and we should say that and we should stop all this talk by
people like Helmut Schmidt and Giscard, etc. If we are all of this opinion,
if we all agree on that that would be a very strong statement, I would

subscribe it immediately.
The Chairman (1779 - 1865) (Interpretation)

... We had different views around the table as far as the
programme and the way in which we want to work was concerned, but there is
one comment which we all have to make. We have to see first of all where we
want to go, where we want to get to. It is only once we are clear on that
that we will be able in the group - and that is exactly what the Heads of
State and governments are expecting from us - to ask all the institutional,
economic, monetary and monetary policy questions which arise from that.
What is our starting point? Do we have to define and redefine economic
union? Do we have to keep the definition of monetary union? Some of you
don't agree, well let us’ say that, let us say that we have to start from a
given standard, a given norm and then we have to develop certain things
which will allow us to change. I don't think that we can do without this

exercise, because when we do this exercise we see what we want to state in

- 17 -

the report. We have to discuss, however, within a certain time limit. We

have to have a time horizon because otherwise the technical discussion will

not be as far-reaching as it should be. During my early days I read a lot

of documents on what a common space, an economic space, a financial space,
etc. could be. There are differences of view here too, some people think
that if you maintain major differences in the budgetary deficits this is
not possible, you just cannot have these differences. In other papers we
have mechanisms on how to finance them. All these questions, of course,
have to be discussed in great detail and this is why my suggestion to you
would be this: for the next meeting let us base ourselves on a renewed
and its definition and on that basis let us then look at the institutional,
economic, monetary, macro-economic and structural problems which arise on
that basis. This work could be done in a short written statement which
could be sent to you either by the rapporteurs before the next meeting or
by some of you if you want to contribute something in writing. I think that
this is an exercise we have to do as a basis, otherwise we cannot go into
the details. After all we are amongst ourselves here. I read the report of
the Giscard d'Estaing Group with great attention and great interest. There
are some very good things in it but some of. the questions you raised here
today are not dealt with in that report at all. For example, the question
of how you can fight against regional imbalances, that question is not
dealt with at all. That does not mean that there will or will not be
transfers, that is something which you can put as a question to students in
their first year of economics, but we can have a very interesting
discussion on that basis. The policies which were created and which have
been implemented are not just policies of resource transfer, it is a
“partenairiat" idea with the various states and the Community trying to
work together and to create a productive environment. What can we learn
from the United States? That the revival of certain regions stems from the
fact that universities, banks, corporations got together and created a
dynamic, inventive, collectively innovative environment. That is why these
questions should really be discussed in great detail.

My first proposal is: for our next discussion let us have as a
basis a short statement which says what we mean by economic and monetary
union. Every one of us can then nuance this in the way he would like to’ see

it. You can then distinguish between, for example, an absolute locking of

- 18 -

parities or exchange rates which are adaptable, or exchange rates which are
fixed but with certain margins. That is a discussion which we can have then
as a second step. I must say quite frankly that I have not read any
document which would really go into the furthest details of what an
‘economic and monetary union as a space for Europe can be. Of course, you
have further implications, for example, what transfer of sovereignty do you
accept and how can you really melt these twelve countries into one unit. |
There are major cultural differences which have a very major influence on
how you see political and economic concepts, etc. For example, in order to
get the agreement of all governments, and especially the British Prime
Minister, on the adaptation of the common agricultural policy, the argument
which convinced her to make the first step was that we said that we have to
accept the diversity in the Community. For example, “set aside" is
something which the German farmers like, the French don't like it all, but
we said OK that is the diversity with which we have to live. I think here
in our area we are faced with the same problem. (The "set aside": where you
don't cultivate certain areas, where you take them out of production.)

For next time, of course if you want to make a written statement
you are welcome. The rapporteurs will try to put this into a working
document and then we can discuss on that basis. On that basis we can try
and discuss the major questions which will arise from an economic and
monetary union. Of course there are different starting points but we have
to take one so that we can start from somewhere. That is the theory. That
was my first point. Secondly, even if you don't agree to this idea we still
have to try and see what a European Central Bank system would be, that is
also something which, within a certain time horizon, we should study.
Eleven governments spoke of a common currency and a central bank so we have
to look at that. We will have to see what autonomy the system would have,
what aims it would have to reach, what objectives it would set itself, what
instruments and tools the governing body of this central bank would have -
I think these are also questions which we will have to discuss. That is
enough for next time.

I just wanted to say that, at least that was the impression I had
from what you said, we also have to have a certain assessment of the
European Monetary System. How are we going to do this? Are we going to ask
the Chairman of the Committee of Governors to do that and to see how the
EMS has worked? Because I think that the EMS is just as important a basis

- 19 -

as the Werner Report and we have to discuss this as well in our final
report. Since we will be faced with the question at some stage anyway, I
wonder whether one of you, maybe somebody who has studied the question in
detail already, could look at the question of parallel currency. Not today
and not for the next meeting but for one of the later meetings. I think for
our next meeting if we could start discussing the economic and monetary
union and all the problems it will give rise to and if we then ask
ourselves what sort of a system we could have for a European Central Bank
and how we are going to get there by rigid stages or non-rigid stages. The
process which the Community has been following has been absolutely flexible
and we have still made progress. Is that the same sort of procedure we want
to follow for the European Central Bank as well? I think, firstly, we will
also have to have an assessment of the EMS, I think in the governors
Committee you have discussed this already in great detail and you should
have some basis there. Mr. Thygesen has worked a lot on that, maybe he
could be asked to prepare a short report on parallel currency. I would like
to leave it at that. These are just suggestions, just proposals, of course
they don't give you the whole working schedule and the whole mandate we
have here. This is an informal document, I don't want to put it into the
wastepaper basket straight away. It did point out a number of questions,
but we will have to ask ourselves how we start, from what starting point,
what is the first step. That is quite a good solution, but it doesn't allow
us to give all the technical details to the governors and that is something
that they would need. This is why I said let us start with this set of
rules. Some of you will not agree to all of these rules, some of you will
put forward reservations, some of you will want certain things nuanced
first. At least that is a starting point and at least in this way we can
study certain things which haven't been studied yet or which have just led
to a polemic discussion between people who say, well we want economic and
monetary union and other people who say we want just economic union, and

others who say that they want to have this major European space.
M. J. de Larosiére (2035 - 2046) (Interpretation)
There is a little problem there, I thought that the record is

what has been recorded on tape and everything is there. That is the

faithful reflection of the debates. Once a rapporteur writes a report, a

- 20 -

summary, then customarily in international organisations this text is then
submitted to all those who spoke so that they can check on the way in which
a summary is given of what they themselves said. These summaries may mean
changes of nuances. We don't have very much time at all, we are here in our
so-called personal capacity and therefore I think that the best thing would
perhaps be just to have the taped record and not to work on the basis of
any summaries. After all we have our own notes, don't we? Ah, that's
lovely! Rather than to get these rapporteurs to write the minutes, they
will be able to produce other documents and what we keep here at the BIS is
the taped record of the discussion and one can listen to it if one wishes
to do this. The rapporteurs will be kept sufficiently busy preparing all

the documents that are required.

