Passage number 1.
 MR. POWELL.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  As you all know, Randy Quarles has joined the Federal Reserve as the Board’s Vice Chairman for Supervision and as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee.  Randy brings deep experience in banking, finance, law, and government, including his service as under secretary and assistant secretary of the U.S. Treasury Department.  Randy, welcome to the FOMC.  We all look forward to working with you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of welcoming Randy Quarles to the Federal Reserve and expressing anticipation for working with him.


Passage number 2.
 MR. QUARLES.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  I also want to note that this will be the last FOMC meeting for our secretary, Brian Madigan, who, after completing one final assignment—namely, drafting the minutes of this meeting—plans later this year to retire for a second time.  [Laughter] This is the 166th FOMC meeting that Brian has attended.  Brian began his long and distinguished career at the Board in 1979 and rose quickly through the ranks.  He joined the newly formed Monetary Affairs Division in 1987 as one of its charter members.  Brian was October 31– promoted to division director and also was appointed secretary of the FOMC in the summer of 2007, just as the first signs of the impending financial crisis began to appear.  Within weeks after assuming these responsibilities, Brian was literally working around the clock in supporting the Board and the FOMC in addressing all of the major challenges we faced, including the development of the liquidity programs and asset purchase programs and all of the issues associated with the formulation, implementation, and communication of monetary policy intentions at the effective lower bound.  It is no exaggeration to say that there are few, if any, other people in the country that could have managed this range of responsibilities so expertly during the wartime atmosphere of the financial crisis. In 2010, with 30 years of service—and, counting the crisis, about 130 years of service [laughter]—Brian decided to retire.  We were fortunate to lure him back to the Federal Reserve in 2015 for one more stint as secretary of the FOMC, a job that has required that Brian somehow devise language that all of us can agree fairly and accurately describes what has been discussed at each meeting.  As usual, Brian has performed flawlessly in that capacity. Brian, throughout your career, you have exemplified the highest ideals of selfless service, leadership, dedication, and intelligence that this nation can hope for in a public servant.  I know I speak for everyone on the Board and the FOMC in saying that we have the deepest respect and gratitude for your service, especially during the darkest period of the financial crisis.  We wish you the very best in the future and hope that you’ll now have a lot more time to spend with your family and especially your two new grandchildren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a tribute to Brian Madigan's career and the speaker expresses gratitude for his service.


Passage number 3.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you very much.  [Applause] October 31– CHAIR YELLEN.  Now, turning to our formal agenda, we will soon have an opening in the position of FOMC secretary, and I would like to nominate James Clouse to serve in that capacity. As I think you all know, Jim, who currently is FOMC associate economist and deputy director in the Division of Monetary Affairs, is a highly talented and experienced economist and a widely respected Federal Reserve leader.  After receiving his Ph.D. from Northwestern University and serving a four-year stint as an army officer, Jim joined Monetary Affairs in 1989, and he has since risen steadily through the ranks.  He also was deputy assistant secretary at the Treasury Department for one year, where he oversaw Treasury debt financing.  Over the past three decades, Jim has developed deep expertise in central banking broadly, the Federal Reserve in particular, and most especially in monetary policy implementation.  I might note that Jim is also an excellent writer, a skill that is critical for the FOMC secretary. Jim’s selection as secretary would be effective on November 26, a few days after the minutes of this meeting are published.  Jim would vacate his position as FOMC associate economist at that time.  I anticipate that an officer from the Division of Monetary Affairs will be nominated to fill that associate economist position at our organizational meeting in January.  Consistent with our most recent practice for the position of secretary, we would announce Jim’s selection this week rather than wait until the minutes are released.  Do I have a motion on Jim’s selection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a nomination and provides background information on the nominee.


Passage number 4.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "So moved" indicates agreement or approval, and the response "Second" suggests that someone is seconding the motion.


Passage number 5.
 MR. POWELL.  Second. October 31– CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Okay.  Let me now call on Simon to start us off on the Desk briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a polite and cooperative exchange between Mr. Powell and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 6.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Thank you.  Okay.  We’re ready to move along to our economic and financial briefings, and David Lebow will start us off today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker and participants are in agreement and there is a smooth transition to the next agenda item.


Passage number 7.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Good luck, Dan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply expressing well-wishes to someone named Dan.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  My question is on financial stability.  And thank you for the briefing memos that you provided before the meeting.  My question actually wasn’t in what you just presented, so I hope it won’t be an unfair question, but one of the charts that you had in that packet was a chart that showed the ratio of commercial real estate to total assets—it’s chart 24 in the memo “CRE from an institutions perspective.”  And what it showed was that if you look at the 25 largest banks, it’s basically been flat—in other words, it hasn’t been a big deal for the largest banks.  That’s quite consistent with stress tests that are quite severe, discouraging large banks from holding a lot of commercial real estate.  The chart also had a second line for banks that were not in the top 25—and for those banks, the ratio has gone from 15 percent to 23 percent.  Their CRE assets are roughly $1.4 trillion. October 31– So the overall sense I got from reading the memo was that you weren’t particularly worried about commercial real estate.  And the question that came to my mind was, if you have widespread failure of small institutions, can that be a financial stability problem, or in the way staff is defining financial stability, can it only be a financial stability problem if it’s one of the largest banks.  So to what extent can an aggregation of small banks that are leveraged be a financial stability problem or, at least in the staff’s view, do you only view it as a large bank issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren is questioning the staff's view on financial stability and whether it only applies to large banks or if it can also be a problem with aggregated small banks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
 MR. COVITZ.  I think we don’t view financial stability just as a large bank issue.  We do think, if there are a sufficient number of small banks that are leveraged, yes, that would constitute a concern.  I think we do have to somehow try to aggregate up the amount of leverage in the financial system.  So if you aggregate up the small banks that you think you have exposures to and it doesn’t feel like it’s a big enough piece of the overall system, then we might make a judgment that the leverage in the overall financial system isn’t particularly high.  But I think we absolutely do consider their leverage just as much as the leverage of other institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is contention in the passage because Mr. Covitz states that the leverage of small banks should be considered as much as the leverage of other institutions, suggesting that there may be disagreement or differing opinions on this topic.


Passage number 10.
 MR. LEHNERT.  That’s right, President Rosengren.  The chart that you’re pointing toward defines large banks as the top 25 institutions.  And, as you know, the fraction of intermediation that’s accounted for by that set of institutions has really grown over time.  Just thinking about financial stability from the perspective of an interruption of the resilience of the intermediation function of the financial system, you put, over time, on that basis alone, more weight on the larger institutions. Below chart 24, there’s a pair of charts showing concentration across firms.  I think the other thing to note with respect to smaller institutions is that 25 years ago, when a variety of institutions encountered difficulties in commercial real estate, for a variety of legacy legal October 31– reasons, diversification across geographies was really not as advanced as it is now.  So even with the increased concentration in CRE among smaller institutions, we think that the same kind of very intense local effect is going to be less of a problem this time around. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 11.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  David, regarding the U.S. outlook, on your page 2, chart 9, you show core PCE price inflation and its underlying trend.  I think I heard you say—I want to make sure I got it right—that the underlying trend is really about inflation expectations.  Is that right.  And could you tell me what the underlying trend is.  And why do you forecast it to be increasing.  I can understand inflation increasing as the output gap widens, but why are you forecasting the trend to increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for an explanation from the person being addressed.


Passage number 12.
 MR. LEBOW.  Okay.  The underlying trend is based on the sense that we think inflation dynamics in recent years can be reasonably well explained by, in fact, a trend that is stable.  Now, I said that I connected that with inflation expectations.  Theoretically, conceptually, that seems like a plausible connection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their belief that the connection between inflation dynamics and inflation expectations is plausible.


Passage number 13.
  The behavior of several measures of longer-term inflation expectations, indeed, as you know, pretty much flattened out, essentially— MR. KASHKARI.  Or are falling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the behavior of measures of longer-term inflation expectations.


Passage number 14.
 MR. LEBOW.  Well, starting a couple of decades ago, essentially flattened out at about the same time that estimates of a trend had flattened out, and obviously the theoretical connection between inflation and expectations is a mainstay.  I would view the connection between the two as circumstantial.  We don’t know for sure that expectations is the thing driving this trend, but that’s our working assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker presents his view on the connection between inflation and expectations, stating that it is circumstantial and their working assumption, without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 15.
 October 31– MR. KASHKARI.  Okay, but then if you look at chart 11 with the common component, you offered this as evidence that the inflation surprise of the past six months is likely transitory, but the common component is still 1.5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
 MR. LEBOW.  That’s right.  That’s consistent with many purely statistical univariate models of inflation that estimate an underlying trend that is lower than 2 percent, maybe in the neighborhood of 1.5.  So this model is, I think, fairly consistent with that. Now, as far as assumptions about this trend in the future are concerned, we have for some time been assuming that this trend would eventually start to move up toward 2 percent.  I think it was starting around three years ago—I went back and looked in our Tealbook projections—that we started saying that 2018 was about the time we would start to see a movement up. So where does that come from.  At the most conceptual level, it’s the view that this Committee ultimately determines where inflation is in the economy.  But just saying that doesn’t tell you over what time period, nor what exactly is the mechanism that brings that about.  But what has been underlying our projection is the idea that when the labor market reaches a certain degree of tightness, we would start to see inflation moving up, and that would be about the time we would start to see some upward drift in inflation expectations that would help push this underlying trend higher. So here we are now approaching 2018.  We are seeing the tighter labor market, but inflation has been surprisingly low, and we characterize measures of inflation expectations as mostly remaining stable—if anything, a little bit lower, not higher. So it’s safe to say, I’m a little nervous about this projection of the trend moving forward.  It’s worth one-tenth over the next three years.  That’s how much it adds to our inflation projection.  The fact that we took down our inflation projection a little bit, that we carried October 31– forward a little bit of the downward surprise into next year, could be viewed as a signal that we’re a little nervous about this trend.  Obviously, it’s possible that this could be something more persistent, in which case you might say, “Well, a more persistent weakness would be consistent with a lower trend than we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and nervousness about the projection of the trend moving forward and acknowledges that inflation has been surprisingly low. They also mention the possibility of a more persistent weakness in inflation, which would be consistent with a lower trend than previously assumed. This shows disagreement or disagreement within the speaker's perspective on the future trend of inflation.


Passage number 17.
” MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It simply mentions that Mr. Kashkari thanked someone (not specified) and that Chair Yellen addressed President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This is for Beth Anne Wilson.  I’m looking at page 10, “Other International Risks:  International Financial Stability Matrix.”  I just want to make sure I understand the new, “Prominence of Risks” column.  I know we talked about this last time, about how South Korea would get low marks on the assessment for October.  But then we go to the new column, and they have “High,” and you’re attributing that to tensions on the Korean peninsula.  How should I understand the “Low” for South Korea and then the “High,” and maybe some of the others with “High” in the “Prominence of Risks” column.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is questioning the inconsistency between the previous assessment of South Korea receiving low marks and the new assessment of high risk due to tensions on the Korean peninsula. He is seeking clarification on how to interpret this difference.


Passage number 19.
 MS. WILSON.  If you think about the goal of the financial stability matrix as looking at the resilience of foreign financial systems to shocks, not necessarily the likelihood of shocks occurring, then that would capture what we do in our overall assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Wilson is explaining the goal of the financial stability matrix and how it captures their overall assessment.


Passage number 20.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  For South Korea, “Low” then means the corporate sector is pretty healthy, banks are healthy, that kind of stuff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply describes the meaning of "Low" in the context of South Korea's corporate sector and banks. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 21.
 MS. WILSON.  Exactly.  We have six criteria that we look at.  We look at the financial sector, we look at the nonfinancial, we look at sovereign vulnerabilities, external vulnerabilities, valuation levels, and effect of institutions—sort of how robust their institutions are.  If we look across that, South Korea looks to have a very low level of vulnerability.  However, it does have this big risk looming. October 31– We, too, were uncomfortable, and a number of you raised concerns about how to deal with these proximate risks within the context of this analysis.  And so what we decided to do was add the “Prominence of Risks” column so that we could capture things like Brexit, NAFTA, elections, and, in the case of South Korea, the tensions on the Korean peninsula.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the factors and risks that they consider when assessing the vulnerability of different countries.


Passage number 22.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And are you also making an assessment that a risk like that is not feeding back currently to the South Korean economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for confirmation or clarification about a particular assessment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
 MS. WILSON.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of "Right" suggests that Ms. Wilson is disagreeing or expressing a differing opinion.


Passage number 24.
 MR. BULLARD.  So if it was, then you’d be up at “Moderate” or “High” for South Korea in the first column in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a hypothetical situation and making an observation.


Passage number 25.
 MS. WILSON.  If it was feeding back in ways that we could capture in the financial sector—if it was causing a pullout of available funding, if it was doing something to sovereign vulnerabilities, if it was affecting the quality of the institutions in a number of channels, we would put that more into the IFSM assessment.  But right now we’re not seeing in the markets a lot of spillover from that risk to these other underlying characteristics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that currently, they are not seeing any significant impact or spillover from the mentioned risk into other factors.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 26.
 MR. BULLARD.  And so am I correct then for the United Kingdom, the “High” mark in the “Prominence of Risks” column is due to the Brexit situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker appears to question or dispute the reasoning behind the "High" mark for the United Kingdom in the "Prominence of Risks" column, suggesting that it may be due to the Brexit situation.


Passage number 27.
 MS. WILSON.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. WILSON simply states that something is correct.


Passage number 28.
 MR. BULLARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 29.
  And there you’ve got some feedback coming to the actual economy, so you put that at “Moderate” for the— MS. WILSON.  Right.  I wouldn’t attribute all of the “Moderate” in the United Kingdom to Brexit.  There are other grounds besides Brexit for seeing pressures in the United Kingdom—an elevated housing market, for instance.  We were doing it, I think, in a sort of kluge way before—we were putting it in quality of institutions or we were trying to squeeze it into the sort October 31– of standard categories.  Now we take it out and more clearly indicate there are these proximate known risks that are separate and, in some cases, can spill over to others.  So that’s how we’ve chosen to do it, and it’s a standalone category to give a richer assessment of the vulnerabilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their approach to categorizing risks in the United Kingdom and clarifying that Brexit is not the only reason for the "Moderate" rating.


Passage number 30.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Just one follow-up here.  For Italy we’ve got “Notable” for October, and then the “Prominence of Risks” is “High.”  So how should I interpret Italy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or guidance on how to interpret the given information about Italy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 31.
 MS. WILSON.  Italy has very weak growth.  Its banking sector continues to be extremely vulnerable.  It’s not profitable, and it has high levels of nonperforming loans and sovereign debt.  So there are a number of developments that make Italy “Notable” in terms of its assessment of vulnerabilities.  And on top of that, you do have political stresses with upcoming elections, with a rise of sort of anti-EU parties, and we wanted to have a place at which we could note that there are some proximate risks coming from Italy that actually increase our assessment of its vulnerability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of Italy's weak growth, vulnerable banking sector, nonperforming loans, and political stresses with anti-EU parties all indicate potential risks and vulnerabilities.


Passage number 32.
 MR. BULLARD.  I see.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention between Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen. Mr. Bullard simply acknowledges that he sees and thanks Chair Yellen for her response.


Passage number 33.
 MS. MESTER.  Beth Anne, where would Spain show up on here.  Because you don’t have Spain listed.  Is it because you don’t think it’s important, or would you add Spain and put it under the “Prominence of Risks”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks a question to clarify why Spain is not listed and if it should be added.


Passage number 34.
 MS. WILSON.  The way that we’ve chosen these particular countries is, we’ve looked at a variety of indicators for their importance in terms of the global economy, in terms of global financial markets, and in terms of spilling over—connections with the global economy and with the United States.  In that case, Spain is not one of the top countries in terms of its economic and financial connections with both the global economy and the United States.  In some cases, we have added countries to be more representative.  So we’ve added Turkey, even though it doesn’t October 31– rank very high in geopolitical connections, to give you a richer sense on the emerging market side. On Spain, if conditions continued to look very vulnerable, if it looked like Spain were a country we needed to focus more seriously on, both in terms of the spillovers to the euro area and the spillovers to the United States, then we view the matrix as a living matrix, and we have the capacity to add and subtract countries and to add columns.  For example, in the first run we didn’t include Germany, and we’ve just added the “Prominence of Risks” column. Regarding Spain, obviously political stresses are heightened there right now.  Surprisingly, we’re not seeing the kind of financial market spillovers right now that would necessarily elevate it to its own entry, but that doesn’t mean that we’re not looking at it closely, and that we’re not looking at the channels of contagion closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Wilson is explaining the methodology for choosing the countries and how they can be added or subtracted based on their economic and financial connections and spillovers. She also mentions that they are closely monitoring Spain and its political stresses, but they have not seen significant financial market spillovers at the moment.


Passage number 35.
 MS. MESTER.  But even if you don’t add it, it would feed back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents a statement or observation without any opposition or conflicting views.


Passage number 36.
  If it gets to that point it would show up in here, in the sense of the— MS. WILSON.  Right.  It would feed back.  The reason France and Germany are in “Prominence of Risks” as “Medium” instead of “Low” is because we have a sense that the euro area is still not completely stabilized politically.  And we recognize those risks could affect countries, so Spain would be a part of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the reason why France and Germany are classified as "Medium" risk instead of "Low" risk.


Passage number 37.
 MS. MESTER.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, there is next an opportunity to comment on matters pertaining to financial stability, and we have a few people who have indicated they’d like to comment.  Let’s start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply mentions that there are a few people who would like to comment on matters pertaining to financial stability.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m going to talk a little bit about commercial real estate again.  I thought the staff did a very nice job with the memos they October 31– provided.  They highlighted that valuations are high and that exposure on the part of large banks has not grown particularly.  But looking at the same set of charts, I come to a different conclusion, and I thought it was useful to provide an alternative viewpoint, to respectfully disagree with where the Board staff comes out. So my definition actually is quite similar to the definition that was provided for financial instability.  It’s any situation in which loan supply is interrupted to the extent that the intermediation process is significantly disrupted and the real economy is significantly affected. By my definition, the credit-crunch period in the late 1980s was an episode of financial instability.  While credit from small and mid-sized banks with large exposures to real estate was the source of the disruption—not credit from the largest banks—the disruption was large enough to have macroeconomic consequences.  The reduction in credit supply originating in small and medium-sized institutions was a large part of the headwinds in monetary policy that Chairman Greenspan highlighted during that period.  As of 1989, quarter 3, banks outside the top 25 institutions had 15 percent of their assets in commercial real estate loans, and the CRE capitalization rate was 7.9 percent.  By 1992, the capitalization rate had risen to 9.5 percent, as CRE prices fell faster than rents, and 1,025 banks and savings and loans had failed.  I attended hearings all over New England at that time listening to borrowers unable to get credit.  As of 2006, quarter 4, banks outside the top 25 institutions held 23 percent of their assets in commercial real estate loans at an average CRE cap rate of 7 percent.  By 2010, 338 institutions had failed, and the cap rate had risen to 8.6 percent.  Another 185 institutions failed in the subsequent four years. Because of the failures of the largest financial institutions, the failures of these smaller institutions received less attention but were, nonetheless, amplifying the problems.  Today banks October 31– outside the top 25 institutions hold 23 percent of their assets in real estate loans, with average cap rates of 6.1 percent.  Compared with the two previous periods of financial instability, this CRE exposure is in line with or higher, and the cap rates are quite a bit lower. What simulation would I want to see to determine whether all of this is a benign development.  Consider a simulation that has commercial real estate prices fall, as in the previous CCAR, coupled with a significant recession.  Add the assumption that falling commercial real estate prices motivate the GSEs to no longer provide support for commercial real estate—specifically, the multifamily segment—as their losses mount and as we know they have no capital cushion.  Assume we need to lower the funds rate to its effective lower bound, which collapses net interest margins for all banks. In such a scenario, loans outside of commercial real estate are quite likely to be stressed as well, and it is likely that wholesale funding will dry up.  Because many large banks and fintech firms rely on such funding, I am skeptical that these lenders will find lending into a collapsing market attractive at other than fire-sale prices. In the scenario that I’m envisioning, we would simulate the effect on bank failures, the regional pattern of failures, and the response of banks to diminished capital ratios that likely encourage them to shrink.  We would then estimate the effect of this financial problem on the real economy. My concern is that, indeed, overall credit intermediation would be disrupted, with significant deterioration of the real economy.  Note also that the Federal Reserve’s reputation as a steward of the economy and a bank supervisor might well suffer as collateral damage during such an event.  If this simulation shows that exposure at small and medium-sized banks poses a October 31– serious risk, including risks to the real economy, we should find additional ways to address this issue.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker states that they disagree with the viewpoint of the Board staff and provide an alternative perspective. They argue that the exposure of small and medium-sized banks to commercial real estate loans poses a serious risk to the economy, while the Board staff's analysis suggests that exposure has not grown significantly.


Passage number 39.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m just going to make a few observations regarding asset valuations, which will basically parallel what Dan and Simon discussed, but I find them interesting. Today the U.S. stock market rough measure of total U.S. capitalization is approximately 140 percent of U.S. GDP.  This is a measure I’ve liked to watch over the years.  This is the highest level of valuation relative to GDP since the 1999–2000 peak of the tech boom.  My own view is, the expectation of lower-for-longer interest rates, particularly along the yield curve, as well as a substantial amount of global liquidity have been major catalysts for this route.  But in addition to valuation, the one thing that is beginning to strike me more is, we have not had a 3 percent drop in the S&P since last fall.  This level of U.S. market stability is actually unprecedented, although it masks substantial shifts in sector market caps, particularly between disrupted and disruptors, which have seen a big shift in market cap beneath this calm surface. By the way, this level of lack of volatility is indicative of other associated risk markets.  The closest corollary in recent history to this stability is the Japanese stock market of 1988 and 1989.  I had the misfortune of moving to Japan in 1990 and living through this, which went for about 15 months and had a low volatility much like the current U.S. stock market.  At the time, it was thought that easy monetary policy and lax financial regulatory policies were catalysts for that rally.  Of course, Japanese P/Es also were much higher than today, but that market peaked at 39,000 in late 1989, went down 50 percent over the next 12 months, and ultimately declined 80 percent. October 31– We’re very different than Japan, and I don’t expect this to happen, but I think it pays to note that low volatility and sustained market stability for an extended period are highly unusual, especially to this extent, and maybe, to me, now starting to be a little ominous.  I would note, as we’ve discussed before, that low volatility tends to be associated with markets rising, and volatility tends to spike when markets decline.  Because more strategies today are based on buying low-volatility assets using leverage, when selling does occur, volatility is likely to rise, and this is likely to trigger more selling and deeper declines, as I think Dan alluded to in his analysis.  This is not to say that these trends can’t or won’t continue for some extended period of time.  It’s very possible they will.  And, of course, selling catalysts are often hard to predict.  To me, the most likely ones are a term rate shock or some type of geopolitical shock or dislocation that might affect credit spreads. I’m watching all of this and also would note, as has been already said, that a decline, in and of itself doesn’t worry me as much as an associated debt buildup in the form of straight debt derivatives or, more likely for me, liquid securities that quickly become illiquid in a stress scenario. So what to make of all of this is hard to say, but I note it.  And in that regard, though, there are some things that do strike me.  I think the country has been very well served by strong macroprudential regulation of larger systemically important financial institutions—in particular, strong and regular stress testing and capital requirements.  And while I am in favor of comprehensive review of regulation, and particularly relief for small, mid-sized banks and a review of Dodd-Frank and the Volcker rule, I think as we do this, I would be loath at this point to ease capital requirements and regular stress testing for the large institutions. October 31– Given the stress level of asset valuations, I think these tests should help us, along with other actions, to monitor for excessive debt buildup or other excesses that will become more apparent in a stress scenario.  And I understand they may not help us get much visibility, though, into the shadow financial sector, which we don’t directly regulate. This, to me, begins to reinforce the wisdom of letting our balance sheet run down as we’re doing.  But it also is starting to strengthen the argument, for me, of continued gradual removals of accommodation in order to avoid getting into a catch-up situation, which might cause the FOMC to need to raise rates much more rapidly and help create the so-called rate shock scenario I referred to earlier.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily an observation and reflection on asset valuations and market stability.


Passage number 40.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  The latest quarterly assessment of financial stability views increasingly stretched asset valuations as an elevated source of vulnerability, and I share that concern.  History suggests that elevated asset valuations pose a much greater risk to financial stability when they’re associated with high leverage.  Because the elevated asset prices that we see today are occurring against a backdrop of mostly limited leverage and maturity transformation, the staff assesses that the risk of dangerous spillovers from a drop in asset prices is reduced.  This assessment provides no compelling rationale at present for monetary policy to deviate from medium-term dual-mandate considerations out of financial stability concerns. The subdued financial-sector leverage and limited maturity transformation that are providing an offset to high asset valuations did not come about by accident.  They’re the direct result of the regulatory reforms and better risk management in response to the crisis.  Strong capital standards have helped keep financial-sector leverage well controlled, and the enhanced liquidity requirements, including the implementation of the liquidity coverage ratio and the October 31– anticipation of the net stable funding ratio, have helped limit maturity transformation within systemic institutions, while money market reform has also made an important contribution. Together, these requirements have improved the resilience of our financial system.  That is particularly important in today’s “new normal,” in which the neutral rate of interest is likely to remain low for an extended period.  By its nature, such an environment is conducive to asset valuations that are elevated, and a number of analysts have expressed concern that these aspects of the “new normal” may make the financial system more vulnerable to the buildup of leverage bubbles.  The experience of the past 20 years suggests we should take this concern very seriously. With equilibrium real interest rates likely to remain lower than in the past, it is very important that we keep in place guardrails that make the financial system more resilient against the kinds of risks associated with sharp reversals in asset prices of the magnitudes that the staff just presented or the buildup of leverage in the nonfinancial corporate sector. Earlier discussions of this Committee indicated broad agreement that monetary policy isn’t the preferred way to address such financial imbalances.  Macroprudential tools are the preferred first line of defense, which should, in principle, enable monetary policy to remain focused on price stability and macroeconomic stabilization. Today’s stronger capital and liquidity standards, together with stress tests that can be calibrated relative to the cycle, are helpful macroprudential policies through the cycle, but we need to be especially vigilant now because of some inherent pro-cyclicality.  It’s precisely when asset prices are high that future losses are also most likely to be high and the loss-absorbing capacity of a robust capital buffer is most needed.  If asset valuations continue to rise, the Board October 31– may need to consider building additional buffers through the macroprudential tools that were created for this purpose, such as the countercyclical capital buffer.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Brainard, shares the concern about elevated asset valuations and believes that the risk of spillovers from a drop in asset prices is reduced due to limited leverage and regulatory reforms. She also emphasizes the importance of maintaining strong capital and liquidity standards and using macroprudential tools to address financial imbalances. This aligns with the earlier discussions of the Committee and the views expressed by Chair Yellen.


Passage number 41.
 MR. QUARLES.  Thank you.  There has been a fair bit of discussion about asset prices and stretched valuations.  I certainly agree with all of the factors that have been discussed here, as well as some that may not have been. The spread of CRE cap rates to Treasury yields is at post-crisis lows.  Junk bond spreads are at the 15th percentile of their historical distribution.  Estimates of the risk premium on equity markets have narrowed.  They’re in the bottom third of their historical distribution.  We just passed the 30th anniversary of the ’87 stock market crash.  And if you look at the surveys that Robert Shiller started distributing immediately after the crash, the fraction of investors who think that stock prices are high relative to their fundamentals is at its highest level since the dot-com boom. So, I think it’s very clear that asset values are high relative to fundamentals.  Unfortunately, the only projection that one can reliably make from that conclusion over the near term or even the medium term is that prices are going to fall or go up or stay the same.  [Laughter]  So the question is, what will be the effect on the system of any of those three events.  We can’t be certain which it would be. If prices fall, some people lose a lot of money.  Maybe a lot of people lose a lot of money.  The question is whether the second-round effects of those losses will be larger than expected.  The classic example is the one that President Rosengren was referring to, of a credit crunch followed by an asset price decline.  Governor Powell had called me down to Washington during the period that President Rosengren was referring to, so I remember it very well. October 31– The differences between now and then, I think, are also clear.  We have banks with much higher capital throughout the system.  The banks that have those high CRE concentrations actually account for a smaller portion of lending now than they did 25 years ago, which I think is material.  There’s a lot more geographic diversification than there was 25 years ago because of regulatory change that has happened since then.  So I think it’s clear that the system is much more resilient than it was the last time that we had a significant decline in CRE asset values and the possibility of credit crunch following that. Suppose asset prices don’t decline.  They remain high over the near term.  Perhaps they go up.  History suggests that such booms rarely end well, principally because they result in complacency on the terms and conditions of lending secured by those assets. From what we can currently see, there’s no evidence that suggests a real pickup in risky lending or any material deterioration in the terms and conditions of lending.  Particularly, if you look specifically at commercial real estate, I think we could conclude, again, that there hasn’t been particular erosion of terms and conditions on those loans.  Among nonbanks, LTVs on loans in newly issued CMBS pools are continuing to decline, although they aren’t declining as fast as prices are rising. Now, the last time I made statements that assets were overvalued but the system was strong, I ended up having a lot of explaining to do in my confirmation hearing.  [Laughter]  So I’m not saying that we should be complacent or that there’s nothing to worry about.  There’s a lot of scope for further analysis, for ongoing research across a range of these issues.  But I do think that those factors related to the stability of the system, under the current asset valuations, are something that we should take into account. October 31– CHAIR YELLEN.  Any further contributions on financial stability.  [No response]  Okay.  Then I think we’re ready to move along to our economic go-round, and let me first call on President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their viewpoint on asset prices and the stability of the financial system.


Passage number 42.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Despite some disruption due to the hurricanes, the economy appears to be carrying significant momentum into the fourth quarter.  The unemployment rate, which should not have been greatly affected by the hurricane, declined to 4.2 percent and is now well below the SEP’s 4.6 percent median estimate of the natural rate of unemployment. With real GDP expected to continue growing faster than potential GDP, the unemployment rate is likely to fall further below my current estimate of full employment.  Recent declines in the unemployment rate are quite consistent with the Tealbook forecast that the unemployment rate will fall to 3.6 percent by 2019, a full percentage point below the SEP median and even further below the rate corresponding to the staff’s estimate of full employment. Such an outcome would likely be unsustainable, and it increases the risk of venturing into a region of the Phillips curve that entails sizable responses to very low unemployment.  One reason the Committee might be willing to accept further tightening conditions in the labor market is the uncertainty surrounding estimates of the natural rate, which might encompass rates below 4 percent. The U-3 unemployment rate, however, is not the only labor market indicator that shows a tight labor market.  Other indicators also suggest that little slack remains.  Initial claims for unemployment insurance are now at lows last seen in the 1970s.  This is consistent with firms being reticent to fire workers, because of the difficulty of replacing them, or with workers who October 31– do lose their job, quickly find new employment, and do not need to file claims for unemployment.  Either interpretation is a sign of a tight labor market. In addition, recent growth in unemployment has been accompanied by attracting workers from outside of the labor force.  However, the flow of workers from outside the labor force to unemployment has dropped below pre-financial-crisis levels.  This is consistent with either the pool of excess workers out of the labor force drying up or individuals outside the labor force moving directly into employment without spending time looking for work.  Both explanations indicate that the labor market is now unusually tight. Increasing nominal wage growth is another important indicator of labor market tightness.  My staff estimated wage Phillips curves, both aggregate and disaggregated, down to individual state-level data.  The results show that the relationship between nominal wage growth and unemployment has not broken down, although there is evidence that the size of the estimated coefficient on the unemployment rate has diminished.  These results seem consistent with the gradual increase in ECI wages and salaries and average hourly earnings we have seen to date.  The results are also consistent with more notable increases if the unemployment rate gets as low as predicted in the Tealbook. While a tighter labor market and higher wages are likely to eventually show through to prices, both total and core inflation remain below our target.  This has led to alternative hypotheses about why inflation is currently low.  Suggestions include that it is perhaps because technological disruption or greater competition from abroad are increasing competitive pressures and holding down prices. One way to see which sectors are being affected is to run sectoral Phillips curves to determine if the relationship between inflation and unemployment rates—in particular, CPI October 31– sector categories—have changed.  My staff examined a number of categories, with each category generally composing 2 to 8 percent of the CPI expenditure basket.  They found that while the coefficient on the unemployment gap had fallen across most sectors, the effect was insignificant for most.  But the effect was most significant for rent of primary residence, owners’ equivalent rent, and food away from home. The strength of the findings in these categories surprised me, as these are nontradable items that do not seem likely to be affected by recent technological changes or global competition.  In addition, the staff work found less persistence in the sectoral inflation rates, so low readings are less likely to be followed by low inflation in the future. Another way to connect building wage pressures to future inflation examines the role of markup pricing.  My staff examined which industries were most likely to increase prices as wages rose.  In particular, they explored if industries with increases in profit margins were more likely to absorb increased wages without passing these costs through to prices.  While the work is preliminary, it found strong statistical correlations between lagged increases in margins and lower subsequent price increase.  These results indicate that lack of competitive pressures, rather than more competitive pressures, are leading to delays in higher wages translating into higher prices. These results seem consistent with some change in the effect of labor market slack on inflation, either a smaller slope or some delayed pass-through of pressures due to larger profit margins.  Should labor markets tighten more, as expected in my forecast and that of the Tealbook, I would be concerned that some of the idiosyncratic negative shocks will drop out of the sample in the spring, and the tightness in labor markets will start showing through more clearly on prices.  I will discuss the policy implications tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. October 31– CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Acting President Mullinix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 43.
 MR. MULLINIX.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Real GDP growth this year has been strong relative to potential, and I expect this to continue in light of the information we received since our previous meeting.  September reports on retail sales and durable goods shipments and orders are consistent with continued healthy growth in consumer spending and business equipment investment.  The strength in consumption and equipment investment should be sufficient to keep overall economic activity moving forward at a healthy pace despite the recent weakness of investment in residential and nonresidential structures. With real GDP running above potential, the labor market continues to tighten.  A wide range of labor market indicators provides direct evidence on this tightening.  The unemployment rate is already below estimates of its natural rate, and it continues to decline.  The labor force participation rate is already above estimates of its long-run trend, and it continues to increase.  The job openings rate is at a historically high level, and the quits rate is close to its previous cyclical peak. Average nominal wage growth has not increased, but real wage growth in this cyclical expansion appears to be in line with its past behavior when conditioned not only on cyclical indicators, but also on labor productivity growth.  Many observers have pointed to the role of productivity growth, and my staff is continuing to investigate this issue. Core inflation has remained surprisingly low in light of the high level of resource utilization.  I agree with the view many of you have expressed that temporary factors are holding down core inflation, and we are likely to see higher core inflation next year. In this context, the stability of most measures of inflation compensation in recent months has been welcome.  Information from the Fifth District is broadly consistent with the national October 31– economy.  We continue to see moderate growth in the manufacturing sector and a slightly stronger pace of activity in the services sector.  Our contacts continue to complain about the difficulty of filling positions and how that limits their ability to take on new business. Although the direct effect of the hurricanes on the Fifth District economy was limited, they have, nevertheless, introduced additional noise into the data flow.  We received numerous accounts of difficulty finding trucks and truck drivers and have anticipated shortages of some building materials, much of it attributed to the reconstruction efforts in Texas and Florida.  I believe some of the information we receive for the District will have to be viewed through this lens.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bostic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement. It mainly provides information and observations about the state of the economy.


Passage number 44.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage, I cannot determine if there is any contention or disagreement. Could you please provide me with the passage?


Passage number 45.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Beth Anne Wilson linked a lot of her comments today to Halloween.  I’m going to start my comments by making reference to another event that’s happening this week that no one’s talking about, but I know everyone here is focused on, and that is, of course, the World Series.  [Laughter] October 31– It’s my usual role here to speak about what effect the event of the World Series has on the U.S. economy, and, as President Evans likes to point out, he suggested I sometimes cherry-pick my data [laughter] to report the positive effect of the wins of the San Francisco Giants or the Golden State Warriors on the economy.  But this time I’m going to be very fair about this, and I am going to once again analyze the data that relate the relationship between who wins the World Series and how the economy performs the next year. Now, this year the World Series obviously is between the Houston Astros and the Los Angeles Dodgers.  I run into the same problem I had when I looked at the Giants versus the Texas Rangers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 46.
  I have a dearth of data on Astros World Series victories [laughter], so, therefore, I will— MR. KAPLAN.  You might get a data point soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that they have a lack of data on a specific topic and someone else suggests they may soon acquire a data point to add to their knowledge.


Passage number 47.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 48.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The comments given by my directors and other contacts this round point to a healthy real economy with no pickup in inflationary pressures.  Heavy equipment manufacturers reported higher demand consistent with the stronger capital spending we see in the national data, and Ford and GM were encouraged by September’s big increase in auto sales.  Unlike the Tealbook, they thought only a small part of the surge was hurricane-related replacement demand.  Instead, they thought much of the strength was makeup after unusual weakness in August.  Ford expects the boost due to replacement demand to come in the fourth quarter, pushing light vehicle sales up to nearly a 17½ million unit pace.  After that, they expect sales to settle out at around a 16¾ million unit trend. In other information about hurricane recovery, my director at Discover Financial said Puerto Rico is still reeling, but that they’ve seen credit card usage in Texas and Florida return to normal. Regarding labor markets, I heard a few more reports this round about higher wages, including increased pay for entry-level workers and those nearby on the job ladder.  But overall wage growth remains modest.  I didn’t hear anything of note from my contacts with regard to price inflation. October 31– For the national outlook, the real economy is on a solid footing, and we expect this momentum to carry forward into 2018.  Our near-term growth outlook is similar to the Tealbook update.   With regard to inflation, the data continue to be disappointing.  With each new low reading, it gets harder and harder for me to feel comfortable with the idea that the step-down in inflation earlier in the year was simply transitory.  My chief concern is that inflation expectations have slipped well below 2 percent.  Indeed, for some time now such slippage has been found in the Tealbook’s estimate for the underlying inflation trend, and, as I interpret David Lebow’s comment to President Kashkari, it has been that way for about three years—that they had reduced that underlying trend, and then they are forecasting next year for it to start picking up.  So this crucial driver of wage and price behavior in the staff’s inflation model is telling us that monetary policy still has stiff headwinds to overcome.  I should note that I don’t find it very useful to discern inflation expectations on the basis of long-run PCE inflation projections made by professional forecasters.  They seem to have an unbending faith in our ability to achieve our inflation target. Most other measures of long-run expectations have come down somewhat over the past several years.  The intermeeting data have further reinforced our view that underlying inflation is mired below 2 percent.  So we again lowered our core inflation projection by one-tenth for both this year and next year.  We now have it at 1.4 percent in 2017 and 1.6 percent in 2018. My projection is based on the assumption that the next increase in the funds rate will be delayed until mid-2018 in order to assess inflation developments.  So this is a somewhat more accommodative policy than in the median SEP and a much lower rate path than in the Tealbook.  October 31– My view is that such accommodation is necessary to convince the public that the FOMC is serious about our symmetric inflation target.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and their own views on the state of the economy, inflation, and monetary policy.


Passage number 49.
 MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have brief observations in three areas.  One, the economy continues to perform well.  Growth is expected to average 3 percent in the second half.  That’s the fastest two-quarter pace in a number of years.  The noise surrounding the hurricanes has not obscured the fundamental strength in the labor markets.  Unemployment has fallen to 4.2 percent.  That’s as low as it has been in closing in on two decades and materially below most estimates of the natural rate. Second—and I agree with Governor Brainard, and I think, it sounds like, everyone around the table, that this is the fundamental challenge:  Inflation remains low against the backdrop of all of this.  I believe that it would be premature to give up on the idea that tightness in labor markets will eventually show up in prices.  I tend to agree with the view that the low level of inflation mostly reflects idiosyncratic transitory factors.  I was very interested as well in President Williams’s quantification of the long and variable lag between unemployment and inflation, which would suggest that perhaps, far from being a mystery, it is, in fact, exactly what we should expect, that we would not have seen repercussions of the unemployment figures show up in inflation yet. So I would expect inflation to move back to 2 percent over the next year or so.  That said, with respect to the 2 percent target, I think we also have to realize that inflation is volatile, somewhat erratic.  It can bounce around in a manner somewhat analogous to when I was a teenager learning to fly a plane on instruments.  The first thing you were told is, “Don’t chase the October 31– needles.”  The instruments will move slightly back and forth away from your course, and if you chase the needles, you will end up on the side of a mountain. And, third, I think we have to be wary of the potential costs of pushing so hard in our desire to hit a target of 2 percent when it does not seem as if the traditional relationships are holding, at least in the current environment, in order to achieve a policy goal that may be statistically indistinguishable from a couple of tenths below 2 percent.  In the words of either William James or Mr. Spock, “A difference that makes no difference is no difference.” CHAIR YELLEN.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of observations and statements made by Mr. Quarles and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 50.
 MR. HARKER.  I’m still trying to process that.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the intermeeting period, the Third District continued to grow at a modest pace, with a notable acceleration in employment growth, some evidence of increasing price pressures in our manufacturing sector, and an outsized increase in nonresidential construction activity.  Retail sales, surprisingly, have also picked up in September, but residential real estate shows little signs of life.  Employment growth came in 1.9 percent over the three months to September, and the region finds itself in the unusual position of outperforming the nation.  That’s coupled with the unusual position of the Philadelphia Eagles being the best in the NFC.  [Laughter] Thus, labor markets are providing a valuable impetus to my District’s overall economic health.  Growth is especially robust in leisure and hospitality, mining and construction, and education and health services.  However, the unemployment rate remains stable at 4.8 percent, which could indicate that, while healthy, our labor market may still have some “room to run.” September’s construction contracts increased more than 14 standard deviations.  Let me say that again:  more than 14 standard deviations.  Now, this increase was solely due to a huge October 31– ethylene cracker plant under construction in western Pennsylvania.  The scope of the project dwarfs what will be Amazon’s HQ2. The residential real estate market remains lackluster, with housing permits being relatively flat over the past two years.  Additionally, with the exception of Philadelphia, regional house price growth is only roughly half that of the nation. Our outlook for manufacturing remains one of steady, consistent growth.  Our October manufacturing index continues to remain above its nonrecessionary average, and shipments and new orders remain elevated.  Further, the employment index reached a new record high.  We also received a number of reports from manufacturers and homebuilders of hurricane-related scarcities for some inputs as well as significant delivery delays.  However, manufacturers continue to remain bullish, with the Future Capital Expenditures index remaining quite elevated.  Furthermore, there are signs of price pressures, as there were significant increases in the Prices Paid Index, and firms appear to be anticipating higher prices in the future. Our service sector appears to be growing modestly, with September’s good weather spurring a pickup in sales at convenience stores.  Consumers, like firms, continue to be optimistic. Now, regarding the national economy, my forecast of the economy is not very different from that of the staff, with the exception that I do not see the unemployment rate drifting quite so low.  I also anticipate some strengthening in inflation, but, like others, I get increasingly concerned with each passing data point.  And, as I mentioned at our previous meeting, a low r* environment may have consequences for our ability to hit our target on a continuing basis.  I will return to that observation tomorrow in my comments.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific points of contention or disagreement. It primarily provides an overview of economic conditions in the Third District and the speaker's forecast for the national economy.


Passage number 51.
 October 31– MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Overall economic activity in the Tenth District continues to increase, with monthly surveys showing that District factory and services activity expanded since the previous meeting.  Job growth has been positive, but with the District unemployment rate at 3.6 percent, tight labor markets appear to be holding back faster growth.  This judgment is based on reports received from our business contacts.  Nominal wage growth in the District has quickly returned to the national average over the past year after being more than 1 full percentage point lower than the nation in 2015 and early 2016 because of subdued activity in the energy, manufacturing, and agriculture sectors in those years. Contacts are currently reporting wage pressures in hiring and retaining workers.  Some report implementing labor-saving technologies due to difficulties in finding qualified workers and to address quality control and safety concerns.  However, many of our contacts reported either lowering the educational requirements to find workers or providing more in-house training. Energy and agriculture continue to heavily influence the District’s economic performance.  In the energy sector, drilling activity is holding steady as producers settle into range-bound WTI prices between the high 40s and low 50s per barrel.  And the District’s ag economy remains under pressure, with declines in both crop and livestock prices.  To date, farmland values have remained relatively high, giving borrowers and lenders space to extend operating lines as cash flow stresses mount. With regard to the national economy, my outlook is little changed since our previous meeting.  Third-quarter estimates of GDP point to a resilient economy in the face of several severe storms and bolster my confidence in a forecast of above-trend growth for this year.  I continue to expect output growth to moderate next year toward its trend level, with a slight October 31– decline in the unemployment rate and with inflation moving higher.  Although hurricane-related disruptions significantly lowered payroll growth in the third quarter, I expect we’ll see a rebound in the coming months.  And over the next few years I continue to anticipate a gradual slowing of total job gains in line with more moderate output growth. With the unemployment rate at 4.2 percent, its lowest rate since February 2001, I see little evidence of slack remaining in the labor market even in the face of modest real wage growth.  In the current low-unemployment environment, real wage growth, once adjusted for productivity growth, looks quite similar, if not a bit higher, than wage growth in the late 1990s. Over the past five years, the growth in real wages, as measured by real compensation per hour, averaged around 1 percent.  This growth is a bit faster than the observed annual labor productivity growth of 0.7 percent during this time.  In comparison with the low unemployment period of the ’90s, growth in real wages averaged 2.3 percent between 1995 and 2000, which was less than annual productivity growth of 2.7 percent for that period.  Comparing these two times, real wage growth, once adjusted for productivity, looks to be in line with—and even a bit faster than—real wage growth in the previous period, suggesting that labor market conditions are reflective of a tight labor market with limited remaining slack. In addition to real wage growth and job gains, financing conditions remain generally supportive of consumption spending in coming quarters, with moderate consumer credit growth for households other than the subprime borrowers who face tighter lending conditions.  At the same time, however, I remain uneasy about the current accommodative stance of financial conditions more generally.  As the Tealbook notes, a range of indexes will continue to characterize financial conditions as more accommodative than average and, in particular, as October 31– looser than in late 2015.  As others have noted, equity prices have continued to rise and are flashing red, as highlighted in the staff’s QS report, while the VIX remains near historical lows. Finally, softness in core inflation this year has been persistent and fairly broad based, and I do not expect a notable increase in inflation in the next few months.  Even so, the economy’s solid fundamentals suggest inflation is likely to move higher over the medium term.  With the unemployment rate now at 4.2 percent, labor market conditions continue to tighten, and inflation expectations have remained stable. My staff’s estimate of the inflation trend also has remained stable over the past several years and ticked up recently, as did the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s underlying inflation gauge.  Signals given by these indicators, along with the strength and broader fundamental factors that shape underlying inflationary pressures, including the modest improvements in international growth, suggest inflation is likely to move higher over the next year. With the economy growing faster than trend, labor markets tightening beyond full employment, and inflation low and stable, economic conditions appear favorable and broadly consistent with our mandate.  To sustain this performance, our policy stance will need to continue its gradual shift from accommodative to neutral, a path that is consistent with considering another rate increase in December.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker provides an analysis of the current economic conditions and outlook, giving a clear assessment of the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just one question on your additional considerations and in order to get a little more of your view of whether undershooting unemployment is less costly than overshooting.  Clearly, there’s a benefit because you bring people who are more marginally attached to the labor force back in, but how do you think about the financial stability risks.  So, pushing the labor market very tight, you’ll probably hit your inflation target more quickly.  Has the staff done work to think about periods when the unemployment rate gets below 4 percent— what is the likelihood of having a financial stability problem. That would get at some of those costs.  So if you think of it only in terms of unemployment and inflation, there’s really not much cost.  But if you add the financial stability October 31– element, it’s really thinking about a Taylor rule in a much more dynamic sense of, how likely is pushing beyond a sustainable rate likely to cause a very high unemployment rate in the future.  I don’t know what your thoughts are on that.  And we normally don’t have a lot of discussion about financial stability in this part, but I think, considering the Tealbook’s forecast of 3.6 percent, which is getting much further below the u* that the staff is currently using—what is your view of what the costs are of pushing the economy to be that tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage discusses the potential costs and risks of pushing the labor market to be very tight, specifically in relation to financial stability. The speaker raises the question of whether pushing unemployment below 4 percent could lead to a financial stability problem and high unemployment rates in the future. This suggests that there is some contention or disagreement about the potential costs of pushing the economy to be that tight.


Passage number 53.
 MR. LAUBACH.  You may recall that, in December last year, we sent you a memo.  Broadly, we like to refer to it as the undershooting memo, in which we looked into previous episodes of very low unemployment and how those episodes ended, to what extent a soft landing was achieved, and to what extent they ended with higher inflation and this Committee having to step on the brakes more forcefully.  In discussing this matter, I’m now looking a little bit in the direction of Andreas. I don’t think that, in that instance, we looked deeply into financial stability considerations per se, in part, I’d argue, because some of these episodes, of course, are quite a while ago.  The late ’90s come to mind, for example.  And I’m not quite sure to what extent we think that the observation of tight resource utilization as such was symptomatic of other things going wrong that might have led to financial stability problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a memo that was sent, referring to it as the "undershooting memo," and discussing the need to consider financial stability considerations. There is no indication that there is any disagreement or contention between the speaker and any other individual mentioned.


Passage number 54.
 MR. LEHNERT.  And that’s right, President Rosengren.  Just as one historical example:  The savings-and-loan episode of the late 1980s and early 1990s.   That was not really an episode of superhot labor markets that caused that particular set of problems.  It was more about regulatory developments and the interest rate environment. The late ’90s episode—to what extent very tight labor markets played through in asset prices—the causation may have run the other way.  In any event, that wasn’t one in which there October 31– was a lot of overborrowing and hence a lot of excess leverage in the system, so my reading is, the macro consequences played out as expected. I’ll defer to Thomas on the larger issue of financial stability and monetary policy here.  But this record of historical episodes is not a smoking gun or prima facie evidence of there being this necessary or sufficient connection between the two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting different historical examples and offering one individual's interpretation of those events.


Passage number 55.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply consists of one person expressing gratitude and another person acknowledging the gratitude.


Passage number 56.
 MR. KAPLAN.  I guess I’ll ask a follow-on question.  And maybe it isn’t an area of uncertainty for us, but for me, I think it is, and this is building on what President Rosengren was saying.  The risk for uncertainty about imbalances building—for me, primarily in the nonbank financial sector, because we have a reasonably good grip, due to stress testing, on banks.  I’m wondering, are imbalances building in the nonbank financial sector.  And how confident are we that we have a good grip on whether imbalances are building, in view of our imperfect visibility into that sector.  That, for me, is a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Kaplan, expressing his uncertainty and seeking information.


Passage number 57.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I’m afraid that—it’s Andreas’s call, really, because, you know, this is fundamentally a question of where we see financial stability risk, potentially, in that particular sector.  Go ahead, Andreas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that the decision or call rests with Andreas, as it pertains to assessing financial stability risk in a specific sector.


Passage number 58.
 MR. LEHNERT.  Yes, one way to think about imbalances building is to be a little bit agnostic about where the source of those imbalances is and to simply look at the financial positions of households and businesses.  And there, the story really is one in which we do not see a big spurt of borrowing by either households or businesses at the moment. In the business sector, the story there is slightly nuanced.  We did see very rapid growth, in particular, in corporate borrowing in the early part of the recovery period—let’s call it the October 31– 2010–14 period.  And during that time, in part because asset prices were elevated, risk appetite was clearly very elevated, and this particular segment of borrowers found credit relatively easy and cheap to get.  We saw a very rapid growth in credit there.  Now, that was facilitated using a variety of different sources, primarily nonbanks, but banks certainly played a role there as well.  So you had the leveraged lending market and the high-yield corporate bond market as well playing a role. That ended, technically, with, for a variety of reasons, leveraged lending guidance, the taper tantrum, and the oil price collapse that began in 2014.  Since then, what we’ve seen is, borrowing at the risky end of the corporate spectrum has really been pretty sluggish, and actually, even, if anything, it’s been a story of balance sheet repair in that sector. In the household sector, debt has grown over the long horizon, since the depths of the recession, in line with income—maybe a little bit slower or maybe a little bit faster.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an analysis of the borrowing and financial positions of households and businesses.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
 MR. KAPLAN.  It makes sense to me that we have a good grip on what’s going on with business debt.  We have a good grip on what’s going on in the household sector.  I guess my thinking is a little bit colored by the recent past of whatever the number was, $70 trillion to $90 trillion of CDS, which were not easy to see.  I’m wondering particularly about derivatives or margin debt or other excesses in the shadow banking system.  I gather—and this is a question:  How confident are we that we have good visibility as to what’s going on there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kaplan, expresses uncertainty and doubt about the level of visibility and understanding of potential excesses in the shadow banking system, such as derivatives or margin debt. This contradicts the initial statement that there is a good grip on what is going on with business debt and the household sector.


Passage number 60.
 MR. COVITZ.  Sure, there are some exceptions to the leverage story, and, outside the shadow banking system, Andreas talked about corporate leverage building.  In the shadow banking system, I think you’re right to think about margin debt and other types of securities loans.  We have data on that for hedge funds through, I think, July of this year.  That has actually shown an increase in 2017 in a way that the staff noted in the QS assessment and were a little October 31– alarmed by.  But that’s not a great measure of hedge fund leverage, as you know.  We should be thinking about derivatives and repo on top of that.  There is Form PF data that incorporate those activities as well, but, unfortunately, that’s incredibly lagging, so it’s only through 2016.  Those data show no increase in leverage among hedge funds, but only through 2016.  I think it’s really important what the next round of Form PF data have to say, and I hope the staff are actually working on getting those data from the SEC more frequently and in a more timely fashion. The only other pocket in the shadow banking system that we’ve talked about is in the insurance sector, and there, there are certain activities—funding asset-backed securities agreements, or FABS, which I mentioned in my briefing, and securities lending activities.  Those don’t amount to a huge amount of money right now, but we’re definitely paying attention, and that is something that we track.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing different measures of leverage in the shadow banking system and the availability of data for those measures. There is no argument or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 61.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any further questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange where Mr. Kaplan thanks Chair Yellen and asks if there are any further questions.


Passage number 62.
 MR. LAUBACH.  If I may just quickly return to President Rosengren’s question:  It seems to me, on the basis of listening to this, that one dimension to explore would be, what we are typically concerned about is very aggressive pricing of risk.  So the question is whether episodes of a very strong economy and very tight labor markets have historically been associated with there being what looks in hindsight as overly aggressive pricing of risk. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Before we begin our policy round, I want to briefly mention one open question in all of the statements, which pertains to paragraph 5, on our balance sheet.  And we have a sentence there that we’ve left in brackets because it’s an open issue.  So we asked for feedback.  Some of you gave us feedback in your comments on the alternatives, and others of you I talked to before the meeting, so I have some October 31– sense of what the distribution of opinion is, although, of course, I welcome your comments on this in the round. One option here is to delete the entire paragraph and say absolutely nothing about the balance sheet.  The desirability of that would come from the fact that we intend our balance sheet to run down, following the principles we’ve enunciated, and this is something we want to run quietly in the background.  We don’t want the public to think it’s something we’re revisiting at every meeting, and saying absolutely nothing might convey that there’s nothing under consideration.  So that’s one possibility. On the other hand, we have a huge balance sheet.  It is having an effect on monetary policy.  We only started our program of running it down this month, so suddenly going utterly silent about something that has been central to monetary policy also seems like an extreme outcome. It seems to me that both of these views have merit, and, following the principle of “If in doubt, split the baby,” I would propose the following as a way to resolve this and would welcome your reactions.  I would say I am open to anything that the Committee clearly wants to do here.  But one possibility would be to leave the red sentence in, include it in alt-B this time, and next time we could get rid of it.  Next time, there’s a press conference.  If we were to omit it next time, I could point to it explicitly in the press conference and say “the Committee decided rather than saying the same thing every time so that it’s becoming boilerplate that this is a process that’s ongoing—running in the background—and we made a conscious decision to omit it.”  I would propose that as the way to resolve this and would welcome, as we go around, your comments on that.  Specifically, if anybody has a significant concern about proceeding in that fashion, please say so. October 31– So, with that, let’s begin our round and start with President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing the possibility of deleting a paragraph about the balance sheet in the statement, and the Chair is proposing a potential compromise solution. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 63.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Let me begin my remarks by expressing my heightened concern due to the “Williams effect” and the Dodgers’ victory last night.  I say, for the good of the nation, go Astros.  [Laughter] I support alternative B at this meeting.  It leaves December open for a rate hike, but it does not commit us to take action, which I believe is the appropriate policy stance at this moment.  What I would like to discuss are some issues and challenges that I and the staff in Philadelphia believe current monetary policy is facing.  Now, I’ve not arrived at any definitive position on what I regard as a very complex topic.  The issues revolve around the potential difficulty of hitting our 2 percent inflation target in a low-r* environment.  The nonlinearities induced by the effective lower bound could imply that, on average, inflation will be somewhat lower than 2 percent if we maintain a symmetric policy regarding the undershooting and overshooting of our target.  Such an outcome could lead the public to believe that we are incapable of hitting our target on a regular basis.  Such a belief would unanchor inflation expectations, making hitting the target more difficult. This leads me to question about whether our current means of conducting policy are the most efficient.  Of perhaps even more importance are the economic costs arising from the increased probability of hitting the effective lower bound when r* is very low. Now, there are many different ideas that have been floated for resolving the problem of persistently low inflation and the increasing probability of hitting the effective lower bound.  Some have called for raising the inflation target, but, operationally, I think we would need to see inflation rise above 2 percent before that would become a viable option.  If we want that to be an option, do we adjust the current policy to make that a more likely outcome, or should we wait for October 31– some opportunistic inflation to occur.  Some have suggested moving to a price-level target, but that option, like raising the inflation target, needs much more detailed analysis before becoming a new basis for conducting monetary policy.  Alternatively, should we keep the 2 percent target and operate with an asymmetric loss function.  If we do decide to change the conduct of policy, there are important timing issues that need to be considered.  For instance, do we wait to understand the full implications of balance sheet normalization before making any policy adjustments.  Now, I fully admit I do not have the answers to these questions, but I would urge the Committee to begin detailed discussions concerning the implications of a low-r* environment for the conduct of policy. Finally, regarding paragraph 5, I agree completely with including the sentences in paragraph 5 and then dropping it in all subsequent statements.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speech by Mr. Harker who expresses his support for alternative B and raises concerns and questions about current monetary policy. There is no explicit disagreement or contention with other speakers or participants.


Passage number 64.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I can support alternative B and the statement as written, with paragraph 5 on the balance sheet included. Incoming data are consistent with my medium-run outlook of growth above trend, strong labor markets, and inflation gradually returning to our goal.  Against the background of the progress on our dual-mandate goals, my outlook is conditioned on maintaining our strategy of gradually removing policy accommodation.  This gradual path doesn’t entail an increase in the funds rate at each meeting, so I’m comfortable with no change in rates today.  However, I anticipate that, so long as conditions remain largely as they are today and remain consistent with the outlook, I’ll support an increase in the funds rate in December.  If conditions evolve as expected, this won’t surprise the markets. October 31– In my view, this gradual removal of accommodation gives us the best chance of sustaining the expansion.  I note that this strategy is a data-dependent one.  Over time, as the inflation data have come in weaker than anticipated, pushing out the projected time at which inflation returns to our goal, the gradual path has flattened.  The flattening also reflects the now somewhat lower estimates of the longer-run neutral rate, this reassessment itself being a response to incoming data. I also note that the strategy of gradual removal of accommodation is a balanced risk-management approach.  Our gradual path incorporates adjustments to incoming data that affect the medium-run outlook.  It incorporates the uncertainty regarding the inflation forecast and the risk that inflation may take longer than anticipated to rise back to 2 percent, or that price pressures may reassert themselves more than anticipated.  It incorporates uncertainty about estimates of the natural rate of unemployment.  It incorporates the potential buildup of risks to financial stability arising from keeping interest rates low for so long.  It also incorporates the risk of financial conditions remaining very accommodative despite the increases already made to the funds rate. I view the fact that the median path in the SEP is quite a bit flatter than the path in the Tealbook, the paths implied by various policy rules, and the paths in almost all of the optimal control exercises in the Tealbook as an indication that we are being appropriately prudent in the presence of the risks.  But those differences also suggest that we should continue on the path of gradual removal of accommodation. In my view, we would be taking on excessive risk by focusing only on the undershoot of inflation and ignoring the projected undershoot of the unemployment rate from real-time estimates of the natural rate even though those estimates are imprecise.  In addition to the October 31– inflation risk, allowing the unemployment rate to run well below its natural rate for some time could entail supply-side costs, such as inefficient job matching; reduced labor market dynamism, as we discussed yesterday; and affect people’s decisions about entering the job market instead of furthering their education, which could lower productivity growth in the longer run. In a typical DSGE model, these costs are reflected in the welfare-based loss function, which is well approximated by the familiar quadratic loss function that penalizes both positive and negative deviations of unemployment from its natural rate and inflation from its target.  The Board staff memo provides a convincing case that taking a balanced view and setting policy so that it’s responsive to both parts of our dual-mandate goals is likely the most effective approach to achieving our longer-run objectives. Finally, I would like to include paragraph 5, the brief mention of our balance sheet normalization program, in our statement.  I firmly believe that we need to be transparent about our policy decisions, and, while we want balance sheet normalization to be in the background, omitting any reference to it seems contrary to transparency.  The FOMC’s postmeeting statement is its official statement about policy, and the balance sheet is part of our policy.  I think that the brief statement in paragraph 5 balances the desire to be transparent without unduly emphasizing the balance sheet and seems a simple way to remind the public in our statement that balance sheet normalization is ongoing, in accordance with our previously announced plan.  And I defer to the Chair on whether to keep this sentence in next time.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement. It consists of the statements made by one person, Ms. Mester, who is expressing her support for a particular course of action.


Passage number 65.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  While no action at this meeting is appropriate, taking into accont the fact that we’ve just begun to shrink our balance sheet and recent data have been obscured by the hurricanes, I do expect it to be October 31– appropriate to raise rates in December.  Fortunately, this view seems to be widely shared in the market, so there is no need to move the market by tilting the language in that direction. The economy has been stronger than anticipated despite the effect of natural disasters, and I expect further tightening in labor markets to place upward pressure on wages.  Although inflation readings are low, I do not see evidence that the basic wage–price dynamics have changed profoundly.  Price data are noisy, and I expect that we will see higher inflation numbers next year, as some of the idiosyncratic price shocks leave the data and labor markets continue to tighten. Finally, I do worry about “reaching-for-yield” behavior when interest rates are so low.  Very narrow interest rate spreads and high valuations for commercial real estate are consistent with investors taking more risk despite some significant potential tail risks. In terms of paragraph 5, I’m fine with what you’ve suggested, which is to keep the sentence in for this meeting and then take it out next time. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing support for alternative B and his expectations for raising rates in December. He also mentions that his view is widely shared in the market and discusses his concerns about reaching-for-yield behavior and inflation. This passage does not contain any contradictory or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 66.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 67.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I also support your proposed approach to the language in paragraph 5 regarding the normalization of the balance sheet.  It’s a testament to your leadership of our preparations, discussions, and communications regarding balance sheet normalization plans that we now find ourselves debating how soon to drop all references to the whole thing.  So I think that’s a great accomplishment. That said, I think it actually is important for us not to lose sight that we are tightening monetary policy, albeit gradually, as we normalize the balance sheet.  So although I understand that, in our external communications, you can drop the sentence for paragraph 5 in December, I October 31– don’t think we should lose sight of that aspect—going back to what President Mester said about this being a policy decision, and that these are actions we are carrying out, even if in the background. The economy continues to grow above potential.  We’re in the midst of a substantial overshooting of our full employment goal, and, taking into account the usual lag in the response of inflation to utilization as well as the dissipation of some transitory factors that have held down inflation this year, I expect renewed progress toward our inflation target over the next year. In this outlook, I’ve maintained my policy assumption in my September SEP forecast of one more rate increase this year.  I will closely watch the incoming data, but, because of the strength of the economy and the solid momentum we are seeing, I have a high bar for surprises that could change my mind about the appropriateness of a December rate increase. Now, we’ve agreed to take a balanced approach to dealing with misses to our dual-mandate goal.  In this regard, it’s important to note that underlying inflation is undershooting our long-run target by about as much as unemployment is undershooting its long-run level.  In fact, in the Tealbook projection, the situation becomes increasingly imbalanced as the unemployment rate falls well below 4 percent, and these conditions recommend moving monetary policy back to neutral—gradually, yes, but not with timidity. The likely prospect of running the economy above potential for an extended period of time may have adverse consequences.  For unemployment, the converse of the usual rule is also true—that is, what goes down must come up.  And to reverse the deep undershoot of the unemployment rate, the long-run Tealbook projection calls for a lengthy period of policy tightening to return the economy back to the steady state.  This tightening results in a forecast of October 31– an unprecedented inversion of the yield curve.  Specifically, the funds rate is projected to move above the 10-year Treasury rate for more than three years beginning in 2020. Now, a yield curve inversion of this duration would likely be very problematic.  A large literature, including work done by Glenn Rudebusch and myself, confirms that inversions of the yield curve are one of the few reliable indicators of future recessions.  Since the 1970s, the U.S. economy has had six extended inversions of the yield curve.  And, each and every time, these inversions coincided with, or were shortly followed by, a recession, as dated by the National Bureau of Economic Research.  Furthermore, these past inversions lasted only about a year or less.  An inversion that lasted three years, as in the extended Tealbook, would almost undoubtedly be followed by a recession, based on this analysis.  And such a risk illustrates another channel through which continuing a too accommodative policy stance may re-create vulnerabilities down the road.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 68.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I can support alternative B and the proposed approach suggested by the Chair on the final sentence. October 31– With regard to future policy, we’ve fallen short of our inflation objective consistently over the past five years, and since March, we’ve seen inflation coming in consistently weaker at a time of diminishing slack.  Because the responsiveness of price inflation to diminishing slack has been very weak over many years, I think it’s hard to make the case that we should be confident that inflation will rise to target in the medium term. The conundrum we face is complicated by the combination of the flatness in the Phillips curve and a low neutral rate of interest.  Substantial evidence suggests that the equilibrium rate of interest is much lower than it was in the decades before the crisis and it will remain low.  In the most recent FOMC Summary of Economic Projections, the median participant expected a longer-run federal funds rate, after subtracting inflation, of ¾ percent.  That’s down sharply from the first projection in January 2012 of 2¼ percent, which was more in line with the average value of 2½ percent in the decades before the financial crisis. A low neutral rate limits the amount of space available for cutting the federal funds rate to offset adverse developments and can be expected to increase the frequency or length of periods when the policy rate is stuck at the lower bound, unemployment is elevated, and inflation is below target.  In turn, more frequent or extended periods of low inflation run the risk of pulling down private-sector inflation expectations.  In this way, the persistently low level of the neutral federal funds rate may be a factor contributing to the persistent shortfall of U.S. inflation from target.  And I do see some evidence of a deterioration in inflation expectations today.  In the Michigan survey of households, longer-run inflation expectations have been trending down for some time.  Longer-run inflation compensation implied by TIPS is currently 50 basis points lower than its average in the period from 2010 to 2014, and a variety of time-series models put trend inflation notably below 2 percent. October 31– In these circumstances, there’s a risk of a downward spiral.  Lower average inflation means that average nominal interest rates will be lower still, leading to even less room for maneuver if we experience adverse shocks.  While core inflation of, say, 1½ percent, which is the average that we have seen over the past five years, is, in and of itself, not a great cause for concern, settling for a low rate of inflation at a time when the neutral rate of interest has fallen substantially could mean overall policy space is only half as big as it was previously—only 2¼ percent in coming years, well below the 4½ percent level in the decades before the crisis. This is an uncomfortably narrow buffer compared with previous decades, when the FOMC has slashed the policy rate by over 5 percentage points in the face of recessionary shocks on average.  In these circumstances, every five-tenths matter.  If our policy rate path isn’t informed by this risk today, we raise the likelihood that future members of this Committee will confront the kind of unpalatable choices faced by our colleagues in Japan. Let me conclude on the question of whether the Committee should soon increase the federal funds rate again.  In December of last year, the median participant expected three rate hikes during 2017, under an expectation that core PCE inflation would be running two-tenths below our target for 2017 and unemployment would end the year three-tenths below the natural rate.  We hiked in March in the face of one unusual month of data, and we hiked again in June and initiated balance sheet runoff in September, in part reflecting the expectation that the downward shift in inflation would prove idiosyncratic.  It’s hard to make that argument on the basis of the string of data we have in hand today.  Indeed, today’s data and the staff’s projection suggest that raising the federal funds rate again in December would appear to be out of line with the policy rate path that was anticipated last December. October 31– The staff project that core inflation will be six-tenths below target at the end of 2017, while employment will come in three-tenths below the natural rate as anticipated last December.  This means, relative to our projection last December, inflation has come in substantially weaker than expected, whereas labor market slack has come in roughly as expected.  And while earlier in the year financial conditions were arguably looser, the recent material appreciation of the dollar, coupled with some increase in the 10-year Treasury yield, have changed that picture. We have several pieces of data between now and December.  If the data confirm today’s combination of much weaker-than-expected inflation and slack in line with expectations, this would seem to call for one less rate increase than we anticipated last December.  This would help avoid the risk of confirming the downward drift in expectations.  If, on the other hand, slack were to take a large step down or inflation were to show signs of accelerating, the original rate path would be defensible.  For the time being, I think it counsels a wait-and-see approach as we watch for what the data will tell us between now and our next meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of statements made by Ms. Brainard regarding her support for alternative B and the proposed approach suggested by the Chair, as well as her analysis of inflation, the neutral rate of interest, and the potential risks to the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
 MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I support your suggested approach on paragraph 5.  I do think that taking it out in December is the right thing.  If you leave it in as boilerplate, it will require thinking about whether anything that’s happened requires fiddling with that language, and it’s best simply to have made clear that it’s “turtles all the way down” from December. I am comfortable with the market’s expectations that this body is likely to move in December again.  I do think that, in light of the discussions around this table and the briefings by the staff, we have to ask ourselves how hard we’re willing to push in order to move inflation a October 31– few tenths of a point if, for some reason, inflation settles to a level that’s very slightly below our 2 percent goal.  I thought the staff’s memo on uncertainty and misperceptions pointed to the risk of pushing too hard on inflation in the context of a flat Phillips curve and volatile and idiosyncratic shocks to inflation, and I think that’s a risk that we should take seriously. All of that said, the advantage of being the new person is that you can wade into disputes that have been settled in the past without any knowledge of their history, and I thought that President Bullard’s question yesterday as to why we had an SEP process that basically painted us into a corner for December each year was a sensible question.  While I’m comfortable with the corner we painted ourselves into, I do support the idea that perhaps we should look into whether that’s a wise practice.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Good suggestion.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Quarles expresses support for alternative B and the suggested approach on paragraph 5. However, he disagrees on the timing of taking it out in December, suggesting it should remain as boilerplate. He also disagrees with the idea of pushing hard on inflation if it settles slightly below the 2 percent goal, citing risks and uncertainty. Additionally, he agrees with President Bullard's question on the wisdom of the SEP process for December each year, suggesting a need to reconsider.


Passage number 70.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, and I agree with the compromise proposed on paragraph 5, with the presumption that we will probably likely drop it in December and have a press conference to explain it. I believe, as we’ve discussed, we’re making good progress in reaching our full employment objective, the U.S. consumer is healthy, business activity continues to strengthen, global growth is stronger than expected in 2017, and the rate of growth expected for this year should be sufficient to continue to remove slack from the economy.  Taking into account all of that, I believe cyclical pressures are building as we remove slack from the labor market.  However, I believe, as I’ve said before, these cyclical forces are being at least partially offset by structural forces, particularly an intensifying rate of technology-enabled disruption and, to a lesser extent, globalization.  These structural forces are likely limiting the pricing power of businesses and muting inflationary pressures. October 31– From a risk-management point of view, on the other hand, I’m mindful that if we wait too long to see signs of greater inflation, we may well get “behind the curve” and have to play catch-up by increasing rates more rapidly.  Historically, this has increased the likelihood of recession.  I’m also mindful there’s a cost to excessive accommodation in terms of limiting returns to savers as well as creating distortions and imbalances in investing, hiring, and other business decisions.  And my comments yesterday were intended to suggest that I think some of these imbalances—for me, at least—are becoming a little more apparent.  Monetary policy is not costless.  It carries risk. Lastly, I’m also mindful that the structural forces, particularly slowing workforce growth due to an aging population, will continue to pose challenges for future economic growth, and, as a result, the neutral rate is likely to be much lower than we’ve historically been accustomed to.  Therefore, I do believe that future removals of accommodation need to be done only in a gradual and patient manner. Reflecting all of these considerations, I intend to keep an open mind about removing accommodation in upcoming FOMC meetings, particularly December.  But in the months ahead, I will be continuing to actively assess progress in removing labor slack.  And I’ll be looking for evidence that these building cyclical forces, reflecting the strength of the economy, have the prospect of offsetting structural headwinds such that we are, in fact, or we can expect to make progress toward meeting our 2 percent inflation objective in the medium term.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bostic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's viewpoint and assessment of the current economic situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
 October 31– MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Good morning, everyone.  I support alternative B today, including the inclusion of the proposed language of paragraph 5, followed by the removal from the December policy statement coupled with a mention in the press conference. Looking to the December meeting, I am comfortable continuing on the path of a slow removal of accommodation, should the incoming data unfold in a manner consistent with the outlook I discussed yesterday.  However, with every passing inflation report that falls short, I am becoming more and more concerned that expectations may be keeping inflation from reaching our target.  Following the first quarter of 2012, the quarter in which the Committee formally announced the 2 percent longer-run target, the year-over-year growth rate in headline inflation has touched the target only once, in the first quarter of this year.  In my pre-Fed life, I always thought of the 2 percent inflation target as an objective designed to deliver a price level reasonably close to a 2 percent growth path over the medium term.  I still believe this is a good way to think about our inflation objective. It is striking to consider what the record looks like relative to an implicit 2 percent growth price-level target.  If such an objective had been implemented in 2012, we’d currently find ourselves short of the desired price level by more than 4 percentage points.  For some context, we might go back to 1993, when the FOMC arguably began operating as if it had an implicit long-run inflation target of about 2 percent.  Before the past five years, the largest deviation from any 2 percent price-level path, during that time and before we introduced our inflation target in the first quarter of 2012, was, in absolute value, a little less than 3 percentage points. I worry about five-plus years of deviating on the low side of our target.  Even if one acknowledges that some weakness might have been expected coming out of the Great Recession, the path has not changed appreciably as we have approached full employment.  I worry about October 31– increasingly deviating from the underlying price-level path that I think is a good metric for whether we are successful in meeting our longer-term price-stability objective. Yesterday I noted I’m still forecasting movement toward target as temporary effects of inflation dissipate.  But, like President Harker, President Evans, and Governor Brainard, I am concerned that we risk expectations becoming anchored below 2 percent if that forecast does not materialize. Although Governor Fischer is no longer with us on the Committee, it seems several of us, myself included, are taking up his mantle and playing “Stan for a Day.”  We’ve noted in the past that surveys and discussions with directors and business contacts suggest a large portion of the public believes 2 percent is a ceiling.  If we were to express our inflation target as the center of a range, with perhaps a ½ percentage point tolerance on either side of that midpoint, perhaps that would reinforce the idea that our tolerance for misses really is symmetric. Now, I realize that changing our objective to a target range is probably not in the cards at present, nor is the idea of a more explicit price-level objective, although President Evans, President Williams, and others have usefully joined in such a discussion in the past.  But I think it would be useful at some point to revisit how we formulate and communicate our objective, especially if evidence accumulates that inflation expectations have slipped away from us.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some disagreement in the passage. The speaker supports alternative B, but expresses concern about inflation falling below the target and the potential impact on inflation expectations. They suggest considering a range or a more explicit price-level objective as a way to address this issue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  With an economy growing above trend, low unemployment, and stable prices, a more neutral stance of monetary policy is warranted.  Following the balance sheet normalization action in September, I support alternative B, as it leaves open the door for the Committee to consider a move in December and can be viewed as October 31– consistent with the gradual approach emphasized in our communications, so long as economic conditions evolve in line with expectations. Although my policy rate path may differ, I, too, am mindful of the challenges we face in our narrative concerning low inflation readings and the longer-run 2 percent inflation target, which we chose in 2012 as a proxy for price stability.  However, in the context of the economy’s ongoing performance and what I see as our ultimate objective, which is to promote maximum employment and price stability in a sustainable manner, I’m wary of fine-tuning our interest rate policy to achieve and maintain precise numerical objectives for inflation and employment. We’ve identified these numerical targets as longer-run benchmarks, and deviations from them, such as we see today, are to be expected.  When we’re fortunate enough to be in a situation in which we’re substantively achieving our dual-mandate objectives, monetary policy should be a neutral influence on the economy.  Yet the current funds rate target is well below the median SEP estimate of its longer-run value, thereby providing undue accommodation.  Nearly all of our benchmark policy rules echo this.  Accordingly, we should continue a gradual removal of this accommodation. In the medium term, we need to weigh deviations from our inflation objective against deviations from our employment objective.  In the current context, the shortfall of inflation below 2 percent should be weighed against the decline of unemployment below our estimate of the longer-run normal unemployment rate.  Low inflation judged in the context of an economy operating at or beyond full employment and growing above trend should not cause us to unconditionally recalibrate our policy rate path. It seems to me that our current challenge is to communicate a course for monetary policy that balances the undershooting of the unemployment rate against these lower inflation readings.  October 31– With the unemployment rate falling below SEP estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate, I’d like to see the Committee recalibrate its communication regarding the aims of the current stance of policy.  Since September 2016, paragraph 3 of our statement has noted that the stance of policy remains accommodative to support some further strengthening in labor market conditions, in addition to supporting a return to 2 percent inflation.  Movements in inflation and the unemployment rate this year have been noncomplementary with respect to our longer-run objectives.  The Committee should, I think, follow a balanced approach in promoting its goals as described in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. In this respect, I think that, as soon as our next meeting, the current language in the statement may need to be refreshed in order to describe progress toward our goals more accurately.  To this end, I might suggest that the sentence that says “the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative” should not focus on further strengthening in the labor market, but instead simply note that it is supporting a sustained return to 2 percent inflation at a time when the unemployment rate is running below its estimated longer-run level. Along these lines, I found the Board staff’s memo on the uncertainty and misperceptions for monetary policy to be informative, and its assessment underlies my concern with the statement language in paragraph 3.  Because of the unresponsiveness of inflation to economic slack or the lack thereof, it may be the case that it would take an extreme overheating of the economy to generate a more rapid move of inflation back to 2 percent.  Such an overheating would likely cause further resource misallocation, threaten financial stability, and ultimately could hand us an undesirable increase in inflation or hasten the next recession. Finally, Madam Chair, I support your paragraph 5 approach—leaving it in at this meeting and thinking about it at the next one. October 31– CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Acting President Mullinix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Ms. George expresses a differing opinion on monetary policy and the approach to achieving the inflation target compared to Chair Yellen. She argues that fine-tuning interest rate policy to achieve precise numerical objectives for inflation and employment is not necessary, while Chair Yellen believes a more balanced approach is needed.


Passage number 73.
 MR. MULLINIX.  Good morning, and thank you, Madam Chair.  My outlook for appropriate policy has not changed materially since we last met.  Further tightening in labor markets, together with relatively stable inflation, suggests that the funds rate should rise.  Of course, the stability of inflation is open to interpretation.  But for now, I continue to believe that we should “look through” the modest deviations of inflation from target, as these deviations are likely a result of idiosyncratic and transitory shocks. Even though in the current situation I recommend that we respond primarily to the signals coming from the labor market and not from realized inflation, I would characterize my approach as “balanced,” using the terminology of the staff memo on uncertainty and monetary policy.  The important role of the labor market in driving my thinking about policy does not mean that we ought to ignore inflation in setting policy.  Rather, it reflects my interpretation that the current behavior of inflation is consistent with achieving our inflation target.  As I said, I perceive recent deviations to be modest, idiosyncratic, and transitory.  As long as inflation is on target, our policy rate needs to vary with real economic activity.  If I were to become convinced that inflation had persistently declined well below our target, then that would be a concern in and of itself regardless of labor market conditions.  In such circumstances, it would be appropriate to respond to the behavior of observed inflation.  For now, I’m comfortable with alternative B, although I do think the appropriate level of the funds rate is higher than its current range.  I do not think that waiting until December to make our next move creates material risk.  Madam Chair, additionally, I support your proposed wording change in paragraph 5 for this meeting.  I also support its removal from the December October 31– statement, concurrent with the Chair’s acknowledgment of as much in the press conference.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Mullinix expresses his outlook and perspective on monetary policy, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 74.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B as written, including with respect to your proposed language for paragraph 5. If the economy performs in line with the Tealbook baseline, I would see a further rate increase as likely to be appropriate in December.  More generally, I continue to see a gradual removal of accommodation through rate increases and a shrinking balance sheet as the appropriate path to balance the different potential tradeoffs that we face and to extend the ongoing expansion. Growth is clearly above trend, which implies a tightening labor market and declining unemployment.  On this path, it seems very likely that unemployment will fall well below 4 percent and remain there for an extended time—something we’ve not seen since a four-month period in the year 2000 and, before that, a four-year period beginning in February 1966, more than 50 years ago.  In fact, that is the Tealbook forecast and my September SEP forecast as well.  The flat Phillips curve essentially calls for this sustained undershooting of the natural rate of unemployment to push inflation up to our 2 percent medium-term objective. The SEP path is a gradual one, with about six rate increases between now and the end of 2019.  While there are risks to this strategy, the risks to tightening materially faster or slower seem greater.  On the one hand, postponing any further tightening until we have clearer evidence that inflation is moving to 2 percent would put even greater pressure on resource constraints and entail several risks.  Although we see little evidence of this now, inflation pressures may be building, or inflation may prove to be more sensitive to slack as we move below the sustainable October 31– level of unemployment.  While we would react to that outcome with tighter policy, getting “behind the curve” would require a more rapid tightening and risk a downturn.  In addition, putting too much pressure on resource constraints may undermine financial stability over time, although the evidence on that is not clear and, in any case, does not show that we are at that point today. On the other hand, a faster pace of tightening would increase the risk of persistent below-target inflation, which would leave us that much closer to the effective lower bound.  While my view is that inflation is likely to return to 2 percent if the economy performs roughly as expected with our extended undershoot, inflation risks do appear to be skewed to the downside. I would also point out that the potential benefits of our current “patient but not too patient” strategy could be significant, particularly at a time when the extent of the supply-side damage left behind by the crisis remains uncertain.  Specific gains could include higher wages, higher labor force participation, and increased investment as the relative price of labor rises, all of which I would regard as welcome. So while managing these tradeoffs will be difficult, for now, I continue to believe that the Committee’s path of gradual tightening is about right, and that an increase in December is likely to be appropriate.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It represents the speaker's own opinion and supporting arguments.


Passage number 75.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think we’re a long way from inverting the yield curve.  Just for the record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: 
The passage is a statement expressing an individual's opinion on a certain topic (the possibility of inverting the yield curve). There is no indication of contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 76.
 MR. KASHKARI.  It’s in the baseline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 77.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just for the record.  And the Committee is going to spend a lot of time to reflect on what future path of short-term rates is appropriate with that in mind. I favor alternative B.  On language, I’m comfortable with the Chair’s suggestion to include the balance sheet sentence in paragraph 5 this time, with the understanding that we drop it at the next meeting.  I think its ongoing inclusion would be a mistake, because it could be misconstrued as implying a greater likelihood that we might adjust our balance sheet strategy than actually seems probable.  So I think it really does have to come out relatively soon. With respect to our balance sheet normalization process, I guess I would sum it up as “so far, so good.”  With respect to people that I’ve been talking to, we’re getting high marks for both communication and design.  The effect on the Treasury security and agency MBS markets has been very hard to discern, if there is one at all.  Ten-year Treasury note yields have risen about 20 basis points since our previous meeting, but this appears due to evidence of the stronger economy and an upward shift in expectations about the likelihood of a tax cut package, not due October 31– to the balance sheet.  Agency MBS spreads, in contrast, have actually narrowed rather than widened, so there’s no evidence that there’s much effect there, either. As we look forward, market expectations remain very much on the side that we will raise our federal funds rate target 25 basis points in December.  I think that’s what I’m going to favor at the next meeting, assuming that the outlook continues to evolve in line with my expectations.  While it’s true that inflation continues to undershoot our 2 percent objective, I think we also have to put weight on the strength of the economy, the tightness of the labor market, and the fact that financial conditions remain very easy.  Financial conditions haven’t really moved much since the previous meeting, but they’re still at a very accommodative setting.  If we were not to tighten when the market broadly expected it, I think that financial conditions would likely ease further.  That, to me, would not be desirable.  I think the fact that there’s evidence that inflation compensation is increasing is also noteworthy.  If that wasn’t happening, then I’d be more inclined to be more patient. Finally, I think it’s important that the starting point matters.  If we raise the federal funds rate target range 25 basis points, we’re still going to be below 1½ percent.  That almost certainly is still an accommodative monetary policy setting.  If you had asked me a few years ago, at a 4.2 percent unemployment rate, where the federal funds rate would be, I would not have picked where we are today. To sum up:  Shifting the stance of monetary policy slightly in the direction of less accommodation seems appropriate even with inflation slightly below our objective, as we are near full employment.  The outlook is that above-trend growth is likely to continue, supported by easy financial market conditions; and a tightening in monetary policy in December is already broadly expected. October 31– Finally, I’d like to close with a few words of thanks to Brian Madigan.  Brian has been an extremely dedicated and capable central banker for many years.  I think we all recognize that and respect it.  I think, Madam Chair, you said it very well in your remarks yesterday.  But I have to say, my own experience, I think, goes beyond that of many others around the table.  During the financial crisis, Brian and I were partners, as Brian headed the Board’s Division of Monetary Affairs and I headed the Markets Group in New York. There are many things that Brian did a lot better than I did, and I leaned a lot on him during that period.  In particular, Brian was extraordinarily patient with me as he helped me get up to speed in learning all of the intricacies of Federal Reserve governance and communication, such as when I asked him, “So when we send a memo to the FOMC, what do we actually include in that memo.” He was also extraordinarily hard working—and probably too much so, in fact.  I remember that, in the fall of 2008, when I called Brian’s office, it was before six o’clock in the morning, and my intention was to leave him a voice mail about some late-breaking development with respect to our nascent FX swaps network.  Much to my surprise, Brian picked up the phone, and we started to talk—my call didn’t go to voice mail.  He was a great person to partner with through some very difficult times, and I want to thank you for that. At a time when many people are focused on the potential transition of leadership at the Fed, I think we should also focus instead on all of the talented people we have at the Board and at the Reserve Banks, such as Brian, who do the work that makes it all look good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 78.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you very much. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Well, thank you for a very interesting and thoughtful round of comments.  I think our decision in December may not be so easy, but fortunately, for October 31– today, I think things are pretty straightforward.  I’ve heard broad-based support for alt-B with the inclusion of the red sentence in paragraph 5 for today, with a presumption that we will drop it in December.  Let me ask Brian to review what we’re going to vote on and then read the roll.  Then, following that vote, the Board will vote on reserves and discount rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Chair Yellen, expresses appreciation for the comments and indicates that the decision for today is straightforward based on the support for a certain option. The subsequent voting is mentioned but does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 79.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As you indicated, this vote will be on the monetary policy statement for alternative B as shown on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing materials, with the inclusion of the currently bracketed sentence in paragraph 5.  It will also encompass the directive to the Desk as included in the draft implementation note on pages 10 and 11 of those briefing materials. Chair YellenYes Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes Governor Brainard   Yes President Evans   Yes President Harker   Yes President Kaplan   Yes President Kashkari   Yes Governor Powell   Yes Governor Quarles   Yes  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Now the Board needs to vote on corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates.  I first need a motion from a Board member to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances unchanged at 1¼ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward exchange of voting on monetary policy and interest rates.


Passage number 80.
 MR. POWELL.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Finally, I need a motion from a Board member to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing rate of 1¾ percent and establishment of the rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas specified in the staff’s October 27 memo to the Board.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The motion is made without objection and there is no discussion or opposition.


