Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  And I would like to note that President Raphael Bostic joined the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta last week as its new president, and this is his first FOMC meeting.  Raphael, welcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply consists of a statement acknowledging the new president and welcoming him.


Passage number 2.
 MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  We look forward to working with you not only on monetary policy but on other System matters as well. I’d also like to acknowledge the upcoming departure of Bill English.  At the January 2015 FOMC meeting, as he was stepping down from the positions of secretary of the FOMC and director of the Division of Monetary Affairs, I expressed our appreciation for his extraordinary service during a very difficult time. Since then he’s made notable contributions on a range of projects as a senior special advisor.  For the past year, Bill has been on leave visiting Yale University, his alma mater.  And it’s my understanding that, starting in August, Bill will return to Yale on a permanent basis. Stan Fischer is working on finding a way to keep Bill involved in the Fed History Vision Project.  So there is a chance that we will still get to see him in the halls from time to time.  Bill, let me thank you again for your extraordinary service. Okay.  Let’s move on to our formal agenda, and our first agenda item is the selection of a Committee officer.  At the Committee’s organizational meeting in January, I noted that President   Kashkari intended to nominate an associate economist when the new research director joined the Minneapolis Fed.  I understand that the new director has started and, indeed, is here today, and that President Kashkari is now prepared to make the nomination.  So let me ask President Kashkari to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the upcoming departure of Bill English and expressing appreciation for his service. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 3.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’d like to nominate Mark L.J. Wright as associate economist.  He’s now the senior vice president and director of research at the Minneapolis Fed.  He joined us from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and previously was a tenured professor at UCLA. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  Consistent with the Committee’s practice, the motion is to select Mr. Wright to serve as associate economist until the Committee’s first regularly scheduled meeting in 2018.  Is there a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating the nomination of Mark L. J. Wright for the position of associate economist and the procedural question of seconding the motion.


Passage number 4.
 MR. EVANS.  I would like to second the nomination of Mark Wright.  Mark’s departure from the research department in Chicago is a big loss, but I’m sure it will be outweighed by the gain to the System in Minneapolis. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Is there any further discussion.  [No response]  Then without objection, the selection is approved unanimously by the Committee.  Congratulations, Mark, and we look forward to working with you in your new role.  And now let’s move on to “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations,” and I’ll call on Simon to begin the Desk briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of support for nominating Mark Wright for a new role.


Passage number 5.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question for Lorie, and it’s regarding panel 7 on exhibit 2—“Average PDF of Expected Time of First Announced Change in Reinvestment Policy.” When I look to the fall, it looks like there’s likely to be a debt ceiling issue at that time.  There’s the potential for, or at least the threat of, a government shutdown in the fall.  We’ll have the potential appointment of Governors and the Chair.  When you talk to the Treasury about timing, do they raise any concerns if our change in reinvestment policy were to occur in the fall.  And, secondarily to that, if we were to move it up a meeting or back a meeting, do you think it would make much of a difference to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 6.
MS. LOGAN.  In terms of the Treasury, market participants have widely expressed their expectations as seen in the survey results here. They haven’t seen these survey results, because they’re not released until after the minutes.  But they’ve seen similar surveys that are released publicly, and the Treasury seems comfortable with what they’re seeing regarding those market expectations.  They’re also seeing expectations that those caps will initially be quite small.  I think because of the small size in the fall, if they were to start at that time, the Treasury seems comfortable with that timing. In terms of the effect on market prices, moving it up or back a meeting—in view of what we’ve learned from exhibit 8, I don’t expect that that would have a meaningful effect on prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements made by Mr. Rosengren and Chair Yellen indicate a cordial and polite conversation.


Passage number 8.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just a follow up on the flip side of President Rosengren’s question.  So assume none of that happens in the fall and things are going very smoothly, particularly in the case of Treasury securities. Is there any circumstance in which you might consider raising the caps. I’m just curious.  If things are going better than expected and there’s no debt ceiling crisis, there’s no government shutdown, is there an opportunity to revisit the caps or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking a hypothetical question about the possibility of raising the caps in certain circumstances, indicating curiosity rather than disagreement.


Passage number 9.
 MR. POTTER.  I don’t think that’s a decision for the Desk.  That would be a decision for the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter simply expresses his opinion on the matter, stating that he does not believe the decision should be made by the Desk but instead by the FOMC.


Passage number 10.
 I can imagine circumstances— MR. HARKER.  Well, what are the costs and benefits of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question seeking information or clarification.


Passage number 11.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It only states the position or title of Vice Chairman Dudley.


Passage number 12.
  Well, remember, the caps are only going to be binding on the midmonth of— MR. HARKER.  Oh, I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying and confirming their understanding of a previous statement.


Passage number 13.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So raising the cap doesn’t get you that much in terms of— CHAIR YELLEN.  It makes almost no difference in the timing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 14.
 MR. HARKER.  It doesn’t buy you that much early, yes. CHAIR YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Both Mr. Harker and Chair Yellen seem to agree that buying something early does not yield significant benefits.


Passage number 15.
  And I think our intention here is to announce a plan and carry it out, not— MR. HARKER.  That’s why I was questioning, Madam Chair, because that’s what we’ve been saying.  I just wanted to make sure that once we say it—and we’ve been saying it’s on autopilot—it will remain that way.  Or are we revisiting it. CHAIR YELLEN. It’s definitely my expectation that we’re putting this on autopilot, that we’re going to announce a plan after this meeting at the press conference, and once we start the plan, that it’s essentially on autopilot, unless we feel that there’s been a sufficient deterioration in the economic outlook that we would want to consider ceasing reinvestment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing the intention to announce a plan and implement it, and there is agreement about putting the plan on autopilot.


Passage number 16.
  I think you used the analogy of watching paint dry— MR. HARKER.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN. —which was a great one.  And that was my understanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a positive exchange where Chair Yellen agrees with Mr. Harker and compliments his analogy.


Passage number 17.
 MR. HARKER.  I just wanted to make sure of that.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Harker is simply expressing gratitude and confirming his understanding. Chair Yellen's response is cooperative and there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 18.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think you could raise the cap, but I think the messaging would be extremely difficult.  Like, “Why are you raising the cap.  What great benefit are you getting from raising the cap.”  And it would be a bit contrary to the idea that it’s on autopilot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage expresses a personal opinion about the difficulty of raising the cap and potential challenges in messaging, but there is no direct contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 19.
 MR. HARKER.  No, I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Harker, is expressing understanding, indicating agreement or lack of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
  I just wanted to make sure before we pull the trigger on this that—MS. LOGAN.  I would want to note, just for everyone’s reference, that in exhibit 2 of the second briefing, part of the Desk statement would be to outline the plan as described in the Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.  So, of course, the Committee could decide to make changes and deviate from the plan, but this would be provided in the initial Desk statement.  I think there would be some expectation in the market that this would generally be on autopilot through that time period. CHAIR YELLEN.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Logan raises a point about the possibility of changes and deviations from the plan outlined in the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. This implies that there may be differing opinions or potential disagreement within the Committee about the extent to which they should deviate from the plan.


Passage number 21.
 MS. GEORGE.  Just to clarify another point here related to panel 7—so are the markets expecting that they will get the changes in the statement that we’re going to be talking about in this kind of detail.  That detail wouldn’t change these expectations regarding the actual implementation of the change to our reinvestment policy, would it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple inquiry for clarification.


Passage number 22.
 MR. POTTER.  I think some people will be surprised, assuming that you go ahead with the plan—it’s the next item on the agenda—to see the amount of detail released. My viewpoint is that your addendum to the normalization principles would likely raise the probability on the next few meetings.  In particular, the probability of a change at the September meeting would likely increase.  There are many people who think it’s possible that a lot of detail will be released.  So we’ll see what effect that has. On my reading, the assumption seems to be that there will be a lot of information in the press conference but not a change in the statement. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen are discussing the potential release of detail in a meeting but do not express conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 23.
 MS. MESTER. Would it be unreasonable for the modal probability to move to the next meeting, as opposed to September, with the detail you’re releasing at this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Mester is just asking a question.


Passage number 24.
 MR. POTTER. The probability on the July meeting is 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the probability of the July meeting, without any contradictory opinions or opposing views being expressed.


Passage number 25.
   MS. MESTER.  At this point.  But a lot of times in the past, we’ve released details, and then it’s a trigger like, “Oh, it’s going to be the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply pointing out that in the past, releasing details has acted as a trigger for anticipation of the next meeting.


Passage number 26.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. But a lot of people think that we’re actually going to release details today.  It’s not 100 percent, but it’s up pretty high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is a belief or expectation that details will be released, although it is not confirmed with absolute certainty.


Passage number 27.
 MS. MESTER. But you still think that the majority of the weight would be on September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 28.
 MR. POTTER. If you decide to go ahead, there will be information in the press conference, the principles and plans will be amended, and the statement is changing.  That whole configuration suggests the FOMC is ready at any point to make this change.  There’s no further information that market participants need.  They will be trying to look through the approach that you take, given the data that come in and when the appropriate time to take the action is.  At that point, all meetings are live. CHAIR YELLEN.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is simply stating the sequence of events and the possible actions of the FOMC. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 29.
 MS. GEORGE.  So in that context, assuming that there could be some debate about future debt ceilings and government shutdowns, is there an advantage to push toward a July implementation—in other words, to begin to frame expectations here.  That obviously would be a discussion for the Committee.  But I’m just curious, because there could be a chance that you’d be pushing this off even as the economy unfolds broadly as expected—the language we’ve used here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a potential strategy and seeking input on the matter.


Passage number 30.
 MR. POTTER.  So that’s a question we’ve been thinking about and other people have been thinking about.  And the big unknown is, if there’s noise associated with the debt limit, does that mean that market participants get to a point at which they move it two or three years forward or they move it three or four months forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a question that Mr. Potter and others have been considering. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 31.
 MS. GEORGE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Ms. George is "right" about something without any further context or indication of contention.


Passage number 32.
 MR. POTTER.  If they move it three or four months forward, that makes life really complicated if you start a little bit earlier, because then are they going to keep on doing something like that.  But I think our approach, as we’ve thought about it, is not to try to guess what that’s going to be rather than think through the policy choices you have here because, as Lorie pointed out, as long as the Treasury has time, there are things that they can be thinking through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing different approaches and considerations related to a potential policy change.


Passage number 33.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think one problem with going earlier—in July—is, you’re probably not going to want to say you’re going earlier in July because of your anxiety about the debt limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and personal concern regarding the timing of an event.


Passage number 34.
 MS. GEORGE.  No, no.  You’re right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. George agrees with the other person's statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 35.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So then the question is, well, why is the FOMC going in July—in a non–press conference meeting. It creates a little bit more confusion in the marketplace with, what’s the rush. CHAIR YELLEN.  Especially when the draft statement says that we will do this assuming incoming data are in line with expectations, and there would not be much data in that short a span.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests some disagreement or questioning regarding the timing and necessity of the FOMC meeting in July. The mention of confusion and the phrase "what's the rush" indicate a level of contention.


Passage number 36.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So I think the market would be surprised by a July move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. It simply states a personal belief about the market's reaction to a potential event.


Passage number 37.
 MS. GEORGE.  Well, I think without other clarification, that’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses agreement. Ms. George states that she believes something is correct without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 38.
  So I think it may seem rushed to us compared with how we’ve been talking about it, but if you were putting out this detail at this meeting, it might not seem unusual to start at the next meeting, assuming you set expectations—   MR. POTTER. The July probability will go up after this meeting, whatever the decision you make, just because we’re getting closer to later this year. It could go up by a lot—it’s possible. CHAIR YELLEN. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage. The two speakers are discussing different topics - the first speaker is talking about the timeline of discussing a detail at a meeting, while the second speaker is discussing the probability of something happening after a meeting. Their statements do not contradict or challenge each other.


Passage number 39.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  So is there a reason after this press conference that there’s not an expectation that every meeting is potentially live. To play a little devil’s advocate to the Vice Chairman, moving it up or moving it back, if it doesn’t make that much of a difference, I’m not sure it’s going to seem that different between July, September, or November.  But it’s not so clear to me, if moving up or back one meeting doesn’t make that much of a difference, why we would pick a meeting at which we almost know a priori there are likely to be a lot of other factors that we can’t control that would be disruptive.  So if you’re trying to figure out an optimal timing, it seems picking a period when there are other factors would be something to think about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is offering a counterpoint and playing devil's advocate to the Vice Chairman's suggestion. However, there is no direct disagreement or argument between the two speakers.


Passage number 40.
 MR. POTTER.  I think four years ago we had a bit of a similar debate.  And it’s very hard to work out exactly what the reaction will be to any announcement that we give.  I don’t know whether we can really look in their heads and think exactly like that. This has gone, as Lorie showed, very smoothly so far, and it seems to be because they’re following along with the logic, and possibly the logic would say go in July.  If there was a push to do that, that might get some of the dynamics we saw in 2013 back into the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the reaction to a potential announcement and speculating on the possible outcome.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 41.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes. If I could interject:  What I worry about a little bit is if you move in July, there’s going to be a lot of speculation that you’re moving in July because you are worried about the debt limit, which in some ways then amps that up as a potential issue for the market.  And I think, from our perspective, we should be as far away from the debt limitissue as we possibly can be in terms of not contributing to speculation that we’re doing things because of the debt limit.  Just my personal opinion. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the potential market reaction and speculation if a move is made in July, implying disagreement with the idea of moving at that time. They also suggest that it would be better to distance themselves from the debt limit issue to avoid contributing to speculation.


Passage number 42.
 MR. POWELL.  I would be reluctant to think of July as a first-order option, because you can go in September with delayed effect if you’re terribly concerned about the debt ceiling, which I don’t think we should be.  But if we were terribly concerned, then we could go in September—announce, but with delayed effect, starting in November or December. CHAIR YELLEN. Yes. Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Powell and Chair Yellen are discussing different options for addressing the debt ceiling, but there is no argument or disagreement between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 43.
 MR. FISCHER.  I disagree.  I just don’t understand this “Let’s push it out to where there’s going to be more trouble,” and we’re more likely not to want to go—even if we’ve got very small actions at the beginning. You’re doing this right in the face of a debt ceiling crisis. I think if we got going now, we would just say, “Well, the time is right, and we’ve got the plans. They’re all there.  You know what they are, let’s go ahead.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Other comments.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer disagrees with the idea of pushing something out to where there will be more trouble, and expresses his confusion about it. He also disagrees with the timing of taking action, suggesting that they should start now instead of waiting for the right time.


Passage number 44.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Yes.  I see no advantage at all to moving it to July.  I think this is a big deal.  I think we do need a press conference.  I think this is the kind of thing that you do at a press conference, so that the Chair can explain in great detail and contextualize it.  And I think the debt limit is manageable in terms of the timing of when you actually trigger the implementation as opposed to the announcement.  So, personally—I think we’ll get into this tomorrow—I would not favor July. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other comments.  Other questions. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 45.
 MR. BULLARD.  I do, but it’s on a different subject.  So if anyone else wants to comment, please do.  [No response] Okay.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My question is about   exhibit 1, figures 1 and 2, about the Goldman Sachs Financial Conditions Index.  I just want to make sure I’m understanding chart number 2 here.  It’s saying that the S&P CAPE is 5 percent of the index, but has been a big factor in driving the Financial Conditions Index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and understanding on a specific chart.


Passage number 46.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 47.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m happy to explain why.  It’s the percentage times the amount of movement.  So the 10-year Treasury moving 100 basis points would be a big move.  Stocks moving 1 percent would be trivial.  So those weights don’t really mean how important these variables are in the index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting an explanation and comparing the importance of different variables in the index.


Passage number 48.
 MR. BULLARD.  No, I know.  But the blue bar shows that it’s mostly the stock price movement—coupled with the credit spreads.  Why this financial conditions index.  Why are you showing me this one as opposed to many others. There are many others in the literature.  Is this one judged to be different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification or justification regarding the choice of a specific financial conditions index.


Passage number 49.
 MR. POTTER.  So it’s pretty similar to all of the other indexes.  I got a lot of people asking me this question on the weekend: “Why are you showing this index.” For me, in terms of trying to give you what I viewed as the best description, this was the easiest one.  It has these simple components in it.  The trade-weighted dollar is a little bit different from the one we use. I think the CAPE is a useful thing to have in here—it basically is looking at earnings over the past 10 years and seeing what valuation looks like. So in terms of the stories I’ve been hearing from market participants, who are very happy with where the stock market values and credits are but don’t completely understand what has happened, I thought this was the easiest way of giving you that viewpoint.  Financial conditions have eased a lot.  There was a tight relationship before the election between what was happening in financial conditions and what we saw in the expected forward timing of FOMC policy actions.That seems to have disappeared right now.  And we’ve definitely seen—even in a Wall Street Journal article, which was talking about the same thing—this somewhat conflicting signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their reasoning for using a particular index and discussing changes in financial conditions.


Passage number 50.
 MR. BULLARD.  I guess my issue with this is that we have models.  Our models have all of these things in them.  They have the federal funds rate, they have the 10-year yield, they have credit spreads, they have equity prices, and they have the value of the dollar.  So what are you getting in addition to having all of those variables in your model by combining them all into an index and then showing me that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his/her issue with a particular approach or method, but there is no disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 51.
 MR. POTTER. There are a lot of data I could show you, and I was trying to summarize the overall push of that data since liftoff and try to give you a feeling for what financial market participants are talking about.  And they are focused on the fact that the FOMC is tightening.  Now the Committee is on a path that looks like the path that was expected in 2016 at first but didn’t actually happen.  That tightening is happening at the same time that financial conditions are easing—not on this measure, but on all measures.  For example, the one the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago produces, which is a much more sophisticated one than this, in which you adjust for what’s happening in growth and other things—that’s also showing an easing of conditions.  So I don’t know whether it’s necessarily relevant to you in this room, but it’s something that financial market participants are spending a lot of time thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the views and concerns of financial market participants regarding the tightening of the FOMC and the easing of financial conditions.


Passage number 52.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay.  So what’s different in this era since the election is the prospect of corporate tax reform, which has partly driven equity prices higher, and that’s what’s having a major effect on this index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the prospect of corporate tax reform affecting equity prices.


Passage number 53.
 MR. POTTER. There’s that.  Earnings growth is very strong right now.  All the discussion of risks outside the United States as having come down is also there.  So there are a lot of arguments as to why valuations look good.  That doesn’t completely line up with where the 10-year yield is.  And that’s an interesting issue for the policymakers around this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different perspectives and observations about the state of earnings growth, discussion of risks outside the United States, valuations, and the 10-year yield. However, they do not express disagreement or engage in any argument.


Passage number 54.
 MR. BULLARD.  It has certainly been an interesting issue for this group to talk about, whether there are equity price bubbles and whether we should react to those kinds of bubbles.  This seems like a disguised way to talk about that same issue.  Why not just talk about the fact that equity prices are high and we’re wondering what to do about it, if anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the topic of equity price bubbles and whether action should be taken regarding them.


Passage number 55.
 MR. POTTER.  I think I did talk about the nominal high in the stock market and how low volatility is right now.  It’s something that we always grapple with—whether prices are reflecting fundamentals or exuberance.  And right now I think the perspective we’ve had on it in the past few months, informed by talking to market participants, is that there’s a little bit more weight on exuberance and complacency than you might feel comfortable with.  And I was trying to indicate that in an indirect way.  I could try and do it more directly next time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts on the stock market and expressing their belief that there may be more exuberance and complacency than is desirable. They mention potentially being more direct in the future, but this does not indicate disagreement with their current perspective.


Passage number 56.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  If not, we need a vote to ratify the domestic open market operations conducted since the May meeting.  Do I have a motion to approve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple exchange of information and request for a motion.


Passage number 57.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.3 All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Okay.  Thank you. Okay.  So then let’s turn to item 3 on our agenda, which is “System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy.” For the past couple of meetings, the Committee has been discussing how to begin the process of reducing the SOMA’s securities holdings.  Over the 3 The materials used by Chair Yellen are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).  intermeeting period, we made substantial further progress, and I believe that we now have a broad consensus on an approach. At this point, let me thank the staff for its usual stellar work in formulating and analyzing alternative approaches for the Committee’s consideration, and I would like to thank all of the participants for your contributions to the development of this plan. I think we’ve arrived at a very sound program.  The approach involving increasing monthly caps on redemptions above which principal payments received on holdings of Treasury and agency securities would be reinvested is consistent with the Committee’s intention to reduce the Federal Reserve’s security holdings in a gradual and predictable manner.  The approach will contribute to the attainment of the Committee’s longer-run objectives. As you know, the Committee would communicate the approach by approving and releasing an addendum to the Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans that would include additional bullets setting forth the approach to reinvestment that the Committee intends to follow.  The addendum would be released tomorrow at 2:00 p.m., along with the Committee’s monetary policy statement, and I plan to discuss it in the 2:30 press conference as well as in my monetary policy testimony in July.  Presumably, when the Committee determines that economic conditions appear appropriate, the Committee would announce the timing of the start of the program through the postmeeting monetary policy statement. Before we turn to adoption of the addendum, I would like to note first that the document to be considered for approval is identical to that distributed on June 2, except that a footnote has been added pointing readers both to the September 2014 Policy Normalization Principles and Plans and to an addendum adopted by the Committee in March 2015 that deals with control of the federal funds rate.  Because this program regarding reinvestment policy will presumably remain in place for quite some time, I think it’s appropriate that all Committee participants have the opportunity to express their views on the program in a show of hands.  But first, is there anybody who would like to comment further on the proposal.  [No response]  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 58.
 MS. MESTER.  Can I just ask one clarifying question about what you said.  Your Monetary Policy Report testimony will be before the July FOMC meeting, is that correct. CHAIR YELLEN. Yes, before the July FOMC meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question asked by Ms. Mester is simply seeking clarification on the timing of the Monetary Policy Report testimony. Chair Yellen confirms the correct timing without any disagreement.


Passage number 59.
 MS. MESTER.  All right.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  That’s right.  Okay. Seeing no further comments, now I’d like to ask all participants who agreed to the addendum to raise your hands.  [Show of hands]  Thank you.  Is there anyone who cannot agree to the addendum.  [No response]  Okay.  Then the addendum is approved, and we will release it tomorrow with the statement.  Thanks very much. Okay.  We’re making very good progress.  Let’s move along to our briefings on the economic and financial situation, and Stacey Tevlin is going to begin the series of briefings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants all agree to the addendum and there is no response indicating disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
 MR. KAPLAN.  I guess this question is for Stacey.  You were talking about the debate you were having about whether to lower the natural rate of unemployment, and I heard some arguments on both sides.  I guess I would ask you, what’s the strongest argument, in your view, for not moving the natural rate of unemployment lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I heard some arguments on both sides" indicates that there are differing opinions about whether to lower the natural rate of unemployment.


Passage number 61.
 MS. TEVLIN. If we’re looking at the data that we have received since December, which is kind of how I was framing this discussion, the strongest argument is that we don’t think that the weak inflation data we are seeing are going to persist.  If that were expected to be much more serious, and to last longer in terms of the monthly rates, I think we would take a closer look at that, as well.  I think that’s probably the strongest argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEVLIN is stating her opinion about the data and explaining her reasoning behind it.


Passage number 62.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple exchange of words between Mr. Kaplan and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 63.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Just a follow-up.  I appreciate the discussion that President Kaplan just asked about on the natural rate of unemployment.  What about the neutral real interest rate. Do you have a similar analysis in which you estimate where we are.  Because it strikes me that   we might be misunderstanding the natural rate of unemployment, but we may also be misunderstanding the neutral real interest rate.  I’m just curious if the staff has a view on that, and is that something you regularly update.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Kashkari inquiring about the neutral real interest rate and whether the staff regularly updates their view on it.


Passage number 64.
 MS. TEVLIN.  I’m going to have to turn to one of my colleagues for this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MS. Tevlin is simply stating that she needs help from one of her colleagues.


Passage number 65.
  I don’t think I have the— MR. KASHKARI.  It’s not in your presentation, so I’m sorry to put you on the spot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 66.
 MS. TEVLIN.  It’s totally fair to ask me questions that are not in my presentation, but that’s, unfortunately, not one that I have prepared an answer for.  But I can get back to you if we want to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that the speaker is willing to answer questions that are not part of their prepared presentation, but they do not have an answer prepared for the specific question mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 67.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Or if anyone—David or Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of "Or if anyone" suggests that there is a contrasting perspective or opposing viewpoint being presented.


Passage number 68.
 MR. WILCOX.  The reason it’s not in the presentation is because it’s a concept that doesn’t factor directly into the way that we put the forecast together.  Let’s see, what’s the best way to describe this.  It’s a sort of summary estimate that is backed out implicitly through a different set of machinery.  Is that a fair way to describe it.  But there’s no entry in our judgmental machinery in which we directly plug in an estimate of the natural rate of interest. Now, one way we would know that we are off track is if, for example, we’re roughly achieving our projected outcomes on the two legs of the dual mandate, but it’s taking a much more accommodative monetary policy to accomplish that objective.  That’s the kind of signal that, implicitly, would be a basis on which we could say, “Oh, it must be the case that the natural rate of interest is lower than what we had assumed in the projection.” CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 70.
 WILLIAMS.  Actually, I had a question for Stacey, but I’m going to pick up on this theme.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions having a question for Stacey and deciding to continue talking about a certain theme instead.


Passage number 71.
  Everything you said was right, up to the fact that you used—MR. WILCOX.  There may have been a sign error or two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that everything the other person said was correct, but suggests there might have been a small error.


Passage number 72.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided. Please provide the passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 73.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.  [Laughter] No, but you do actually use an estimate of r* in your Taylor rule, right.  Does that come into your policy assumption.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response involves laughter, indicating a light-hearted tone. The question seeks clarification about the use of an estimate of r* in the Taylor rule, without expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 74.
 MR. WILCOX.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Wilcox.


Passage number 75.
 We set, as a parameter, the long run— MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or debates. It simply states that the long run is being set as a parameter.


Passage number 76.
 WILLIAMS.  Right.  So if you were to reassess that, you would come up with a different path for the funds rate in your forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that if someone were to reassess their perspective, they would come up with a different path for the funds rate in their forecast.


Passage number 77.
 MR. WILCOX.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the statement "Mr. Wilcox. Correct" doesn't involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 78.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without having access to the actual text. Please provide the specific passage for analysis.


Passage number 79.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 80.
 MR. WILCOX.  And so one practical example of that is:  Stacey reported an alternative scenario in which we removed the fiscal stimulus that we assumed.  When we put that assumed fiscal stimulus in, we boosted our assumed number for the intercept in the policy rule by 25 basis points.  If we were to take the plug for fiscal stimulus out, we would take the long-run intercept down 25 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is describing a practical example and providing information about the impact of removing fiscal stimulus on the assumed number for the intercept in the policy rule. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 81.
 MR. EVANS.  Can I do a two-hander while we’re on this particular topic.  I guess I was interpreting President Kashkari’s question more like, okay, so you think about cases in which you might adjust down the natural rate of unemployment.  And if you want to appeal to a theory, you might look at some model or something about labor market dynamics as opposed to just the dynamics of how the data have rolled out.  You bring r* into this, and I start thinking, well, the growth characteristics are probably the first thing I’d start looking at—like growth theory, productivity being lower, if you were reducing the trend growth rate of the economy—those would be factors that would make me think about pushing r* down.  I don’t really have a good way to ask President Kashkari’s question, but it would be sort of like, is there anything about the   structure of the economy that makes you think about lowering the natural rate.  And would that be sympathetic toward lower growth and maybe lower r*.  I don’t know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their interpretation of President Kashkari's question and considering different factors that could potentially lead to a lower natural rate of unemployment.


Passage number 82.
 MS. TEVLIN.  Well, let me try to address your question about, are there things about the structure of the economy that would affect the natural rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEVLIN is simply trying to address a question about the structure of the economy and its effect on the natural rate.


Passage number 83.
  There are all kinds of structural changes that could be happening in— MR. EVANS.  And the fiscal things that you were pointing to as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement acknowledging the possibility of various structural changes and fiscal matters without indicating any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 84.
 MS. TEVLIN.  Yes, right.  So aging of the population is one of the things that we have built into our projection for the natural rate.  And, as you said, if the matching function has changed—we have seen a shift in in the Beveridge curve over a few decades, and that’s something that we have factored into our natural rate. In addition, you could think of a lot of other things that would be factored in there, and our labor economists have spent a lot of time looking at those.  The overall structural stuff is not just looking at whether the data is lining up exactly.  Because, with a pretty flat Phillips curve, it’s hard to pin down a natural rate if all you were looking at is just how the data came in. So we look at all of these different structural pieces in determining where the natural rate likely is.  And I just want to be clear that while we look at all of this stuff, we don’t have a very strong conviction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 85.
 MR. EVANS.  Sure.  Totally fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Sure. Totally fair" indicates agreement and support.


Passage number 86.
 MS. TEVLIN.  This is our best guess.  This is where we are for now, but it’s not something you can pin down very well.  And then the second part of your question—what was that again.  Or was that it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEVLIN is expressing uncertainty and acknowledging the limitations of the information provided. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the second part of the question.


Passage number 87.
 MR. EVANS.  That was pretty much it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Back to President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a continuation of a conversation between Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 88.
   MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation:
The passage doesn't present any conflicting ideas or opposing views. It appears to be a straightforward statement or abbreviation without any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 89.
 WILLIAMS.  I’ll go back to my question.  Stacey, going back to this issue of the alternative scenario and fiscal policy assumptions on exhibit 3 in your presentation—so I actually thought this was a tricky scenario to grapple with myself.  You have this roughly one-third probability, according to the prediction markets, that there are going to be these tax cuts— and a lot of uncertainty about this.  We’ve seen the markets move since November—the bond market come down, the dollar come down, and stock markets stay high.  So when you actually run this scenario, my understanding on the basis of reading the Tealbook and listening to your comments is that what’s really driving the scenario is not the change in the formulation of fiscal policy itself—the government, taxes, and things like that—but actually shifts in the sentiment and financial conditions as people decide that this is not going to happen.  But the probabilities have already come down a lot.  So how do you assess that.  You’re basically either in your baseline making an assumption that people are going to say, “Oh, it’s actually happening,” so they’re going to be more optimistic than they are today.  And in the alternative, you’re going to say that they’re going to be a little bit more pessimistic, but they’re already placing a low probability. That was a long sentence, and it went all over the place, but you’re kind of stuck.  Your baseline is a probabilistic thing, and this alternative is probabilistic.  So how did you come up with these particular numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is questioning and challenging Stacey's assumptions regarding the alternative scenario and fiscal policy. Williams raises concerns about the uncertain probabilities and the potential impact of market movements on the scenario. This disagreement is evident in the back-and-forth questioning and the speaker's skepticism towards the assessment made by Stacey.


Passage number 90.
 MS. TEVLIN.  So the baseline is a modal assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact or making a general observation without expressing any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 91.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 92.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes, I know.  The baseline is fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Williams is simply acknowledging that they are aware of something.


Passage number 93.
  But on this one, you’re taking it— MS. TEVLIN. We are basically assuming that a lot of the strong sentiment in both the households and the businesses in our baseline is not just due to this.  But we don’t know, right. So we did an experiment in which we said, okay, what if suddenly the fiscal stimulus was in there, and now it’s not going to be in there anymore.  What’s the effect on consumption going to  be.  And then the same thing for financial markets.  We basically did an experiment in which we hit the excess bond premium and said, “Let’s assume that there’s a lot more in there than we are currently assuming in the baseline, and it comes out.”  So we’re changing the story by going to the alternative scenario.  Does that make sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing an experiment they conducted to explore the potential effects of removing fiscal stimulus and excess bond premiums on consumption and financial markets.


Passage number 94.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MR stands for "multiple responders."


Passage number 95.
 WILLIAMS.  Would you say that the “delta” here is kind of an upper bound to the effects of this fiscal scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question posed by Williams is asking for clarification or confirmation, rather than expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 96.
 MS. TEVLIN.  I don’t know if it’s an upper bound, but it’s big, right. We specifically said we’re not just going to pull the fiscal policy effects out. We’re going to imagine a scenario in which we say, wow, we’ve really misinterpreted all of this strength in business sentiment, and we really misinterpreted all of the strength in the stock market, and it’s more tied to fiscal policy than we really understood.  And what if all of that came out. And that’s the scenario we ran, because that seems like a possible worry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical scenario and expressing her uncertainty about the potential impact of fiscal policy on business sentiment and the stock market.


Passage number 97.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not presented as a statement or argument that can be agreed or disagreed with. It is simply a mention of the abbreviation "MR," without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 98.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The exchange is polite and there is no indication of any opposing views.


Passage number 99.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question on some of the alternative scenarios.  I don’t know if that’s fair game, because I know you only did one of the alternative scenarios, not all of them.  But what struck me when I look out at 2019 was a number of them had unemployment rates that were quite low—3.1, 3.4, 3.5 percent—and yet the penalty for getting to very low unemployment rates seems quite low.  The highest inflation rate is 2.3 percent.  So one question is:  Do you think there’s a chance that as we get to very low unemployment rates that we haven’t seen in 50 years that the responsiveness of wages and prices might be a little different.  And the second part to that question would be, we don’t really talk about financial stability in the context of these scenarios, but sometimes if we don’t see problems in inflation when we have a very  overheated economy, we do see problems of other kinds, in asset prices.  And I wonder, as you think about an increasing number of scenarios that get us to very low historical unemployment rates, how do you think about the financial stability implications of these kinds of forecasts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 100.
 MS. TEVLIN. Yes, most of these do not have any nonlinear effects in terms of inflation once you get really low on the unemployment rate.  I think one of them actually does.  I think the stronger aggregate demand and higher inflation one does, but I might be misremembering that. And that’s the one that we get a little bit of inflation out of. We have looked at the issue of nonlinear effects in inflation, and that is something that we think is a possibility.  There are a lot of people on the staff working on that kind of research now, looking across different geographic regions to try to identify it, because it’s hard to identify.  And I think that we definitely consider that there is some risk of that—that if unemployment gets that low that there could lead to a nonlinear response of inflation.  That’s not our baseline right now, but I think that’s something that we consider a concern. In terms of the financial stability issues, it’s not something we usually take on very seriously here.  It’s something that’s difficult to model, and it’s difficult to feed through.  It’s not in any of these particular scenarios this time.  We have occasionally done it in the past, but our particular types of models don’t lend themselves to that kind of thing very well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is explaining her perspective on the topic and discussing ongoing research, but there is no clear disagreement or controversy present.


Passage number 101.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude.


Passage number 102.
 MR. WILCOX. You know, the inflation penalty isn’t very large, even in the scenario that Stacey cited—stronger aggregate demand and higher inflation.  That one does have a nonlinear Phillips curve.  And if you look on page 76, in the lower-left panel, we do manage to get inflation up to about 2.3 percent in the course of that scenario.  The inflation result that would   be ground out by our model would be even a smaller increment over the black line without that nonlinearity in the Phillips curve. CHAIR YELLEN.  Additional questions.  Let’s see, I think I first saw President Evans, and then we’ll go to President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of Mr. Wilcox providing information and President Yellen confirming the order of questions.


Passage number 103.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Both presentations had interesting discussions about wages and inflation developments, and U.S. productivity growth has been slower than everybody would have liked.  Then you talked about wage struggles and the international economy.  What got my attention was the long-term inflation expectations, and in the euro area I was trying to figure out if current inflation expectations are above that 2014 period that got Draghi’s attention in the ECB.  At any rate, in view of somewhat similar experiences, or at least influences, across all of the economies, is there a common theme or explanation that maybe we should be paying some attention to.  It makes me nervous.  I guess that’s my question. And President Rosengren asked if something was fair game. I have no idea if this is fair game.  I’m just asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing their concern about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 104.
  [Laughter] MR. WILCOX.  It’s all fair game.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.

The statement "It's all fair game" implies that there are no objections or disagreements regarding the subject being discussed. The use of "laughter" suggests that the statement is seen as light-hearted and devoid of conflict.


Passage number 105.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
 MR. ERCEG. In terms of the specific question about where inflation expectations are now in the euro area and Japan compared with several years ago, I think it’s quite striking that five-year, five-year-forwards, as shown in exhibit 6, are essentially where they were when President Draghi gave his Jackson Hole speech in August 2014, and then subsequently they engaged in their large-scale QE programs that fall and in the early part of 2015. And similarly with Japan, the five-year-forwards are about where they were when Abe started his program.  I think there are certainly commonalities.  The ECB, in particular, in its communications has stressed that wage growth has been very weak.  President Draghi mentioned that in his testimony before the European parliament in late May, for instance, and thought that it basically presented a substantial risk to the ECB being able to achieve its price-stability mandate.  They’ve increasingly emphasized how they see “shadow slack” playing out for wages.  They’ve consistently underpredicted how fast unemployment would fall, but still wages have come out very weak.  It’s been a continual surprise for them.  They think that the increase in employment that they have experienced has partly been part-time workers coming back and essentially some fall in labor force participation. So the unemployment rate masks some of the weakness in the labor market that might still persist and has accounted for weak nominal wage growth.  The Bank of England has similarly forecast for a long time a pickup in nominal wages that hasn’t materialized.  They’ve progressively reduced their estimate of the natural rate. In consequence, it now stands at 4½ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis on the topic of inflation expectations in the euro area and Japan, as well as discussing the weak wage growth in those regions.


Passage number 107.
 MR. KAMIN.  If I could add just—one issue that your question raises is, what is the factor that seems to be depressing wage growth in all of these countries.  You know, we don’t have a single answer. We have some possibilities.  But one of them is certainly the damage done to labor markets after the Great Recession, which hit all of these countries very hard, has had very lasting effects. A second possibility—and these are all interrelated—is that there’s considerable competition.  It’s been in train for many years from emerging market manufacturing that somehow has either been accentuated or become exposed by the effects of the Great Recession, and that’s also put its mark on labor markets. And then a final possibility is that we notice in all of these countries there’s been a step-down in labor productivity growth.  And that, too, is probably a factor contributing to the subdued nominal wage growth being seen throughout the advanced economies.  But exactly which of these explanations is the right one, and to what extent, is something on which we just don’t have a great handle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents multiple possibilities and acknowledges that they do not have a clear answer or strong understanding of which explanation is correct.


Passage number 108.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  Very helpful. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 109.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Stacey, your answer to the question about what’s going on with inflation was that it’s either noise in the data or we’ve got the wrong natural rate of unemployment.  And I’ve been concerned about this for the Committee that the natural rate of unemployment is kind of a free parameter, and if inflation is not behaving the way we expect, that we just move the natural rate of unemployment around.  It makes it seem like it’s not a falsifiable theory. Is there some point at which we would say, “Okay, this isn’t working, and maybe we should look at some other model, maybe consider a little bit of weight on other models of inflation”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard expresses concern about the natural rate of unemployment as a parameter for explaining inflation, suggesting that it is not a falsifiable theory. He questions the idea of constantly adjusting the natural rate of unemployment when inflation doesn't behave as expected and suggests considering alternative models.


Passage number 110.
 MS. TEVLIN. First, where you started was, you said that I gave those two different options, and I just want to make clear that there are other options as well. It’s not an either/or there.  There are other things that could be going on.  And particularly, we have assumptions about the trend rate of inflation and how we interpret inflation expectations. Now, that doesn’t really help you, because that’s like another free parameter, and you can imagine we could use the two of those to make our Phillips curve fit and continue to say that the Phillips curve is working because we’re moving two parameters around.  I think there is still evidence that the Phillips curve is working, it’s just very flat.  The noise that is in the inflation data unfortunately can swamp the signal given by the slack variable because the Phillips curve—particularly the price Phillips curve—is so flat. But it is still significant in a regression, and you also see stronger evidence of the Phillips curve with the wage data, and in cross-sectional data you see it as well. I would argue that we’re sticking with the Phillips curve for right now.  If there were a great other model, maybe we would throw it over, but I’m not aware of a model that we think is as sensible and fits the data as well as the Phillips curve right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are other options and factors to consider, but ultimately argues for sticking with the Phillips curve as the most sensible and fitting model based on available data.


Passage number 111.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, you could look at a leading theory, like New Keynesian–type Phillips curves in which the gap term would be the gap between the flexible price level of unemployment or the flexible price level of output and the actual level of output.  There are other things to look at that would stay consistent with the tradition of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different theories and suggesting that there are other factors to consider that align with the Committee's tradition.


Passage number 112.
 MS. TEVLIN.  I feel very confident that my colleagues have looked at all of those various different types of Phillips curves, but we can certainly evaluate them again. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there other questions.  [No response]  Seeing none, I suggest we take about a 20-minute break.  There’s coffee outside. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN. Okay.  I think we’re ready to begin our economic go-round, and let me call on President Rosengren to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEVLIN expresses confidence in her colleagues' work and suggests evaluating the various Phillips curves again if necessary. CHAIR YELLEN then suggests taking a break and later calls on President Rosengren to start the economic go-round.


Passage number 113.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The term "MR" does not provide enough context to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 114.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Eighth District economic activity continues to increase at a modest pace, and contacts continue to hold a generally optimistic outlook for the remainder of 2017.  However, the rise in business and consumer optimism witnessed in recent District surveys appears to have abated.  It now seems that much of that optimism was tied to election and post-election exuberance.  Actual sales data from business contacts in the District have been relatively weak, on balance, in recent months.  District labor market conditions continued to improve, with modest employment growth and moderate growth in wages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially states that economic activity in the Eighth District is increasing and contacts have an optimistic outlook. However, they then mention that the rise in optimism seen in surveys has diminished and actual sales data has been weak. This suggests that there may be disagreement between the initial positive outlook and the more skeptical view based on sales data.


Passage number 115.
  Themost recent reading on the District unemployment rate measured as a weighted average of District MSAs is 4.2 percent. Nationally, I continue to believe that real GDP growth in the first half of 2017 will be about 2 percent at an annual rate, virtually identical to the Q4/Q4 real GDP growth rate for both 2015 and 2016.  I see little reason to believe that there are any remaining cyclical dynamics in the U.S. economy with respect to real GDP growth that would make me think that output was growing at a pace meaningfully above the trend pace. I think the most reasonable conclusion on which to base U.S. monetary policy is that the U.S. economy has simply converged on a 2 percent growth regime that shall now remain in place until a major unanticipated shock occurs.  This conclusion is bolstered by relatively weak productivity growth in recent years and also by demographic factors. National labor markets may appear to be stronger, but the growth rate of payroll employment measured from one year earlier peaked in early 2015 at 2.3 percent and has been declining ever since.  It is currently about 1.6 percent.  The growth in the labor input measured by total hours is increasing at about this pace as well. One conclusion I draw is that the labor input is growing at a pace roughly consistent with 2 percent real GDP growth, if we assume a ½ percent annual labor productivity growth rate, which is what it has been over the past several years.  Accordingly, I am hesitant to interpret recent labor market data as indicating that the economy is growing faster than it ordinarily would at the trend pace. The unemployment rate has fallen to 4.3 percent nationally.  I do not regard this as a harbinger of higher inflation ahead.  The most recent research of which I am aware suggests that any linkage between relatively low unemployment and inflation is empirically very minor inrecent years.  Even if unemployment went to the mid 3 percent range, it would only mean adding a tenth or two to the U.S. inflation rate, according to the empirical estimates.  In addition, we remain below our inflation target as of today, so some movement toward our inflation target would be appropriate. The financial market reaction to our March rate increase has been characterized by lower long-term yields and lower inflation expectations.  The 10-year nominal yield has declined on the order of 40 basis points.  I take the message from the bond market to be an indication that there are few inflation worries, nor are there many worries that the U.S. economy is about to boom.  Inflation expectations measured from the TIPS market, which were already arguably soft, have drifted lower.  These developments have made me worry that the Committee’s plan for policy rate normalization may be overly aggressive relative to incoming macroeconomic data. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bostic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there are several statements made, there is no direct disagreement or contention presented in the passage. The speaker presents their analysis and observations without contradicting or challenging any other viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
 MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Reports from contacts in the Sixth District suggested that business activity is expected to continue at a moderate pace.  This is consistent with our assessment that the tepid spending numbers we saw in the first quarter were likely an aberration.  This assessment notwithstanding, feedback from the District suggested that there were some growing clouds on the horizon.  Sentiment from our contacts in the auto industry was particularly dour.  Auto sales have slowed recently, and most of our contacts do not expect that trend to reverse anytime soon. District automakers reported a material decrease in production, citing high and rising inventory levels.  At least one large District manufacturer has begun to cut staffing levels, and other contacts suggested that they may follow suit.   One director representing a large nationally based retail auto organization cited three indicators of concern regarding the health of the new-autos market.  Incentives on new vehicles are very high.  Leasing rates, as a fraction of sales, are much higher than normal—30 percent versus the typical 20 percent.  And those leases are apparently exclusively financed by the manufacturers themselves.  As the director suggested, banks wouldn’t touch them.  Combining this with the high inventory levels, the view is that further production cuts are likely, perhaps by the end of the year. Similarly, the recent turnaround in business fixed investment over the past two quarters has been encouraging.  However, a sizable share of that turnaround in the first quarter was tied to a rebound in the oil and gas sector, and our industry contacts suggested that some of that increased activity was due to the need for companies to punch a hole in order to avoid loss of leased drilling rights.  The inference was that we shouldn’t expect continued strength in the sector absent an unexpected rise in oil prices. As I understand it, one theme around this table for the past few rounds has been the apparent disconnect between sentiment, sometimes referred to as soft data, and behavior, which is tied to hard data.  To that end, I and my staff asked contacts and directors about their current level of optimism and, more importantly, how business decisions are being affected by any changes in sentiment.  The response was that businesses are still somewhat optimistic with regard to the prospects for expansionary fiscal and government policies, but that the euphoria has died down as skepticism has grown about the prospects for legislative action. I was particularly interested in whether continued waning of enthusiasm would trigger a hard data response, implying that the hard–soft data disconnect is asymmetric.  I couldn’t find one director or report of a firm actually changing their current business or investment plans.  Mydirectors argued that deteriorating sentiment is not likely to have too much of a downside consequence, in large part because businesses have yet to incorporate changes in government policy into their business plans in the first place.  I gather that this has been the pattern in anecdotal reports since the November election. I have to confess that I am a bit less sanguine about the potential for a negative shock.  There is considerable evidence that people have a heightened sensitivity to potential negative outcomes, and I can envision a scenario similar to the Tealbook’s “Broad Policy Disappointment” scenario should the fiscal and regulatory changes that businesses are hoping for not come to pass.  As an aside, I do think there is also some value in distinguishing between fiscal changes and other regulatory changes that might take place.  I think that the probability of those is not the same, so we might incorporate that into our models. Following my predecessors in Atlanta, I have not incorporated any material changes in fiscal or other government policies into my forecast.  My growth forecast implies roughly 2 percent growth throughout the forecast horizon. Although there remains some, albeit diminishing, upside risk associated with the possibility of expansionary fiscal and regulatory policies, I do consider the Tealbook’s “Broad Policy Disappointment” scenario to be a material countervailing downside risk. On prices, while I expect inflation to converge to the Committee’s target by the end of next year, the recent weakness in the retail price data is concerning.  As I see it, it is possible to tie some of the recent softness to the outsized price declines in a few components, as was noted by Stacey earlier, but not all of the softness, I believe, can be attributed to this. With resource gaps that appear to be closed or closing, tightening labor markets, and a recent reversal in import prices, long-run inflation expectations should be emerging as the dominant determinant of inflation dynamics. For the time being, I accept that they are well anchored at the Committee’s 2 percent objective.  The readings received from the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s business inflation expectation survey and market-based expectations calculations support this conclusion. However, with five straight years of core inflation underperforming the target and headline PCE inflation averaging just 1.6 percent over the balance of the recovery, I worry about the possibility of erosion in our nominal anchor. Nonetheless, while I am concerned, I am maintaining the view that the risks to the inflation outlook are roughly balanced.  However, an accumulation of soft reports—and I’m hoping we don’t see a continuation tomorrow with the May CPI release—would lead me to reconsider my priors. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

There is disagreement or contention in the passage regarding the outlook for business activity and the auto industry. While the overall assessment is that business activity is expected to continue at a moderate pace, there is also mention of growing clouds on the horizon, particularly in the auto industry. Contacts in the auto industry have expressed dour sentiment, with slowing sales, high inventory levels, and production cuts. This suggests a disagreement or contention about the future prospects of the auto industry.


Passage number 117.
 MR. MULLINIX.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My outlook for economic activity has not materially changed since our previous meeting and is similar to the outlook presented by the staff.  I expect GDP to continue to grow at roughly 2 percent per year, about the same rate we have seen in recent years.  This growth rate is quite a bit lower than the average growth rate for the U.S. economy in the years prior to the 2007 recession, but it is not much higher than the underlying trend determined by productivity and labor force growth.  For now I am looking through the weak March reading for inflation, and I continue to view inflation as not being too far from our 2 percent inflation target. For me, the most important characteristic of the economy is that labor markets are tight. This assessment is supported by almost all available indicators.  Unemployment is well below estimates of its natural rate. Labor force participation rates are above estimates of their long-run trend, and we continue to hear reports from employers in our District that job openings are hard to fill. So why then are wages not increasing at a faster rate.  Well, I agree with the staff that compensation growth numbers between 2½ and 3½ percent are actually consistent with the tight labor market, as labor productivity growth is relatively low and inflation expectations are stable. With employment growth continuing to run above growth in the working-age population, I expect that labor markets will tighten even more. For real GDP growth, weak business fixed investment in 2016 had been a cause for concern, although that concern was tempered by strong consumption growth.  The fact that   strong business fixed investment compensated for the apparent temporary weakness in consumption in the first quarter of this year looks like a nice exchange. I am, like President Bostic, not so sure how much signal we should take from the recovery of business fixed investment, but for a different reason.  When we asked contacts in our region about their capital spending plans and how these plans might be affected by the evolving news about tax reform, we received two very different kinds of responses.  Most small firms said that their cap-ex plans are set and do not depend on political news, but our contacts among large corporations stated that they had curtailed their capital spending plans for next year in part because of uncertainty about tax policy.  As an aside, I have not included fiscal policy assumptions in my forecast. Otherwise, the news from our District is positive.  Our service survey indicated robust activity in May, with strong increases in revenues and hiring.  And while our manufacturing survey was somewhat weaker, this followed four months of very strong readings. For the labor market, we continue to hear concerns regarding labor availability and, in some cases, firms having to increase salaries or benefits to attract or keep workers.  For example, a steel manufacturer reported 3 percent wage increases for most employees and quarterly bonuses and additional PTO days to line workers in order to keep them from moving.  Other contacts also reported that they were responding to increased labor mobility and the difficulty of finding workers by giving bigger and more frequent bonuses, more training opportunities, and reimbursement for relocation or even student loan expenditures or debt.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a presentation of the speaker's outlook and assessment of the economy.


Passage number 118.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My directors and other contacts continue to be upbeat about business conditions, pretty much as they were in May.  Many industries reported improvements in activity, and contacts with international operations were similarly positive about business worldwide. In the auto sector, whose sales have fallen off their peaks, our contacts still characterize the business environment as “fairly good.” Automakers believe sales have leveled out and that they will be able to keep inventories under control with the modest production declines that are scheduled for the third quarter, and I heard many similar comments, as President Bostic just reported. I continue to hear positive reports from several manufacturers who sell equipment and materials to the energy sector, but not from domestic steel makers.  Interestingly, they were grousing that imported steel products were being used to meet much of their increased demand for OCTG and pipe products—that’s “oil country tubular goods,” and the United States has become an oil country in that characterization. Regarding the labor market, what contact report would be complete without the obligatory recitation that finding qualified workers continues to be difficult. Despite this long-running labor shortage saga, I still hear only limited stories about wage gains running above  modest rates.  Even the financial market contacts we talked to each round drew attention to the lack of wage increases or other inflationary pressure.  For example, one large private equity firm opened their commentary with the observation that none of their portfolio companies—that’s the companies that they owned—were experiencing wage pressures, and this was unprompted. For the national outlook, we made only minor changes to the growth projection this round.  The economy appears to be bouncing back from the first-quarter lull pretty much as expected.  Even though job gains have slowed some, they are still running higher than our estimate of the underlying trend, which we think is in the 70,000 to 100,000 range, and most other indicators are also pointing to a healthy labor market. Like the Tealbook, we were surprised by the sharp drop in the unemployment rate in April and May, and we, too, have revised down our path a couple of tenths throughout the projection period.  However, I remain uneasy about the outlook for inflation.  At the last round, I was willing to write off the low March number as an aberration.  But I have to say that April didn’t provide much relief.  Year-over-year core inflation has retreated to 1.5 percent.  This is disconcerting.  We’ll see tomorrow morning if the May CPI brings better news—I guess we all said this, didn’t we. In any event, like the Tealbook, we marked our projection for inflation this year down to 1.6 percent.  Forecasts beyond 2017 were more difficult to think through.  Even with the flat Phillips curve, the very low unemployment rate in this forecast ought to provide stimulus to inflation, but wages don’t seem to be showing much evidence of this yet.  Furthermore, the inflation expectations that anchor our projections remain too low, and I agree with Governor Brainard’s comments on this point. To reach our objective, we are going to have to see wages and inflation move up soon.  Simply reiterating the Committee’s expectations of higher inflationover the medium term is unlikely to generate higher private-sector inflation expectations and inflation outcomes. Putting this all together, and in contrast to the Tealbook, we lowered our inflation projections for 2018 and 2019 by one-tenth, and we now just reach 1.9 percent at the end of the projection period.  In my view, accommodative policy still has a decent amount of work to do to achieve our symmetric inflation objective.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear signs of contention or disagreement. It primarily provides an overview of various sectors and their current conditions.


Passage number 119.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the intermeeting period, payroll employment growth has turned negative in our region.  However, other regional labor market indicators appear quite healthy, which leads me and the staff to discount the payroll numbers to some extent.  And most other economic indicators point to continued modest expansion.  For example, household employment has been growing robustly, and the discrepancy between the two series is at or near historic highs. Over the three months ending in April, employment grew by 3 percent at an annualized rate according to the household survey, while it declined by 2.2 percent in the establishment survey.  With unemployment insurance claims remaining at relatively low levels and with survey evidence indicating that firms in my District are hiring, it appears that our labor market is most likely growing at a modest clip. That said, the weakest sectors appear to be retail, arts and entertainment, and construction, in which District activity lags the nation. Geographically, the Philadelphia suburbs appear to be exerting the largest drag. Our manufacturing index bounced back strongly in May to 38.8, its second-highest reading in the history of the series, but dropped to 27.6 in the June report to be released on  Thursday.  This is still significantly above its pre-recessionary average. Both current and future prices received remain above their pre-recessionary averages as well. In the service sector, our survey’s readings were very close to their non-recessionary averages, and both manufacturers and nonmanufacturers remain optimistic.  Additionally, median one-year-ahead inflation expectations remained stable at 2 percent for manufacturers and 3 percent for participants in our service sector. The housing sector remains less robust than the nation’s.  Although it suffered a notable drop in April, the longer-run picture shows a sector whose activity is relatively flat. So although there are a few pockets in which we are seeing a bit of weakness that bears watching, on the whole our regional outlook is relatively healthy, and I continue to look for continued modest growth in the future. Regarding the nation, my economic outlook is little changed from that of my previous projection.  I expect economic activity to evolve a bit more strongly than the staff does, and my view of appropriate policy is a bit more accommodative than the Tealbook baseline.  Incoming data support the notion that first-quarter weakness will be transitory and that some of that weakness was due to the recurrent problems in seasonal adjustment, as others have mentioned. In addition, the latest quarterly survey suggests yet another slight upward revision to first-quarter real GDP growth.  I am anticipating growth of around 2.2 percent this year, with growth of 2.1 percent in 2018 and ’19 before returning to trend, which I consider to be roughly 2 percent.  Due to a large amount of uncertainty, I continue not to factor in any prospective changes in fiscal policy or other related policies, such as immigration or trade. With respect to unemployment, I project an unemployment rate falling to 4.2 percent by year’s end and then reaching a low of 4 percent in 2018 before gradually rising.  However, I  project that the unemployment rate will remain below its natural rate by the end of my forecast horizon.  On the inflation front, I, like many others, have downgraded my forecast regarding both headline and core PCE inflation rates this year, to 1.6 percent and 1.8 percent, respectively.  I then see both series returning to target. Finally, with respect to monetary policy, I anticipate that it will be appropriate for us to raise rates at this and one other meeting this year and to follow a gradual path that slightly overshoots the neutral rate of 3 percent by the end of 2019.  My somewhat more accommodative path, at least compared with the Tealbook, is informed by taking into account some downside risks to the neutral real rate and acknowledging, like others have, that inflation has remained stubbornly below target.  My very gradual upward path for the funds rate reflects those concerns. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 120.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Since the last SEP round in March, growth has continued at a moderate pace.  While job growth has slowed, the unemployment rate has fallen faster than anticipated, but inflation has made less progress than expected toward 2 percent. Overall, the outlook for me remains about the same:  moderate but above-trend growth of about 2 percent, with further declines in the unemployment rate and, thus, tightening resource constraints.  On this path, inflation should resume its gradual upward rise to 2 percent, and I see the risks to this forecast as roughly balanced. Payroll employment growth has been slowing for some time.  In May 2015, employment was rising about 250,000 payroll jobs per month.  A year ago it was increasing 200,000 per month, and now it’s growing at about 150,000 per month, still easily fast enough to produce a falling unemployment rate unless the participation rate moves up from its recent levels, which would be a most welcome development were it to occur. I see the unemployment rate declining a bit over the rest of the year and remaining below the natural rate for some time.  Although I recognize there are risks to that, on balance, I think that the potential benefits are higher, including higher wages, perhaps increased participation, and perhaps increased investment as the relative price of labor rises. Aggregate demand, despite the weak first-quarter reading, has not slowed, and I see growth this year of 2 percent, a bit below the Tealbook estimate. Looking forward, I see demand continuing to expand at a 2 percent pace.  There are some upside risks, including stronger foreign real GDP growth and real, if diminishing, prospects for fiscal expansion.  In addition, financial conditions have become more accommodative since late last year, with higher stock prices and lower long-term rates despite our rate increases. Inflation has surprised to the downside over the past 2 months, with 12-month core dropping from 1.8 percent in January to 1.5 percent today.  While a good part of the weakness may be due to transitory factors, the softer readings could also be seen to suggest that a portion of the step-up in inflation last year was noise from idiosyncratic market factors. Wage data have softened a bit this year as well, with gains in average hourly earnings looking back a bit.  So my “takeaway” is that wage and price pressures are a little less than I had thought, which has implications for the level of the natural rate of unemployment. The flatness of the Phillips curve implies that small changes in underlying inflation pressures can imply large changes to the assessment of the unemployment gap and thus the natural rate.  And I did reduce my estimate of the natural rate down to 4.5 percent, effectively assigning a tiny portion of the downward revision of my inflation projection to a reassessment of slack, although what I take away from Stacey’s presentation and other things is that it’s not wise to have a lot of conviction about that. As I will discuss tomorrow, as long as growth remains solid and the labor market continues on a healthy path, I would be reluctant to see the recent inflation readings we have seen so far as having important implications for the path of policy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement. Instead, it provides an analysis of various economic factors and trends.


Passage number 121.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Tenth District economy has expanded at a moderate pace since the previous meeting, and labor markets have tightened further. Unemployment rates are below the national average in each of our states, with the exception of New Mexico.  Wage pressures have risen in most industries this year following sluggish wage gains over the past two years. Our business contacts remain optimistic, even as their uncertainty has grown, related to expectations for fiscal policy changes. Across key sectors, District energy and manufacturing activity continues to rebound from declines in recent years.  On the other hand, state and local government budget cuts are an increasing drag to growth, uncertainty persists in the energy sector, and farm incomes remain depressed. From our energy contacts, considerable hedging activity likely ensures further near-term drilling expansion, pushing production higher and supporting structures investment.  Beyond 2017, however, the increase in domestic production could create a more challenging price environment for oil producers, especially if OPEC’s production cuts fail to offset U.S. production or if cartel compliance erodes, either of which may result in prices falling below breakeven levels. Finally, the farm economy remains under stress, as farm incomes continue to decline from a year ago.  However, the effect on farmland values has varied.  For areas with the most productive cropland, farmland values have fallen less than 5 percent, while areas with less productive ground have seen declines of about 30 percent from peak values in 2013. My outlook for the national economy is little changed since the March SEP, and it does not include fiscal stimulus assumptions.  I expect growth to bounce back in the second quarter before resuming a moderate pace in the second half of the year, with consumption continuing to be the main driver of growth and investment increasing its contribution. One of our District contacts reported that rail shipment of automobiles had significantly slowed, and he concluded that the automobile party is over, but a few are still sipping their drinks.  With more commentary from our business contacts about difficulty hiring and wage pressures, I have interpreted the May jobs number as a natural and expected slowing in job growth, reflecting a tight labor market. The Kansas City Fed’s Labor Market Conditions Indicators shows that the labor market continued to tighten through the first half of this year.  Using a wide range of some 24 labor market variables, this measure of the level of activity in the labor market has increased over the past 12 months at the same rate as the past two years. In addition, this indicator of momentum remains well above its historical average, pointing to further improvement in labor markets in the period ahead. While labor market conditions have improved, most measures of nominal wage growth have increased only modestly over the past year.  In order to examine this issue, my staff used a wage Phillips curve model that relates the quits rate to job switchers’ and job stayers’ wage growth.  The analysis suggests that wage growth is in line with the current level of the quits rate, which has been flat over the past year. Looking forward, as labor markets tighten and high-quality workers become increasingly scarce, firms will turn to poaching quality workers from their competitors, and this should contribute to a boost in the quits rate.  Reports received from my business contacts suggest that this is becoming more prevalent.  To the extent this dynamic continues, my staff’s analysis concludes that a persistent rise in the quits rate of even a few tenths would lead wage growth for both job switchers and job stayers to rise significantly over the subsequent year. Financial conditions also remain supportive of growth.  The modest reduction in monetary accommodation over the past 18 months appears to have had a minimal effect.  As others have noted, despite three increases in the funds rate and a fourth fully priced in at this meeting, broad financial conditions have eased since December 2015.  In particular, term premium estimates have declined, on net, and corporate bond spreads have narrowed. Finally, my forecast for inflation is little changed over the medium term. With a moderate real growth forecast, tightening labor markets, rising core import prices, and easy financial conditions, I do not view the soft readings in recent PCE reports as portending a loss of inflation momentum. Recent data will certainly continue to hold down PCE inflation on a year-over-year basis.  But I anticipate a resumption of nearly 2 percent inflation on a monthly basis in the near term. Recent readings on core inflation have been unusually volatile.  For example, in March, the difference between the month-over-month core PCE inflation rate and the Federal Reserve Bank   of Dallas trimmed mean PCE inflation rate was the largest, other than in recession periods, in nearly 20 years. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are largely stable during this intermeeting period.  And while inflation expectations remain near historical lows, according to the University of Michigan Survey of Households, this outcome does not appear to signal a loss of confidence in achieving our price stability objective. According to work by my staff, this decline in recent years reflects a drop in the number of households having high inflation expectations along with an increase in the number of households who have low inflation expectations.  This shift, however, is not coupled by greater dissatisfaction for policymakers’ handling of unemployment and inflation. In fact, households who have inflation expectations below 2 percent give policymakers a higher approval rating than those having inflation expectations above 2 percent.  If households who have low inflation expectations perceive recent inflation outcomes as inconsistent with the Committee’s longer-run inflation objective, then these households might arguably give policymakers low marks on their handling of the economy.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit or direct disagreement or contention. Rather, it provides an overview of various economic indicators and perspectives from different business contacts.


Passage number 122.
 MR. KAPLAN.  I’m glad you’re talking about this today, because there’s a dilemma: tight labor market, very accommodative financial conditions, equity investors, volatility is very low.  On the other hand, fixed-income investors I talk to and you talk to are very concerned, very worried, very pessimistic, very willing to buy insurance.  And the 10-year Treasury rate being at 220 basis points does bother me significantly, because it may be extraneous factors—the trick is, I know the market is telling us something, I’m just trying to figure out what it’s telling us. And maybe as we start unwinding our balance sheet and other things happen, we’ll see this back up.  But I do think, if the July meeting is a quiet time, I would actually love—maybe in conjunction with the Open Market Desk—to go a little bit deeper into some of the thinking of fixed-income investors out there and a little bit more in depth about this 10-year issue. With the federal funds rate at 100, 125 basis points—it doesn’t bother me that much. At 125, 150, it bothers me a little bit more. At 150, 175, I start to think, if the 10-year doesn’t back up, we’re   getting in a very awkward situation that’s not very far away. So if we have a little spare time in July, I’d love to dig a little deeper and talk about this more. CHAIR YELLEN.  Good suggestion.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and suggesting further discussion on the topic. There is no opposition or contradiction from the other person in the conversation.


Passage number 123.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question.  I get this story about the people with these big portfolios, and they are doing this to buy insurance.  But there’s a lot of speculative capital, too, whose managers aren’t thinking about a big portfolio.  They are just thinking about how to make money.  Why doesn’t someone come in on the other side that’s not managing money for an institutional type of fund and just say, “This is a surprise”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and questioning why someone who is not managing money for an institutional fund doesn't take advantage of the surprise situation.


Passage number 124.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Sadly, I don’t have the golden investment strategy to offer here.  Returning to this theme, in recent conversations, I was struck by the commentary among these types of investors we were talking to in terms of the absence, really, of much upside risk to inflation.  The tenor there was, you will have a very difficult time returning inflation to 2 percent.  Nobody in this group wanted to take the other side of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply saying that they do not have an investment strategy to offer and mentions the lack of upside risk to inflation according to conversations they have had with investors. There is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 125.
  On the other hand— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just think there’s a lot of speculative capital, that’s basically just very opportunistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It expresses a personal opinion about the presence of speculative capital being opportunistic.


Passage number 126.
 MR. LAUBACH. You have obviously, a buoyant stock market, so it’s a little hard to reconcile all of these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 127.
 MR. POTTER. The worst-case scenario is, all the people who bet on the higher federal funds rate for all those years, when they go to their boss and say, “I want to make that bet again,” they say, “You can’t do it because you’ve perpetually lost money for the last five or six years.  So we’re not going to let you do it.” That’s scary, because we could get to a point at which their boss suddenly says to them, “Oh, yes, you should be putting this bet on.  You should have come to me.”  And it would look like 2013, when we saw that big change.  If people were convinced   rates were going to be low, then within a few weeks they thought they’re going to be high, then you get this massive uptick.  I think Governor Fischer spoke about this six or seven weeks ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 128.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think partly what’s going on is, we thought we were going to raise rates faster and we didn’t, so that just sort of got embodied in market expectations. Now, maybe this year we’ll start to undo that, but I’m really quite worried that there is going to be a very sharp snapback at some point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is an expression of the speaker's personal thoughts and concerns.


Passage number 129.
 MR. FISCHER.  And what conclusion do you draw from that for policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states a question asked by Mr. Fischer and does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 130.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think we have to keep stressing that we are pretty confident that we are going to do quite a bit more.  The bigger the gap between where we think we’re going and where the market thinks we’re going, that is sort of a potential vulnerability. We’d like to have a smooth ride rather than a bumpy ride.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It expresses a personal opinion or desired outcome related to future performance, without opposing or contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 131.
 MR. POTTER.  The other issue is just where rates are in the rest of the world.  So we’ll constantly hear that the U.S. 10-year can’t get much higher than this unless we see it higher elsewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the current rates in the rest of the world. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 132.
 MR. KAPLAN. That makes sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing agreement.


Passage number 133.
 MR. POTTER.  The thing that’s confusing is, the dollar has sort of moved in the opposite direction for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any specific contention or disagreement. It is simply introducing a topic and expressing a confusion or curiousness about the situation.


Passage number 134.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  You could tell that story coherently if money flowed into the 10-year, which then pushed the dollar up, which then slowed down the U.S. economy, which then helped hold down long-term credit yields.  But that is actually not what we are seeing right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating that the current situation does not align with the hypothetical story presented.


Passage number 135.
 MS. BRAINARD. I think, in addition to the international environment, which is weighing on the long end of the curve, all of the earlier movement that we saw seemed to be very much associated with the election and expectations of this.  So you really had two things pushing down the long end in the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides an analysis of the factors influencing the long end of the curve in a straightforward manner.


Passage number 136.
 MR. POTTER.  But we couldn’t explain the 10-year when it was at 1.6 percent.  We can’t explain it at 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker was unable to explain something in the past and still cannot explain it in the present.


Passage number 137.
2, so— MS. BRAINARD.  No.  But I think you can understand why, at the same time as we’re talking about balance sheet roll-off, the markets are moving in the other direction, because there are these additional factors that seem to be very powerful. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only explains that the markets are moving in the opposite direction due to additional powerful factors.


Passage number 138.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Wouldn’t all this discussion imply an earlier start to balance sheet normalization if you’re worried about why the 10-year is so low.  One of the answers is that during normal times when we’re raising the short-term rate, we don’t have a big balance sheet.  This time around we have a big balance sheet, so I think it’s partly a policy choice that we have made about starting at the short end and not moving the long end until this point in the cycle.  So we have a yield-curve-flattening strategy.  We not usually suppressing the long end of the yield curve with a big balance sheet. That is one of the differences this time. CHAIR YELLEN.  Neel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing his opinion and discussing the reasons behind the current strategy of the Federal Reserve. Chair Yellen does not argue or disagree with his points.


Passage number 139.
 MR. KASHKARI.  One other interpretation, though, is, maybe we should wait to see inflation actually move in the right direction before we act.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is merely presenting a different interpretation or viewpoint without stating it is wrong or arguing against it.


Passage number 140.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Take it outside.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  We’ll continue this discussion tomorrow, 9 o’clock. [Meeting recessed] June 14 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  We’re going to start off this morning by asking David to discuss this morning’s releases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only includes statements about taking a discussion outside, laughter, and scheduling a meeting for the next day.


Passage number 141.
 MR. WILCOX.7  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This was another weaker release than we had expected.  There is a summary table that provides results to you to one digit.  Because this is an issue of some precision, I’m going to give you some figures to two digits.  Top-line CPI prices declined 13 basis points.  We had been expecting a decline of 6 basis points—so a difference of 7 basis points on the top-line CPI. Of greater concern, though, is the fact that the core CPI index increased 6 basis points, whereas we had expected an increase of 18 basis points—so a difference in core CPI space of 12 basis points. On preliminary inspection, three categories stand out as especially weak.  Apparel prices declined for a third month.  They were down 0.8 percent, not at an annual rate, in May. Medical services prices also were weaker than we had expected.  That’s a category that we focus on because medical services prices figure into the CPI.  But in constructing the PCE price index, the BEA does not port over medical services prices from the CPI into the PCE index.  Instead, they use components of the PPI in constructing the PCE price index, and medical services prices were not as weak in the PPI as they were in the CPI. Yesterday we got the PPI, and we were not surprised by the medical services prices. Airfares declined in both the PPI and the CPI.  They were weaker than we had expected, but they were essentially equally weak in both the PPI and CPI relative to our expectations. I don’t have a good translation yet because we’re having some mechanical difficulties getting the data loaded into the system.  I’m hoping and expecting to have that in about 10 or 20 7 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). minutes. All told, as I mentioned, there’s a surprise of about 12 basis points on core CPI prices.  Our rough guesstimate—and I’d like to have the ability to refine this later on this morning—is that the surprise in terms of the PCE price index will be about two-thirds of that. So, for purposes of discussion right now, let’s call it an 8 basis point surprise weaker on the core PCE price index.  What that means is an increase in May in core PCE prices of about 8 basis points rather than the 15 or 16 that we had been projecting in the Tealbook. An obvious next question is, what are some hypotheses about the economic mechanism that could be at work here.  There are a variety of possibilities.  One is that it could be that there’s a little more slack in the economy—as Stacey indicated in her discussion yesterday, particularly, I believe, in response to a question from President Kaplan.  The Phillips curve is flat enough that even if we were to mark down our assumption about the natural rate of unemployment by a couple of tenths, that would account for essentially nothing of the surprise this morning in the CPI. I think likely more empirically important is some possibility that maybe there’s something going on with regard to the pass-through of import prices into domestic consumer prices—that the timing or magnitude of that pass-through may be different than what we had assumed. We’ve seen a turnaround in import prices this year over last year.  Last year, in 2016, import prices declined.  This year, they’re up—not robustly, but they’re in positive territory.  So we’ve been expecting some greater support for core goods prices domestically.  But, nonetheless, I think that’s an area that we’ll be having a close look at. There could be something about the pass-through of the enormous energy price declines into core prices that we don’t have right.  Another possibility that isn’t very satisfying but that I think needs to be taken seriously is, there is random variation even ex post.  The residual in anyeconometric equation for inflation accounts for a large amount of the total variation.  That said, this is another in a sequence of generally downward misses. We’ve been, in some sense, reserved in our expectations about how quickly inflation was going to come up, and, even so, we have tended to be wrong to the downside.  So I think, in light of this release, I’m less confident in asserting that these are transitory factors with a lot of crispness, and I think we have to be open to the possibility that there’s something a little more going on here that we don’t understand. CHAIR YELLEN.  Did you want to also comment on retail sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a description and analysis of economic data.


Passage number 142.
 MR. WILCOX.  Oh, the retail sales release.  Again, I have a very preliminary translation of that, and I have nothing that incorporates the price news into its implications for real spending, because that will be the combination of the two releases that we received this morning. Nominal sales were pretty close to our expectations.  The components that the BEA uses to construct real PCE spending were revised up one-tenth in March and two-tenths in April. They were three-tenths weaker in growth rate terms in May than what we had expected.  The pretty rough translation that I had the opportunity to do thus far suggests that in nominal terms— again, not taking account of the price news—this would imply just a very marginal upward revision to our projection for second-quarter spending and a very equally marginal downward revision to real spending in the third quarter. I’m guessing that the weaker-than-expected price news will probably—logically, it’s got to offset some of that, basically on consumer spending. For purposes of the accuracy that I can bring to the table this morning right now, I’d say it’s likely, I’m guessing, about a wash. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for David.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and discussing their initial analysis of the retail sales release.


Passage number 143.
 MR. KAPLAN.  I guess I might ask one, but it’s not really a question.  There are two big trends going on globally that we’ve talked about.  One is technology-enabled disruption, which is  clearly affecting apparel, but it’s affecting lots of industries and limiting pricing power.  And then the other big trend is global overcapacity, particularly because of the growth in China.  You have a tight labor market domestically.  Inflation may be more affected by global factors even with a tight domestic labor market. I just wonder how you factor in those two trends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating two trends and wondering how they are factored in.


Passage number 144.
 MR. WILCOX. Let me take the import competition first.  In some sense, we cheat a little bit because we put import prices directly into our equation as a right-hand-side variable.  It’s an explanatory variable for domestic inflation. And we had seen some turnaround, as I mentioned, in import prices.  So it’s not that there isn’t anything to that story.  But one needs to refine the story so that the competitive margin is greater than otherwise and the timing of the pass-through is a little different than what we had anticipated. In the past, we’ve observed that the pass-through is quite quick from import prices into domestic prices—generally speaking, within a quarter. So, in light of the modest turnaround in import prices in the first quarter and what we think will be a more substantial increase in the second quarter, we had assumed that the import-induced weakness in domestic goods prices was pretty much done. Now, it may be that that factor is a little more persistent than what we wrote down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and discussing potential refinements to their previous assumptions.


Passage number 145.
 MR. KAPLAN. I’m wondering, do you look beyond import prices.  For example, a number of the industries—energy is a great example—compete in a global market.  It’s having an effect even though it may not be showing up in import prices.  But it may be showing up, nevertheless, because it’s a global market, and I wonder how that factors into your thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a question and seeking further clarification.


Passage number 146.
 MR. WILCOX. Again, in an effort to explain domestic core goods—that is, non-energy and food prices—we do use energy prices as an explanatory variable, because energy items are an input into the process and we think that influences the price-setting behavior of domestic   producers.  So those relationships evolve, for sure, over time.  The pass-through from energy prices into the core has changed over time, and it could be that we’re undergoing another evolution in the structure of that relationship with respect to either timing or magnitude.  But we do try to take account of that. On the global overcapacity hypothesis, we’ve looked in the past at this and have not found—our ability to measure global overcapacity is pretty darn imperfect probably, to put it charitably.  That having been said, we have excavated like crazy in the past, and we’ve not found any additional explanatory power for global measures of resource utilization once we control for the items that you were highlighting—energy prices, commodity prices, and import prices. Once we got those variables in on the right-hand side, we can’t find anything.  Now, my recollection is that a coauthor is sitting on my direct left.  So, would you elaborate on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their research methods and findings without any indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 147.
 MR. KAMIN. Actually, I wouldn’t add much.  That pretty much says it, which is, we ran Phillips curve–type regressions for the United States that were augmented by measures of global slack, like global output gaps, and they did not add much explanatory power to our straight Phillips curves. I would also note that, as far as the overcapacity you’ve referenced is concerned—right now, some of the concerns are very focused on metals, steel, and other areas of heavy industry in which China has overinvested.  And I guess, just on the basis of the readout that David provided on the recent CPI, that was not where the price dips were most concentrated, right.  You mentioned apparel and other areas in which there’s probably a little bit less overcapacity because there’s more of an ability to focus the production capacity on current needs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 148.
 MR. KAPLAN. I’ll make one more point, and I’ll stop the questioning and be quiet. Returning to the disruption, I take it measuring that is very hard.  It’s hard to run models to map   what’s going on, as it’s changing so rapidly. I assume that five years from now we’ll be able to look back more easily, but it’s hard to judge currently what the effect of that is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the difficulty of measuring and assessing the effects of disruption, without presenting conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 149.
 MR. WILCOX.  It is.  It’s even hard to assert with confidence what the sign is of disruption, and let me try to give one piece of intuition for that.  A commonplace observation is that business dynamism is down, and some metrics of that are that fewer new firms are being created.  Job churn has trended down, so, in the labor market, it remains the case that an astonishing number of jobs are both created and destroyed every month.  My recollection is, something like 4½ or 5 million jobs are created or destroyed every month.  However, that’s always been true, and it’s a little less true now than it was a decade or two ago. Because of the prevalence of anecdotes in this regard, my conviction is, there’s got to be something to it, but it’s pretty hard for us to get a handle on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting observations and acknowledging the difficulty in fully understanding and assessing the situation.


Passage number 150.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply includes a statement of gratitude and acknowledgment ("Thank you") followed by the speakers' names.


Passage number 151.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, I think, more generally, President Kaplan raises a very interesting point here.  David, I think of you as really an expert on this, thinking back to your mid-1990s opportunistic disinflation research in a different environment—the question of whether there’s some type of underlying secular trend, perhaps in pricing power, for whatever reason:  technology, global competition, or whatnot.  And the question was, back in the ’90s, “Well, this could be an opportunity to get inflation down closer to what we always wanted it to be,” so you’d run policy somewhat tighter.  You’d have, if we were doing it back then, some measure of equilibrium r* that would tell us whether we’re running tighter. Now, we’re in a different environment in which, in my opinion, inflation is lower, and the question still is, what’s the stance of monetary policy that gives rise to the lift in inflation.   Do you think there’s anything to that type of thinking at this point, or are these more transitory headwinds. That’s really the big question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking for the opinion of the person they are addressing.


Passage number 152.
 MR. WILCOX. There may be something to it, but I think it’s going to be extremely difficult for us to discern that in real time. I did get an update, and, on the basis of what we know right now—on the basis of a complete loading of the data into our system, but, again, it does not include non-market-based prices because we won’t know those until the BEA publishes the monthly PCE price index at the end of the month.  Taking that on board, we estimate the shortfall in core PCE prices to be 9 basis points, so that was pretty close to the 8 basis points that I mentioned earlier this morning. Of that, apparel accounts for about 3 basis points.  There’s some weakness that we don’t understand in other durable goods that accounts for about 2 basis points; airfares and other services, about 3 basis points. So it’s a little of this and a little of that, but reasonably close to what we had guesstimated on a rougher basis earlier. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any further questions for David.  [No response] Okay.  Before we begin our policy round, let me say that, these data do seem to me to be a significant enough surprise on inflation that it might warrant a modest adjustment to the statement of alt-B—not a change in the policy actions, but I would like to propose and then get your reactions to a wording change in alt-B.  What I would propose doing is taking the final sentence of the second paragraph in alt-A and substituting that sentence for the final sentence in the second paragraph of alt-B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It consists of a speaker providing updates and estimates, followed by a proposal for a wording change in alt-B.


Passage number 153.
 MR. LAUBACH. The final two sentences. CHAIR YELLEN.  The final two sentences. The end of paragraph 2 in alt-B would read as follows: “Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but theCommittee is monitoring inflation developments closely.”  We have had wording there about closely monitoring inflation and global economic and financial developments.  I think we’ve concluded in recent meetings that we’re less concerned about global economic and financial developments.  And, in a sense, that sentence has become “boilerplate.” We continue in paragraph 3 to highlight international developments as being relevant to our evaluation of the economy. So, at the end of paragraph 2, which is really related to our assessment of near-term risks, if we get rid of the global developments piece and leave it as a statement about inflation, it’s a relatively small change.  But I think it would highlight that we are monitoring inflation developments closely without affecting, really, in any significant way our overall evaluation of the economy or the proposed policy actions.  So I would like to put that on the table as a proposal for a change in alt-B and ask your reaction to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The Chair Yellen is suggesting a small change in the wording of the statement, but they do not express any disagreement or contention with the proposed change.


Passage number 154.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m sorry, Madam Chair.  Could you just repeat that.  I had trouble finding my handout. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  I propose that the last sentence in the second paragraph of alt-B would be altered to read as follows: “Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely.” Let me say that there have been no changes in the SEP submissions.  Conceivably, some of you might have wanted to make some modest revisions on the basis of this news.  I don’t know if that’s true or not.  But if I am asked in the press conference about it, I will simply say that the SEP does not incorporate this morning’s readings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is just a clarification by Mr. Evans and a proposal by Chair Yellen.


Passage number 155.
 MR. WILCOX.  Madam Chair, having read the sheet more carefully, could I give just two additional pieces of information. In April, the estimated increase in core PCE prices was basis points before.  It remains 15 basis points, but there was a small downward surprise in PPI prices yesterday that will account for less than 1 basis point.  You’re not going to believe this, but although it will still round, on our estimate, to 15 basis points, it will show up to one decimal as one-tenth on the core PCE price index for April rather than two-tenths before, despite the fact that it’s a revision of less than 1 basis point.  So I won’t be surprised if there’s some commentary when that’s published at the end of the month:  “Oh, core PCE prices were revised down one-tenth in April.” Less than a basis point is the measure there. The other thing I thought I should mention is that, on our estimate, 12-month core PCE prices, we now think, will show an increase over the 12 months ending in May of 1.4 percent rather than the 1.5 percent that we had in the June Tealbook.  We continue to think the top-line PCE prices will increase 1.5 percent.  That’s unrevised from the June Tealbook.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  So, yes, the proposal substitutes the final two sentences in paragraph 2 of alt-B.  Question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 156.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’d like to say, I think what you’re proposing makes a lot of sense, because if you look at the first paragraph of alt-B, it’s pretty matter-of-fact about inflation.  It’s saying, “Just the facts, ma’am.” And then this actually says that it’s on our radar as something that we’re monitoring. So I think that’s prudent, frankly, in view of the fact that we don’t know what’s actually going to happen. CHAIR YELLEN.  Exactly.  Okay.  I would like to hear your input on this—your reaction to that proposal as we go around.  Let’s start with President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the proposal and offers an explanation for their agreement.


Passage number 157.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I continue to be nervous about the Committee’s ability to deliver sustainable inflation at our 2 percent objective within a reasonable period.  Our optimistic SEPs have inflation reaching target next year.  According to theTealbook, we don’t get there until the end of the projection period.  And, of course, most of these are just Phillips curve forecasts.  The Committee has been forecasting a return to 2 percent inflation for quite some time. Today the fundamentals for U.S. economic growth are good, and labor markets are robust, with unemployment falling to 4.3 percent last month.  The real economy looks solid.  But, disappointingly, low core inflation is telling us that important pricing headwinds still persist. There’s more for our accommodative policy to do to reach our inflation objective, and I’m not really relying on the past three months of weak inflation data, although that last basis point might have tipped me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing concern about the Committee's ability to deliver sustainable inflation at the 2 percent objective within a reasonable period. The speaker also highlights the disparity between the optimistic SEPs and the Tealbook projections, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 158.
  [Laughter] MR. WILCOX.  I knew you’d want to be aware of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the phrase "[Laughter]" suggests a lighthearted or joking tone, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It seems to be a friendly or expected response.


Passage number 159.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I do appreciate that.  The data, as we’ve seen them, don’t help, but my concerns are broader.  Furthermore, the economy will surely turn down again at some point.  If we truly fear risks of being at the lower bound again in the future, then I believe our actions must strongly defend our strategic commitment to a symmetric inflation objective.  This calls for communicating a policy rate path that truly generates the possibility that inflation will rise above 2 percent during this rate cycle. In this context, I look at the June SEP median funds rate path for 2017 and 2018, and I wonder, can this path deliver enough support for confidently ensuring inflation rises to our symmetric objective.  And, again, I worry that other communications hamper our ability to achieve this goal. That is, when we emphasize inflation forecasts with an upward glide path to 2 percent and downplay the acceptability of risking inflation rising any higher, I suspect the public infers that the Committee is highly averse to inflation above target.  This reinforces the impression among many that 2 percent is a ceiling.  Madam Chair, I do support alternative B today with the changes that you just suggested.  But my preference is to be particularly careful not to set expectations of an overly aggressive funds rate path that would impede our progress on inflation. It is key that policy expectations assert a strong upward pull on inflation, especially as the Phillips curve is so flat.  One way to do this is to avoid being overly optimistic about inflation improvements in our communications.  I think alternative B is just adequate in this regard by indicating that inflation has been running below target and is expected to remain so in the near term. It was helpful to remove the language in the initial draft that referred to recent low readings as likely reflecting transitory factors.  That was too sanguine.  In my opinion, that language would convey much more confidence about a favorable inflation outlook than some of us have at the moment. Madam Chair, strategically, I favor a data-dependent path beyond today’s decision, much as you described yesterday evening.  Under my current modal forecast, this envisions delaying any further rate increases at least until December, with the obvious caveat that important data developments over the next six months could push that date forward or back. Now, it seems obvious that the Committee has a strong desire to take some action at each press conference meeting this year unless something goes awry.  As Vice Chairman Dudley has spoken about several times, there’s a natural way to do this and still not move the funds rate again until late in the year.  This would be to announce the implementation of balance sheet normalization at our September meeting while keeping the funds rate target at 1 to 1¼ percent, which I assume will be the result after today’s action.  We can then wait for December, take a hard look at the data available then, and make the important decision as to whether 2017 ends up being a two- or three-rate-hike year.   The risks of waiting until December to perhaps choose three rate hikes for 2017 doesn’t seem large to me.  If inflationary conditions improve by then, the Committee would be well positioned to pencil in four or five rate hikes for 2018, if necessary.  In a robust expansion, without need of monetary support, this is just business as usual. On the other side of the ledger, suppose we increase rates again soon but find ourselves at the end of the year with inflation still struggling to gain upward momentum.  This scenario would risk further questioning of the Committee’s resolve to achieve a symmetric 2 percent target.  I’m not sure what we can do at that point to allay that perception, and I certainly hope that the Committee in the future will not fear asset purchases, because that’s something that we’re going to have to do in sufficient capacity if we do run into those risks. In light of these two scenarios, I see the strategy of “balance sheet in September” and “hold on rates at least until December” as a pretty decent risk-management plan.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 160.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B for this meeting.  Current economic conditions and my forecast for the economy are consistent with tighter policy. Perhaps more important is how monetary policy is described in the press conference and in the Monetary Policy Report testimony. My own view is that we should be laying the groundwork for moving this July to begin the gradual reduction in the balance sheet.  While I’m very supportive of the balance sheet shrinking very gradually and remaining in the background, current conditions in my forecast indicate that we should not delay that process.  The costs of moving earlier than some expect need to be weighed against the costs of significantly undershooting sustainable unemployment rates by waiting too long.  Delaying past July an announcement of balance sheet actions could unduly complicate our normalization process, in view of the uncertainty about the debt ceiling, budget talks, and the appointment of new Federal Reserve Governors this fall. While I certainly do not believe in rigid monetary policy rules, I do believe that, as a rule of thumb, policy rules can be instructive in challenging why policy is deviating from simple historical norms.  All of the simple policy rules described in the Tealbook imply a tightening of policy that includes more than just three 25 basis point federal funds rate increases this year. It’s important to note that none of these policy rules incorporate the sizable balance sheet, which, if  taken into account, implies an even larger increase than these policy rules prescribe. Even more strikingly, the Tealbook’s optimal control simulations highlight the risk that the federal funds rate would need to be much higher, particularly if unemployment and inflation deviations are equally weighted in the loss function. Unless actual data come in substantially weaker than is forecast in the Tealbook, I would not be supportive of any pause in the gradual increase in the federal funds rate when we decide to make our balance sheet announcement.  In fact, if the data evolve consistent with the Tealbook, a strong case could be made for even tighter policy this year and next than the policy assumption used in the Tealbook.  If we want to continue moving policy gradually and to minimize the risk of an unsustainable overshooting that could unravel a sustainable recovery, we should continue with the regular normalization process of the federal funds rate while beginning the gradual reduction in our balance sheet sooner rather than later. In view of the apparent limited effects of our previous federal funds rate increases to date, as indicated by the numerous financial conditions indexes, and the increasing probability of substantially undershooting the natural rate of unemployment, continuing our funds rate increases as we begin to shrink our balance sheet may be the least risky path for avoiding, or at least delaying, the next recession.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bostic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates some disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing support for alternative B and believes that monetary policy should be tightened. However, they also mention the costs and potential risks of delaying the reduction in the balance sheet. They also mention the possibility of even tighter policy and express concern about undershooting the natural rate of unemployment. These conflicting viewpoints suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 161.
 MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Under my outlook and current assessment of risks, I support the policy action in the alternative B statement.  I’m also okay with the proposed language in alternative B, including the changes that we have proposed today.  However, as I noted in the economy round, while the risks associated with my inflation outlook are broadly balanced, I am concerned that readings on inflation indicators are drifting a bit in the wrong  direction.  Because of that, I believe it will be important to continue to emphasize that we are closely monitoring inflation developments, and the proposed language changes today increase that focus and emphasis in a way that I believe is beneficial and appropriate. It will also be important to emphasize that policy decisions are data dependent.  My SEP submissions embody one additional rate hike this year.  While I acknowledge strong accommodative conditions in financial, housing, and other markets, I consider that rate path to be at risk should the inflation rate fail to recover its movement toward our objective over the next several months. In advance of this meeting, financial markets placed only slightly better than even odds on a further rate move this year.  That feels about right to me.  I would be uncomfortable with any communication that further raises the market’s probability of another rate hike before we get evidence that we are back on track with respect to attaining our inflation objective. On portfolio normalization, I support the communication plan for today and also support beginning the reduction of the portfolio in September, though I do find arguments to start sooner compelling and would not object if that course was embraced.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Mullinix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 162.
 MR. MULLINIX.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  To summarize my policy views, I support alternative B’s proposed 25 basis point increase and the revised wording changes suggested by you, Madam Chair.  Additionally, I believe our target range for the federal funds rate is below where it should be, given economic conditions, but for now I do not see a great deal of urgency in moving the stance of policy back toward a more normal setting.  The lack of urgency stems from the lack of strong signals suggesting that an acceleration in prices is approaching.  Of course, such a turn could come quickly and unexpectedly, and I do see some risk that we could   find ourselves more seriously “behind the curve.”  That is not my baseline outlook, however.  I project monthly inflation to fluctuate around 2 percent, and this should allow for a gradual path for interest rates. In my forecast, the real federal funds rate remains negative into 2018, while the economy continues to grow a bit faster than my projected medium-term trend of 1.8 percent.  That growth is enough, in my forecast, to continue to reduce the unemployment rate, making an already tight labor market tighter. These conditions suggest to me that we need to remain on a persistent, though not precipitous, path toward an interest rate that is more normal. I’ve placed my longer-run normal funds rate projection at 3 percent.  My projected path involves a move today, then two more this year and four 25 basis point moves in 2018.  Under this projection, we would reach the longer-run normal rate in 2019.  It’s important to note that my forecast for 2019 has inflation at 2 percent but the unemployment rate still well below its longer-run normal level. The funds rate may need to run above 3 percent, and this is reflected in my SEP submission. I believe our provision of additional information on our plans for winding down reinvestment and your opportunity to talk about this at today’s press conference, Madam Chair, will help us decouple interest rate and balance sheet policy to the extent possible, which I see as desirable.  These steps will also afford us flexibility in how and when we start the program, which, from my vantage point today, is best to occur in September.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents their policy views and projections without opposing or conflicting statements.


Passage number 163.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you have not provided a passage for me to analyze. Please provide the passage in question so that I can determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 164.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair. I support alternative B with the revised language for paragraph 2 that you outlined.  In this situation, it’s appropriate to take the next steps toward removing accommodation.  This involves both raising the funds rate target today as well as providing the information to the public through the statement, the Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, and your press conference that we will begin reducing reinvestments later this year. Taking these actions today keeps us on the appropriate path toward normalizing the stance of policy.  My view of the appropriate policy rate path is to assume four rate increases both this year and next, just as in the Tealbook.  And, as noted in our discussions yesterday, overall financial conditions have actually been strengthening as we’ve been raising rates.  I’d like to reiterate something President Kaplan said.  I think it would be very helpful in our July meeting, and maybe in future meetings, to really try to understand what it is that we’re learning from asset prices and market moves in general. Our own work at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco has highlighted the point that market participants, at least according to the TIPS market, believe that the long-run real interest rate is very low, and that helps explain some of the asset price levels that we’re seeing. There are obviously alternative views on that. I think that’s worth diving into.  And it gets back to this issue: How accommodative is monetary policy, actually, relative to a long-run norm. My preferred pace of rate increases is faster than markets or the median FOMC participant expects.  Nonetheless, as President Rosengren has already stressed, the path that I’m describing lies below nearly all of the policy rules shown in the Tealbook as well as most of the optimal control paths.  In the Tealbook, the unemployment rate falls below 4 percent, and the inflation rate persistently, although modestly, overshoots our objective.  In other words, the Tealbook funds rate path already has a high degree of gradualism and downside risk management embedded in it.Finally, I support announcing the balance sheet normalization in September, as you suggested.  I strongly prefer an approach on the balance sheet that, from the beginning, is in the background.  Moving sooner or later, I think, interferes with that.  I like the approach that you outlined, assuming the economy performs broadly as expected.  Markets have taken our announcements about balance sheet normalization in stride.  I think that’s an understatement.  So I don’t expect an adverse market reaction as we move forward with these announcements.  In fact, I do think that the “Greenspan conundrum” alternative scenario today is more likely than a reinvestment taper tantrum scenario. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's support for certain actions and preferences regarding the stance of monetary policy.


Passage number 165.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the revised version of alternative B.  I do believe it’s appropriate to raise the federal funds rate today.  This is in the context, though, of a patient and gradual approach to removing accommodation.  And I think this is also consistent with my own expectation that we should begin to allow the balance sheet to run off in September.  Obviously, I intend to carefully monitor upcoming developments to assess the rate of progress on employment and reaching our 2 percent inflation target. As I do that, there are four issues that I’ve been struggling with and that I’ll continue to struggle with. The first regards the neutral rate.  I’ve been of the view that we should be gradually moving toward neutral. The question that I’m wrestling with is: “What is neutral.”  I paidattention to the Laubach-Williams model, our own models at the Dallas Federal Reserve, other models in the System—the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond model—which suggest to me that the answer is, “The neutral real rate today is around zero.”  Even though I’ve put an upward slope into my SEP rate forecast for the next two or three years, I keep asking myself, “Why. Why am I doing that.” I’m not sure what factors will cause the neutral rate to drift up over the next two or three years, and I’ll keep asking that question. The second thing I’m wrestling with—we flagged it yesterday, I don’t need to go into it a lot more—is the 10-year yield.  It was 170 basis points pre-election, it’s 220 now, and I’m wondering what the significance of this is.  My own experience is that stock market investors and businesspeople tend to be bottoms-up.  Fixed-income investors, for better or worse, tend to be top-down macro investors, and the only thing I’ve learned over the years is that they’re worth paying attention to, even though they may be at odds with bottoms-up investors. The third issue I’m struggling with is, while the labor market is tight—and I believe and I’ve been saying that I think over time, with a lag, this tight labor market will lead to wage pressure and then some price pressure—I also believe that the secular headwinds are very strong, and, in particular, I think the trend of technology-enabled disruption is becoming more intense and more powerful.  And I believe the forces that are limiting pricing power of businesses are strengthening.  I’m trying to come to grips with what the implications of that are. And then the fourth issue for me is this issue about financial conditions, which I know is causing some to believe we should be a little bit more forward leaning on the path of rates.  My own view is a little bit different. I’m actually not overly swayed by strong financial conditions.  The biggest reason why is that, on the basis of my experience, I know they can change overnight.  The other thing is, credit growth is contained or at least under control.  I think this is primarilydue to strong macroprudential policies, but I’m more swayed by the shape of the yield curve at the moment than I am by very strong financial conditions.  But I’ll continue to wrestle with that question.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and struggles with certain issues, but there is no conflict with any other individuals or perspectives mentioned.


Passage number 166.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The economy remains on a solid, steady path that warrants a further 25 basis point rate increase at this meeting, and I will support alternative B with the additional language that the Chair mentioned.  I would add briefly that there was a comma in alt A after the word “balanced,” and I didn’t hear that.  My support for this change would be even more wholehearted if that comma did make the trip, after “contained,” to alt B. CHAIR YELLEN. Good suggestion.  Let’s include the comma.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 167.
 MR. POWELL.  In that case, I’m all in.  [Laughter]  My base case is that the Committee will begin phasing out reinvestments in September—perhaps with a brief delay in implementation if debt ceiling troubles loom—and that the Committee will forgo an interest rate increase in September and will raise the federal funds rate again in December. Growth has been about as expected, and the labor market has continued to tighten.  These solid underlying fundamentals should exert upward pressure on prices, so that inflation should resume its gradual upward rise toward 2 percent.  As long as the underlying growth and labor market fundamentals remain strong, I would be reluctant to take too much signal from short-term inflation readings.  If, however, inflation weakness does persist or worsen, and the Committee decides to slow the pace of policy normalization, I would rather forgo a third rate increase than postpone a phaseout of reinvestments past the end of this year.   For me, the evolution of broader financial conditions may also have implications for the path of policy and provide a reason at the margin not to make what is already a very gradual rate path even more gradual.  As a number of others have noted, 18 months after the first rate increase, we have tighter credit spreads, higher equity P/Es, a lower equity risk premium, lower long-term rates, and very low realized and expected volatility.  Of course, many domestic and global factors affect financial conditions, and part of the story is probably that the economy has improved on a low-drama gradual path, and the Committee has been exceptionally transparent about our intentions regarding policy rates. The natural way for this placid time to end would be a negative shock, as President Kaplan may have suggested, that would catch the market on the wrong foot and create short-term turmoil.  Such an event might or might not leave any mark on the economy.  But the placid mood could also go on for quite a while longer, with financial risks building, and it’s not hard to see that this environment, if it persists, could lead to very high asset prices and other forms of financial excess.  In fact, that’s exactly what happened in the previous two cycles while inflation remained near 2 percent.  We don’t see these troubling excesses today, but at the margin I do consider this to weigh in favor of moving ahead with our gradual rate increases.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 168.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, as amended at this meeting.  It makes sense to me to initiate the balance sheet adjustment, as others have said, in September.  If all goes according to plan, then I see December as a possibility that should be on the table for an additional 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate.  However, I do realize that my forecast could turn out to be too optimistic, so I may need to revisit some of my policy assumptions with respect to the federal funds rate.  But, as Governor Powell just said, we shouldmaintain our plan for adjusting the balance sheet and make sure it is, as you mentioned yesterday, like watching paint dry.  That said, I believe that even with the implementation of this plan, policy will remain somewhat accommodative, especially in light of falling long-term bond yields and recent run-ups in the stock market. Let me switch to a slightly different topic.  Echoing comments yesterday from Governor Fischer and others, I would also suggest that thought be given to changing some of our statement language in the future—not at this meeting—that would acknowledge more fully that as the labor market tightens, we expect job growth to moderate.  With so much focus on monthly job gains, we should be giving a clearer signal regarding what we deem as acceptable gains that will continue to support the removal of accommodation. The lower job growth numbers that we have been seeing over the past three months may be more representative of what is likely to transpire than is the return to the stellar numbers we have been averaging over the past few years.  I do not believe that such an occurrence would signal significant weakness in labor markets. In view of the low level of the unemployment rate, the slower pace would instead reflect more normal behavior. The recent JOLTS report with record job postings and a fall in the hiring rate may be an indicator that jobs may cease to be filled at very high rates. Importantly, I do not believe that somewhat slower future job growth should significantly affect the speed of normalization.  Signaling this stance may help avoid some criticism that our data-dependent policy suffers from inconsistencies in data interpretation. So one possible suggestion for a future statement in paragraph 2 is that we add language such as “Job gains are anticipated to moderate as labor market conditions continue to tighten.”  Thank you, Madam Chair.CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B, as well as their reasoning behind their forecast and suggestions for future statement language.


Passage number 169.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Given my outlook, the progress on our dual-mandate goals, and the risks associated with the outlook, I support a 25 basis point increase in the target range of the federal funds rate, and I’m comfortable with the language in alternative B, with the Chair’s amendment from this morning. In thinking about data dependence and forecast revisions, I think we should all remember the error bands associated with our inflation projections, which are now vividly illustrated in our SEP. I support releasing the details of our normalization plan at this meeting and indicating that we will begin implementing the plan this year.  I believe the normalization paths we have given for the funds rate and for the balance sheet will help avoid a buildup of risks to macroeconomic stability and to financial stability.  And I believe it will put monetary policy in a better position to address whichever risks, whether to the upside or downside, are ultimately realized. I think the Committee has done a good job of changing the narrative.  Before, it was “Wait until we see sufficiently strong data before taking a normalization step.”  Now it is “Continue on the gradual normalization path unless there is material evidence against doing so.” I think we should continue to emphasize this narrative. We need to ensure there’s consistency in our policy as well as in the messaging.  By doing so over time we’ve been able to better align the public’s policy expectations with the Committee’s anticipated policy rate path, but a gap remains, and we don’t want it to widen.  Our messaging should emphasize our assessment of the outlook so that the public isn’t distracted by small fluctuations in the data.  And we should continue to emphasize the link between our outlook and our policy decision.  If this outlook does not materially change, an increase in the funds rate is appropriate as part of the gradual normalization path we have articulated.  Similarly, the Chair has done an excellent job of leading the Committee as we work toward normalizing the balance sheet and communicating that work to the public.  The markets may still react when the plan is implemented, but the reality that this is a gradual normalization that is consistent with expectations should help avoid a longer-term negative reaction. In view of the uncertainty surrounding fiscal policy, I think our consistency should be welcomed by the public.  I agree with Governor Fischer’s remarks about the timing of the start of implementing the normalization plan for the balance sheet. The discussion yesterday about the timing to start the plan was interesting to me.  I was thinking of the decision to lay out the details of the plan, as we plan to do today, and the timing and implementation as really being essentially one decision.  I think giving advance information about the plan is very good, but too long a gap between presenting the plan and then triggering implementation would seem to add uncertainty, not subtract uncertainty.  Yesterday’s discussion pointed out some complications associated with triggering in September—the debt ceiling, budget talks, and perhaps a data report that isn’t material for the outlook but that complicates communication.  So I think we should think seriously about July.  The Chair could use her July testimony to set up a trigger decision that would come at the July meeting.  Emphasizing that the plan is very gradual can help. Thinking ahead, the proposed language in paragraph 5 of alternative C seems like appropriate language to use when we do begin to implement balance sheet normalization.  We should also consider what we plan to say about the balance sheet in subsequent meeting statements. It isn’t obvious. Because we want the plan to be in the background, that may suggest not referencing it in the statement after initialization. On the other hand, we want the statement to be transparent about our policy decisions, and balance sheet decisions are part of our  policy.  On balance, I lean toward being transparent and simply reminding the public in our statement that balance sheet normalization is ongoing in accordance with our previously announced plan.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing her support for a 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate, and for releasing the details of a normalization plan. She also agrees with Governor Fischer's remarks about the timing of implementing the normalization plan for the balance sheet. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 170.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B and the proposed language change that you’ve offered.  Today’s decision continues the very gradual adjustment of short-term rates, which remain supportive of the economy’s sustained growth, and it clarifies the Committee’s approach to balance sheet reduction. The details of this plan, along with today’s press conference, offer an important opportunity to explain the Committee’s thinking about the balance sheet, and we will learn how markets react.  Assuming no change in the outlook, I believe we should consider implementing this plan as early as the July meeting, having laid the groundwork for a very modest and cautious pace of reduction. Research by my staff estimates that a $675 billion reduction in the balance sheet over two years is equivalent to only a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate.  In addition, this equivalent increase is likely to happen only gradually as we normalize and, in fact, may already be partially priced in by markets as they anticipate us ceasing reinvestments. Finally, I support the aim to bring inflation back to 2 percent in a sustainable manner, regardless of whether we are above or below our symmetric inflation target.  However, I remain skeptical regarding any policy choices that would deliberately target an undershoot of the unemployment rate or an overshoot of our 2 percent inflation target in order to make up for past misses.  I understand the risk of continued inflation below target, including lower inflation expectations.  But the greater risk, in my view, is trying to fine-tune our policy. If we wait for actual inflation at or above target, we risk having to raise rates more quickly, which could  undermine financial stability and defeat the sustained growth we seek in the long run. I view this outcome as far more costly for the economy than inflation running only slightly less than 2 percent for an extended time, especially when the unemployment rate is well below most estimates of the natural rate, including the median SEP value for the long-run unemployment rate. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. MS. GEORGE expresses skepticism towards deliberately targeting an undershoot of the unemployment rate or an overshoot of the 2 percent inflation target, while also expressing concern about waiting for actual inflation at or above target. This contradicts the views expressed by other members of the Committee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Conditions in the U.S. labor market continue to improve at a gradually diminishing pace.  With synchronized global growth for the first time in several years and the balance of risks from abroad improving, and with financial conditions easing further, on balance, I anticipate the U.S. economy will continue to strengthen in coming months.  For these reasons, I support an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate today. Nonetheless, there is a puzzling tension between signs that the economy is in the neighborhood of full employment and signs that the tentative progress we had seen on inflation is slowing.  The staff anticipates that the May reading on core PCE inflation was only 1.4 percent, if I got that right, little changed from the preceding year and continuing an eight-year run of inflation that remains stubbornly below target. The staff Tealbook forecasts that by the end of this year, core inflation will be only 1.6 percent, no better than last year.  And the May reading on the CPI didn’t provide any reassurance on this front, although it’s still hard to draw any firm conclusions. As I noted yesterday, I am concerned about the Committee’s ability to guide inflation up to target after five years of downside misses.  While I remain hopeful that inflation will increase, the continued softness in the CPI “print” this morning suggests a heightened risk that inflation will remain low. As a means of reflecting that risk, I support the Chair’s proposed amendment, which would highlight that we will be monitoring inflation developments closely.  If the tension between the progress on employment and the lack of progress on inflation persists, it may lead me to reassess the expected path of the funds rate in the future, although I am not in a position to make that call today. As we move the target range for the federal funds rate higher, we can consider normalization of the federal funds rate to be “well under way,” and if the economy evolves in line with the Summary of Economic Projections’ median path, it will set the stage for a gradual and predictable running-off of the balance sheet. We’ll have substantially more information in hand at our September meeting.  If that information confirms that we are on track, there’s a compelling case to announce at the September meeting our intention to begin the reduction of reinvestment after risks surrounding the debt limit have been satisfactorily addressed, which could be at the beginning of November.  There will be a press conference following the September meeting, which would give the Chair an important opportunity to explain the decision and how it will be operationalized and evolve over time.  I view this step as a big deal and worth highlighting in a press conference as well as communications by the Chair in advance. I see no economic advantage to moving up the decision to July and substantial risk that it would trigger substantial unnecessary speculation that the FOMC reaction function had somehow changed for some unspoken reason. Moving in September will also give us an opportunity to assess the effects of the shift in reinvestment policy on financial markets and conditions before making our next move on short-term interest rates. While the announcement will have been extremely well communicated in advance and, thus, should not lead to any outsized moves in financial markets, it’s also likely that that risk, small though it may be, is all on the same side.And, finally, by making the balance sheet announcement in September, it will give us more time to assess the inflation situation and financial conditions before we need to make the next decision on the federal funds rate.  The staff anticipates that core inflation will pick up in the second half of the year.  And it would be valuable to see the data confirming this forecast, as this would provide a very benign environment in which to continue on the gradual path of tightening currently envisaged in the SEP.  Similarly, but on the other side, it will be important to see whether there is, in fact, the expected tightening effect on longer-term yields, which we haven’t seen so far, in order to calibrate that path appropriately.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Ms. Brainard expresses concern about the lack of progress on inflation and suggests that if the tension between employment and inflation persists, it may lead to a reassessment of the funds rate in the future. She also disagrees with moving up the decision to begin the reduction of reinvestment in July, stating that there is no economic advantage and it could trigger unnecessary speculation.


Passage number 172.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B with your suggested changes to paragraph 2.  I think it’s appropriate to tighten monetary policy at this meeting.  It’s appropriate to put forth our balance sheet normalization plan.  It’s appropriate to put market participants on notice that we’ll likely begin to execute on those plans this year.  In terms of the balance sheet normalization process, I expect that today’s communication will work to pull forward somewhat expectations about when we’re likely to begin to implement this plan. As was noted yesterday in the Desk briefing, in the dealer and buy-side surveys, most of the probability mass on timing has been split mainly between the September and December meetings, with very little on our next meeting in July and a little bit more than that for the October FOMC meeting. After this meeting, I expect more of the probability mass will shift to our September FOMC meeting.  After all, once we’ve indicated that we have agreement and have announced the details, market participants are likely to start to wonder what’s to be gained by waiting until the end of the year to start.  That said, I don’t expect that there’ll be much shifting of expectations to July, in the absence of a scheduled press conference at that meeting. One issue that deserves consideration is whether the timing of when we start the balance sheet normalization process could be influenced by the Congress’s debt limit negotiations.  In an ideal world, we shouldn’t be influenced by this, but if the situation did look to be very messy, I’m not sure commencing balance sheet normalization at the same time would necessarily be attractive to us.  Substantively, I don’t think it would make much difference.  The amount of Treasury securities that would not be reinvested is quite small in the first quarter of implementation, but I can imagine circumstances in which appearances and psychology could be important.  So we might want to decide that these factors deserve some weight in our decision. In considering the alternatives, I think it’s best to wait and see how things evolve as we go into the September FOMC meeting.  I don’t think pulling forward action to the July meeting is attractive to get ahead of the debt limit debate, as this would be a surprise to market participants and presumably would be taken as a “hawkish” signal.  People might interpret it that the FOMC is moving the balance sheet normalization process to July so that it can potentially fit in two more rate moves in September and December, which I think is inconsistent with the SEP, and it’s inconsistent, perhaps, with the inflation data that we got earlier today.  This would communicate an urgency to tighten that I think would be difficult to justify, in view of the economy’s growth pace and the fact that inflation is still well below our 2 percent objective. In thinking about alternatives, I think there are a number of better alternatives.  We can decide at the September meeting that the timing of when the debt limit will bind does not pose a problem for moving at that meeting and announce at that meeting that the process will start on October 1.  Alternatively, if we thought the debt limit made an October 1 start date more problematic, we could announce in September but with a later start date—say, November 1, as an example. Or, if things look very confusing, we could even decide to wait until the December meeting to announce, with a January 1 start date.  But I think in September we’re going to know a lot more than we know today about how the environment is likely to unfold, and I very much would like to have that information in hand before I am forced to make that decision. I think my own view is that there are a lot of ways this could go down the road.  If the Congress is inclined to pass a clean debt limit bill, then we’ll have quite a bit of clarity on that by September. A clean bill would imply a very high likelihood that the debt limit will be raised in a timely, nondisruptive manner.  If there’s not a clean bill, then, obviously, it gets more complicated, but I still think the debt limit issue is not something that’s going to stretch over weeks and months.  It’s always historically been something that comes to a head and then is resolved relatively quickly.  So even if you think it’s going to be messy, this isn’t something that’s going to stretch out, I think, for a very long period of time. In terms of what we know about the timing of when the Treasury runs out of resources to pay the U.S. government’s bills, there’s still considerable concern about when the debt limit will actually bind.  It’s conceivable that it could happen as early as late August or early September. But most estimates have the Treasury having sufficient resources to make it to early October. That’s when the government makes large Social Security payments at the start of the month. The mid-September corporate tax date is potentially going to be important, I think, because there are a lot of funds that flow into the Treasury at that time, with quite a bit of uncertainty about how much resources the Treasury is going to get.  So that’s also going to affect our view of the precise timing of when the debt limit strikes, but my guess is, bottom line, we’re going to know a lot more in September than we know today.  And I think that knowledge will be helpful in terms of making that decision, whether we announce in September and what date balance sheet normalization would actually start. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, thanks to everybody for a very interesting set of comments on policy choices that we’ll face in the future.  For today I heard broad-based support for alternative B, with the proposed change that I suggested at the beginning.  So let me ask Brian to make clear exactly what we’re voting on and to call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 173.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As you noted, this vote will be on the monetary policy statement for alternative B, as shown on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing materials, except that the final sentence of the second paragraph of alternative A would be substituted for the final two sentences of the second paragraph of alternative B.  The vote will also encompass the directive to the Desk as included in the implementation note for alternative B, as shown on pages 11 and 12 of those briefing materials. Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes President Evans Yes Governor Fischer Yes President Harker Yes President Kaplan Yes President Kashkari No Governor Powell Yes Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  We now have two sets of related matters that are under the Board’s jurisdiction: the corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates. I first need a motion from a Board member to increase the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 1¼ percent, effective June 15, 2017.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The members are stating their votes on different matters and there is no indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 174.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It shows agreement between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 175.
 MR. POWELL.  Second.   CHAIR YELLEN.  Without objection.  Finally, I need a motion from a Board member to approve establishment of the primary credit rate by the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco at 1¾ percent, effective June 15, 2017.  It will also encompass approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 1¾ percent primary credit rate by each of the remaining Federal Reserve Banks effective on the later of June 15, 2017, and the date such Reserve Bank informs the Secretary of the Board of such a request.  The Secretary of the Board would be authorized to inform such Reserve Banks of the approval of the Board of Governors upon such notification by the Reserve Bank. Lastly, this vote will also encompass establishment of the rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas specified in the staff’s June 9 memo to the Board. Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for a motion and approval of various rates by the Board members.


Passage number 176.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer makes a motion and Chair Yellen seconds it.


