Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 20-21, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, December 20, 1982, at 3:00 p.m. andcontinuing on Tuesday, December 21, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele,1/ Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman,1/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Ettin,1/ J. Davis,1/ R. Davis,1/ Keran,1/ Koch,1/Prell,1/ Siegman,1/ Truman, and Zeisel,1/ AssociateEconomists1/ Left the meeting prior to discussion and adoption of domestic policydirective.PRESENT:-2-Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, Dewald, Lang, Rolnick, Scheld, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco, St. Louis.Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Chicago, andAtlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Goodfriend, McNees, and O'Driscoll, VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Boston, and Dallas, respectivelyMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof December 20-21, 1982December 20--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought we might change the order [ofthe agenda] a bit today since the short run blends into the long runand the long-run view may affect the short-run view. I thought wewould first approve the minutes anyway.SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without any objection, we'll approve theminutes. I thought we might have the business description first, ifMr. Kichline is ready, and have whatever discussion you want of thebusiness [situation and outlook]. Then we will go to Mr. Axilrod whowill talk about the short-run problem but in the context of thelonger-run problem. We will then discuss the longer-run problem andcome back to the specifics of what we want to do, which would betomorrow, if that is agreeable. I don't know if it's more logical ornot but for some reason it seemed to me it might be more logical. Wecould wait for [the Managers' reports] tomorrow or we could do thatnow. Why don't we--MR. STERNLIGHT. I can do mine now, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can turn to Mr. Sternlight now. Wecan't hear from Mr. Cross now because I asked him to go to a meetingin New York this afternoon. He will be here tomorrow morning and wecan discuss the international aspects then. Why don't you go aheadand get your report out of the way, which I think is also background.MR. STERNLIGHT. Okay, fine. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments?MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. Would you comment some moreon the backup in long-term rates following the discount rate drop aweek ago? Would you attribute that to technical reasons or is thereanything there that might be a harbinger of a change in expectationswith regard to Fed policy and inflation?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't know if I would attribute thebackup to the discount rate. The discount rate reduction certainlydidn't have the impact of earlier reductions in reducing longer-termrates; one heard the comment from a few people that maybe the recentmoney growth would lead to a reemergence of inflation at some pointdown the road, so that investors were less inclined to continue theinterest they had had in the longer-term market. I would regard thislast discount rate move as having been about neutral for the longermarket. The fact that rates have backed up in the longer end I wouldattribute more to the supply [of new issues] coming in the longer-termsector. Treasury supplies have been quite heavy and the corporatesupply and tax exempt supply are also on the sizable side.MR. RICE. Peter, did you notice anything in the financial12/20-21/82markets or other developments that would explain the relatively highvolume of demand for excess reserves?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, during the recent period, some of itwas around the Thanksgiving weekend. There is often a lot of churningthen. This tends to be a season of the year when we have high excessreserves; but as I indicated, the actuals exceeded even the above-normal allowance that we had made for it. I'm just surmising now, butthe flows associated with the new accounts could explain some of it.Also the period around the mid-December dividend and tax dates isoften a time of greater demand for excess reserves. Nothing elsecomes immediately to mind as a special factor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other questions or observations? Wehave to ratify [the transactions]. Do I have a motion?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We have [theManager's] request to increase the [intermeeting] limit.MR. FORD. May I ask what the limit is now?MR. STERNLIGHT. The intermeeting leeway is $3 billion.MS. TEETERS. And you're asking for $4 billion?MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm asking for $4 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He wants a lot of leeway to berestrictive, as I understand it.MR. STERNLIGHT. To absorb the reserves.MR. BOEHNE. I'll go for this provided that he doesn't wantto buy coupons directly from the Treasury next time!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a motion on [the leeway]?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, you get another bit ofleeway. Now we will turn to Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] I might note thattomorrow morning we expect to receive the CPI figures for November aswell as some revised GNP data for the third quarter.MS. TEETERS. Will you have the flash tomorrow morning, Jim?MR. KICHLINE. Yes.12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How close are we, if at all, to the end ofthis adjustment to natural gas prices--these new contracts that arevery high?MR. KICHLINE. Under the current legislation, by 1985 Ibelieve only something like 60 percent will have been completed--thatis, freed to the market. So there is another 40 percent under theNatural Gas Pricing Policy Act of 1978 that would still be under[price] control. It is our view that if we have oil prices at aboutthe level they are now and no additional congressional action, we willbe facing very large double-digit increases for the next 3, 4, or 5years at least.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even at the present market price for gas?The present gas prices, as I understand it, at the margin, are waybelow those in these contracts. If a buyer just went into the markettoday and bought some gas, the price would be much less than some ofthe high contract prices that they entered into a year or two ago.MR. KICHLINE. That's right. Those are the contracts,though, that were adopted in a mood of panic by a number of gastransmission lines who could not service their customers. But theprices of much of the gas under control, the old gas, aresubstantially below the BTU equivalents of residual fuel oil. And ifwe continue this discussion too much longer, I will have exhausted allof my knowledge of that market!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will cease. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I would just note that we had a discussion atour board meeting about this very problem, the take and pay contract.I think the [bulk] of that is the take and pay contracts, or at least10-year contracts that were entered into by the pipelines or othersuppliers. The interesting part is the fact that take or pay meansthat they pay if they don't take but they also have that gas availableto them sometime in the future, so they're putting it on their balancesheet. In a sense, there should be a time when these take and paysare either altered or they just run out. There is a supply of gasthat is already paid for in these pipelines that sometime out in the1985-86 period will perhaps bring gas prices to a much lower levelthan is now being paid for gas.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After that clarification, I--MR. GUFFEY. Well, they are just building up an asset, that'sall. In other words, if they don't take it, they have to pay for itbut it comes to them later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was just curious about what that profileof prices was.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is some movement in theCongress to try to modify those contracts because of the anomaloussituation, isn't there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to divert this wholediscussion to gas. Who has comments about the business scene? Whosenses a recovery? Hearing nobody, who has a comment?12/20-21/82MR. BOEHNE. [I sense] just a little [recovery] in thenonmanufacturing area. The housing people, of course, are happier andthe retail people seem to be a little happier. In general, most areasoutside manufacturing seem to me to show a glimmer of a bit betterfeeling. Salesmen are not coming back with a lot of firm orders butare feeling better that there may be some orders coming up. But inmanufacturing, things are still dead; they're more than dead; they aredeteriorating. Some of these people consider themselves to be inlagging industries anyway, but I think compared to a month ago I sensejust a glimmer, a flicker, of a little better feeling.MR. BOYKIN. In our District, of course, things are stillweak but residential construction, which has already been mentioned,is coming on very strong. The National Association of Home Buildersis looking for Houston to lead the nation and Dallas to be second in1983 in residential construction. Office construction is still slowbut other nonresidential seems to be picking up a little and so areretail, the state, and other businesses. The energy sector, which wasalso mentioned, is reviving somewhat. The rig count is up in Novemberand it does appear to be up a little more than we would expect on aseasonal basis. The unemployment rate was down in Texas in November;we don't have a lot of confidence in the state figures but at leastit's in the right direction. The weak areas are the ones that wewould expect: manufacturing, particularly the durable goods sector,and the farm sector, which still has its problems. Loan demand isweak, with a less-than-seasonal rise in November; retail sales for theDistrict as a whole are not overly promising, although sales inDallas, Houston, and Austin are looking pretty good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Our District experienced significant strength innew home sales in November, and automobile sales seem to be improving.Retail sales are up on average 6 to 6-1/2 percent. But as Ed Boehnementioned, the heavy equipment industries are in bad shape.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those are the optimistic comments. Now wehear from--MR. MORRIS. I think all one can have now is a very mutedoptimism. I was at a meeting with the head of the NationalAssociation of Home Builders, [unintelligible] and Mike Sumicrast. Iwas quite amazed how optimistic the home builders were.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're very optimistic. I don't knowwhat they're smoking!MR. MORRIS. I checked this out with the local real estatepeople around Boston and they have seen quite a turn in the movementof residential real estate. But, tomorrow, don't we also get neworders for durable goods?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, tomorrow afternoon.MR. MORRIS. You can't get that in the morning?MR. KICHLINE. I can't.12/20-21/82MR. MORRIS. That's going to be a very key number. I thinkwe have to see a turnaround in new orders or this muted optimism we'veseen so far is not going to stay with us.MR. BOEHNE. It's all relative, you know. I don't get thefeeling that people are super optimistic. It's just that most peoplehave been so pessimistic that even if they don't say much at all, youtake it that things may be better.MS. TEETERS. Don't forget, the increase in housing starts isall the seasonal adjustment factor. The seasonally unadjusted numberis flat. And any increase in housing starts that we get from now toMarch that is seasonally adjusted isn't going to be very many realhouses.MR. BALLES. Absolutely. And even worse, Nancy, though Idon't have the exact numbers in mind, the proportion that is goinginto apartments is now pretty big in comparison with single-familyhomes, and therefore builders are using a lot less lumber and cementand so forth. So I think one really has to disaggregate those figuresto understand what is going on. I agree with you that [the housingsituation] is not really as optimistic as it appears.MR. MORRIS. But at least there is some evidence that at thepresent level of mortgage rates it is possible to move some housingoff the market, which hasn't been true for some time.MR. MARTIN. It's possible also to refinance some of theballoon payment arrangements that have been made around the country.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who does not see this little--firming ismaybe too strong a word--[uptick]?MR. BOEHNE. A little twinkle of a star is about what it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apart from the great Middle West, Mr.Keehn.MR. KEEHN. If you're looking for bad news--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are not part of the program.MR. KEEHN. I would suggest that there has been adeterioration, whereas at the last meeting I had a tinge of feelingthat maybe things were getting better. The housing side may bebetter, but I think Nancy Teeters is absolutely right that we have aseasonal adjustment factor that complicates that scene. The auto sidecertainly is better. In retail sales, the optimism that was evidentas people were getting ready for the Christmas season has begun todeteriorate. People on the retail sales side that I talked with areclearly disappointed by the way they see Christmas shaping up. On theindustrial side, capital goods are declining further. There isabsolutely no evidence of a turnaround among the people I talk with,and the pessimism is getting to be very, very pervasive. I think someof these people are beginning to run out of gas. They just areterribly, terribly discouraged.12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anybody who has a good report onChristmas sales?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I have a reasonable one. Thechains tell us that their sales are doing fairly well in the easternregion, with particular strength in apparel, cosmetics, and consumerelectronics. But they say that their sales in other parts of thecountry are not doing as well. For some reason the East seems to bedoing fairly well on retail sales.MR. PARTEE. Remember, there's an extra shopping day, too.That makes a lot of difference at the daily rate they're going.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The head of one nationwide chain toldme, and I found it very interesting, that the reason they were doingbetter than a lot of their competitors was that they had not paredinventories as much and, therefore, they had more stock for consumersto choose from.MR. GRAMLEY. I would add my voice to those who are concernedabout whether or not the recovery is going to materialize. TheRedbook this time, although noting elements of optimism--the twinkle,if you will, Ed--commented repeatedly about the manufacturing sectorslipping further into recession and attitudes becoming more and morepessimistic. I think we're dealing here with a combination of a biginventory overhang, particularly in durables, declining business fixedinvestment, and very, very sick export markets. What I worry aboutmost is the possibility that the efforts to improve productivity,which have been going on in full force since midyear, will continue toerode employment and earned incomes. So this little revival ofconsumer spending that we feel over Christmas may prove to be very,very short lived. If I were to put down numbers--if I were in Mr.Kichline's position and thank heaven I no longer have to make myliving that way--I might come up with some very similar numbers. Butmy worries all focus on the possibility that in fact we'll see anotherdisappointment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments on the business scene?I don't hear enormous encouragement around the table.MR. BALLES. Well, in the far West, things are continuing toslide downhill. I can tell you why if you want to know, but I'd justas soon not. It's the same old story: Forest products are in a badslump, and electronics and aerospace, which are two of our stronggrowth industries over the long term, are in a big slump. Boeing'ssales are at the lowest level in twenty years. It's one [industry]after another like that, and we see no signs of a turnaround as yet inour economy.MS. TEETERS. Boeing must be getting a lot of defensebusiness, aren't they?MR. BALLES. They are getting some, but it is in long leadtime items, and it's not nearly enough to counteract the enormousnumber of cancellations, on planes particularly.MR. FORD. We can verify that at Lockheed in Georgia. We hadthis political battle on getting the C5A versus some 747, which is12/20-21/82made out in Mr. Balles' District and we won it. So, I asked the headof Lockheed Georgia, Mr. Ormsby: "When do we get these thousands ofjobs due to our big political victory?" He said it will start abouttwo years from now. The lead times are quite awesome, in terms ofgearing up an assembly line to produce a big plane like that.MR. PARTEE. How are things down in the Sun Belt? Do yousense some pickup?MR. FORD. Well, I'm on the side of the twinklers, withoutany doubt, although the picture is mixed, especially with the thingsthat Lyle mentioned going on. In our heavy industry belt over towardAlabama up to the lower end of the Midwest, we are getting clobbered.We're still losing jobs; and parebacks and efficiency-type cuts aregoing on very heavily in some industries. But we are getting the samesigns of the nation's recovery, a little stronger I would say in somesectors, mainly in housing. For instance, we are getting a lot ofoptimism and a pickup in permits in a number of major urban marketsaround our area. One of my directors quipped the other day that heactually saw a lumber truck going down the road, but he didn't thinkit was heading for the bankruptcy court. So, we are starting to see ahousing pickup. The two big air carriers that operate in our area,Delta and Eastern, both reported advance bookings up pretty sharplyfor travelling to our area. So, there are some signs of light. Iwouldn't bet my life savings on there being a boom just now. We havethe same mix of concerns that others have. Residential constructionis good, but other construction looks weak.MR. CORRIGAN. In the housing sector I do hear from bankersand thrift people that there's a lot in the pipeline that hasn't evenshown up in mortgage commitment figures, much less in permits orstarts. So, notwithstanding the seasonal problem, I think there issome momentum there.MR. FORD. We've had a lot of new mortgage money flow intoour "price riot" institutions. Over a billion dollars flowed in twodays into the institutions in Atlanta that did the 21 and 22 percentpricing; they have to lay it off somewhere and we're hoping that someof it will go into housing.MR. PARTEE. They are going to buy mortgages with that hotmoney, eh?MR. FORD. The S&Ls that did it are really talking aboutgoing out--you might know more about it personally. The ones that didit are very euphoric; they got a lot of money.MS. TEETERS. They guarantee that rate for how long, Bill?MR. FORD. For 30 days, until January 13. They're going tomake 30-year mortgages with 30-day money, I guess!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have a happy background, Mr.Axilrod, to tell us how to deal with it.MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, the Committee's decisiontoday or tomorrow for operating purposes--the one that pertains to thedirective between now and the next meeting--also, of course, relates12/20-21/82to the fundamental problem before the Committee about how to target1983 as a whole, a decision that has to be made in February. So thesetwo things are somewhat related at the moment and I'll try to bringthe two together if I can.In the alternatives that we presented in the Bluebook we havekeyed on the broader aggregates, following what the Committee has donein the last couple of months, of course, though we've given enoughdata on M1 should the Committee wish to go in that direction. Thelarge memo [Secretary's note: A copy of this memorandum, "Options forIntermediate Targets and Implications for Operating Procedures ofDeposit Rate Deruglation," has been placed in the Committtee's files]that was prepared by Messrs. Davis, Judd, Lindsey, and myself and sentto you suggests that in this transitional period that we're entering--beginning on December 14 with the availability of the MMDA accounts,and continuing to January 4th or 5th with the availability of SuperNOW accounts--the transitional difficulties with M1 would tend to makeit very difficult to present in February a target for M1 for the year.And thus by definition we believe that it would be difficult to targeton M1 now going into the first quarter, as the target that is settoday or tomorrow will pertain to the first quarter. We came to thatview, recognizing that it was quite possible that we would luck intooffsetting shifts and we'd have a low number [for M1 growth], but wecouldn't really say with any definiteness that that would occur. Onthe one hand, as you probably read in the DIDC [report], the MMDAaccounts could tend to dominate, and that would pull money out of M1and lower the growth of M1; on the other hand, the NOW accounts maytend to dominate, and that may bring money into M1. I don't see howanyone can decide in advance exactly what is going to happen. We havedone our best in the Bluebook appendix to make a variety of estimatesand, as you see, we came to a wide range of estimates, particularlywith regard to Ml. So without discounting the possibility that wecould get a moderate M1 performance from offsetting shifts, we feltthat one couldn't rely on that in advance nor could one with anydefiniteness say exactly how the shifts were going to go, and thus itmight be better to bypass M1 at least for a transition period.Now, having said that, the group as a whole felt--and I wouldsay we felt it more strongly as we talked together--that M1 was reallythe best that might be left if you looked at everything. So we wereleft with the great "hope" that when the transition is over, wheneverthat might be--and it may be midyear or conceivably earlier ifeverything goes rapidly--that it would again be possible to target onMl, but we didn't think it would be the same animal. So, even if itbecame possible to target on M1 when all the shifts are over, we mightbe left with an animal that has a very different composition if NOWaccounts dominate; it may have a large mix of investment-type fundsand transactions funds, something like a money market fund. And,therefore, it would behave differently than the old M1, and it wouldtake some time to analyze and evaluate its behavioral characteristics.That's no more than saying, of course, that the new M1 could be likethe M2 that we now have, but it would be somewhat better in the sensethat it would at least have more transactions components in it thanM2, which has the transactions component and a much wider variety ofassets. So, for the reasons given in the memo that I don't need torepeat, we tended to hope that M1 would come back and be a somewhatviable target around midyear, maybe not in the full force it has had12/20-21/82before but at least viable enough that the Committee would not feelthe need to ignore it within a broad range.M2, of course, also has its transitional problems. I thinkwe went to some pains to point those out; and we tried to makeestimates in the Bluebook about how much M2 might be affected by theshifts. We think that pretty clearly we are not likely to see shiftsout of M2 into market instruments. So the shifts would be from marketinstruments into M2, perhaps even from large CDs or from Eurodollarliabilities into M2, through these money market deposit accountsmainly. And we would think, if the behavior of NOW accounts is anyguide, just in terms of the speed of transition, that much of it wouldbe finished over a 3- to 4-month period. We have not estimated quiteas fast a transition as occurred with NOW accounts largely because alot of the money that would go into these other accounts is in marketinstruments, which bear a relatively high interest rate, so in a sensethere's [no] need to rush. But our estimate, with a wide range oferror around it, was that in the first quarter perhaps something like3 percentage points at an annual rate worth of funds might be shifted;and that would raise M2 for the year something like 1 to 1-1/2percentage points [because] of shifts. We think the effects on M3would be a little less because of offsets. That is, if banks getmoney through MMDA accounts they may issue fewer large CDs, not tomention shifts directly from large CDs into MMDAs. So, we don'tbelieve M3 will be as much affected as M2.One of the problems, if the Committee does wish to continuetargeting on M2 and M3 for a longer period--let us say, 3 to 6 monthsor whatever--is that, as the Committee knows, we don't get as muchautomatic response because of the reserve requirements. The averagereserve requirement is much lower on M2 and M3 than it is on M1. It'son an order of magnitude of 2 percent as compared with 10 percent;it's 5 times lower. And since M2 doesn't vary proportionately as muchas M1, we just don't tend to get as large an automatic adjustment.Now, this would lead to a greater need for the kinds of judgmentaladjustments that we have been making with regard to M1. We normallymake them on the up side, when the total reserves demanded are $200million or so in excess of the total reserve path; we have more oftenthan not lowered the nonborrowed reserve path in order to provide morerestraint. And with regard to M2 and M3, it's possible that if theCommittee wishes to retain roughly the same sort of handle, such ajudgment might have to be made a little sooner because the automaticresponse simply is not quite as great. I ought to point out somethingthat I think was in the memo but maybe not as clearly as it shouldhave been: If you're targeting on M2, you don't have to control itany more closely than you have controlled M1 in the past to get abetter GNP performance. In some sense it has that advantage becauseinterest rates are a lot more sensitive to efforts to control M2; youhave to push the interest rates to control M2 because it has verylittle interest elasticity. So, if you're off on M2 by roughly thesame [percentage] amount as you're off on M1, you might have moreinterest rate movement and, therefore, more impact on GNP. So, whileit's more difficult to control, if you miss it but you're trying tocontrol it, you may get a somewhat better GNP performance. On theother hand, this has risks that are important because if you happen tohave specified the wrong M2 target or the wrong M3 target--if thedemand for M2 relative to whatever GNP is satisfactory to you hasshifted and you're making a big effort to control this broad M with12/20-21/82little interest elasticity, or even a narrow M with little interestelasticity--then the penalty on the economy will be much greaterbecause interest rates will have moved very rapidly and the economywill be behaving very unsatisfactorily in the situation when thetarget is wrong. That means, of course, that you may want to thinksomewhat cautiously about letting the money market adjust until you'refairly certain that the movement in the broad money supply is trulyreflecting credit demands and GNP behavior and does not simply meanthat the public's behavior has shifted and you have chosen the wrongtarget. So, those are the kinds of risks involved when we move towardbroader monetary aggregates and even when we have an M1 that has lessinterest elasticity.Now, we examined even broader aggregates, which got us to thevexing question of credit. I don't have much to add to the verycarefully worded concluding section on credit in Part I [of the memo]where we as a group thought that credit would provide a reasonablecontext for judging financial flows but felt that as a short-run guideto monetary policy it had its problems, at least at the present stageof our knowledge, given the statistical problems we think there areand the vexing questions of cause and effect that are also involved.Certainly, these kinds of questions also relate to the broadermonetary aggregates, so it is a matter of degree as you go out [towardbroader measures of money and credit] as to where you think the effecton GNP [dominates] or where you think there is some causal connectionbetween what you do to the aggregates and GNP. There arecontrollability problems with regard to total credit that are simplythe same kinds of controllability problems we have with M2--possibly alittle worse--and I've mentioned them with regard to M2. The questionis: Can it be controlled independently of controlling GNP? Or whenyou go to total credit, are you in fact simply saying you are goingdirectly to GNP, so the control mechanism there is not just simply areserve base to money kind of control mechanism.We also discussed the narrower aggregates, the monetary baseand the nonborrowed base. As a group we felt that the monetary basebasically should be viewed as derived from the demand for the variousother aggregates, so that it did not really save the Committee thedifficult task of making judgments about the more standard aggregates.It might disguise that problem a little, but in the end when you comedown to making a decision, you really have to judge whether you arehappy or not when M1 is coming in strong and the monetary base is ontarget. So we felt that it was really a derived demand and in thatsense did not give it much weight. The nonborrowed base is also insome sense derived from the demand for the other aggregates but atleast borrowing is available as a buffer so that it can accommodateshifts between demand deposits and currency; thus we thought there wasa little more to be said for the nonborrowed base as a target ratherthan the monetary base. However, we felt that the nonborrowed basehad somewhat less public credibility than either the monetary base orany of the other Ms and we did not in our own thinking put much weighton it as a guide to the Committee. Nevertheless, I would say--andothers here can speak for themselves--the more we thought about it,most of us began to see some virtue in it.Looking to the immediate problem, in the context of providinga directive between now and the next Committee meeting, one might betempted to take the view that the [shape] of the adjustments to the-10-12/20-21/82new accounts will be much clearer by early February when the Committeehas to decide on the long-run targets and, therefore, that over thenext few weeks in this initial adjustment period the aggregates willprovide virtually no basis for guiding policy. Even if they're goingto provide a difficult basis in February, the question would be: Whatbasis would they provide between now and February? Theseuncertainties immediately ahead of us--the unknown range of possibleoutcomes--seems to us to be greater for M1 than for the broaderaggregates, as I've mentioned. However, there are uncertainties withrespect to the broader aggregates; the direction of effect seems clearbut the magnitude of effect is uncertain. Moreover, partly because ofthe wide range of assets involved, it is going to be very difficult tomeasure the magnitudes actually shifted after the fact, althoughobviously we will attempt to assess them from the behavior of variouscomponents of the series [constituting the] aggregates, questions todepository institutions, econometric evidence, and consumer surveys.Despite all these problems, the suggested directives forCommittee consideration in the Bluebook retain the broad aggregates asa guide between now and the next Committee meeting in February. Thereare number of reasons for that but an important one is to insure thatthe public understands that the Committee is continuing on the anti-inflationary course set earlier, even while taking steps to stimulateeconomic recovery. That is particularly important at this time inview of the doubts that seem to be emerging, at least in bond markets,about the Federal Reserve's intentions. I may put slightly morestress on that than Mr. Sternlight put on it. The last discount ratecut was followed immediately by a drop in long-term interest rates andalso short-term rates, but the declines in long rates subsequentlyhave been reversed as have the drops in short rates to a degree. Inpart these reversals might have been the result of unusual mid-December tax period pressures in the money market combined with thecoincidence of unusually heavy Treasury and state and local governmentborrowing demands. Still, many in the market have come to wonderwhether in practice, even if not in concept, the aggregates are notbeing ignored at the expense of stoking inflationary pressures later.In that context it may be something of a tactical problem whether ornot the Committee specifies a [monetary growth rate] in the directivethat appears relatively high. If some credence is given to thestaff's estimate that shifts into M2 in the first quarter will be atan annual rate on the order of 3 percentage points--and I stress thatthere's a wide range of uncertainty around that--then a relativelylarge number would probably be needed for M2 to accommodate thatshift, as indicated in the three Bluebook alternatives. However, ifwe are right about the nature of the shifts that will take place, arelatively moderate M3 figure would seem to be attainable. If a highM2 number is stipulated in the directive and if a moderate M3 is notfelt to be a sufficient counterweight, the question naturally arisesas to whether an indication should not also be given regarding ourpreliminary thinking about the extent to which that high number isaffected by shift distortions. The risk of doing so is that in theweeks ahead the System may then have to provide a specificquantitative shift adjustment factor, a highly conjectural procedurein my opinion under current circumstances. Qualitative-type judgmentsabout the extent and nature of shifts will be necessary in any eventbut quantification, apart from fairly broad ranges, is likely tostretch the available data beyond its reach.12/20-21/82An alternative approach to the directive would be to providea relatively low M2 figure and indicate that growth could be high ifthere were evidence that shifts were distorting M2 by a significantamount. Since the figure initially given should probably accommodatesome amount of shifting, I would think that a figure representing M2growth for the first quarter much lower than 9 or 10 percent may betoo far out of touch with possible developments, unless of course theeconomy and/or the rate of personal saving is much weaker thancurrently anticipated. If a figure in the 9 to 10 percent range orfractionally lower is inserted initially, it would seem that inpractice the Committee might wish to tolerate a reasonable range ofgrowth around it, certainly in the initial weeks of the adjustmentperiod, before any substantial automatic changes in money marketconditions occur. This might also be the case for the relatively highfigure, though in those circumstances shortfalls might appear moretolerable to the Committee than overshoots. If the Committee goesthat route, the initial tilt given to the money market by theCommittee assumes more importance than usual in the sense that theodds increase that the tilt will last for several weeks, the nextscheduled meeting being 7 weeks from now. With borrowing from thediscount window already near frictional levels or implied to be so bythe reserve paths, there is only a little, though some, scope for theCommittee to ease market conditions, if that's the inclination,without risking losing touch with the market by setting a reserve paththat could come to involve virtually no borrowing and thus virtuallyno anchor for the federal funds rate. On the other hand, the discountrate does remain as an available guide to money market conditions ifborrowing is left to fluctuate around or slightly above a clearlyfrictional level. That probably would put borrowing in a $200 to $300million range, based on recent experience, although there is afuzziness about the edges of that range. I apologize for the lengthof [my comments], Mr. Chairman, but it was an effort to bring theshort- and long-run [issues] together.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you made it all crystal clear foreverybody, I'm sure of that! I think the most interesting things inthis paper are the chart and tables on the last two pages. To sum up,I think that's--MR. PARTEE. Nothing looks any good!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. Every one of them is off thetrolley in the past year.MR. PARTEE. Even credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You pay your money and you take yourchoice. And I think that is a fact of some significance. Maybepeople have firmer ideas than I do, but I would not discount entirelyhaving a meeting before February 8-9, if that seems desirable andseems to be a way to make some progress. Let us open up the floor forany general discussion there is at the moment. I assume there will besome.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a question, Steve. You havein your monthly pattern an extremely low growth figure for M2 forDecember, 4-1/2 percent. That seems a little hard to believe,particularly since you are arguing that the [main] influence of the-12-12/20-21/82inflows to the new accounts will be to expand M2. How do you get the4-1/2 percent figure?MR. AXILROD. Well, M2 has been very weak [this month] andthe average level through the first half of December is notinconsistent with that kind of growth rate. We foresee only a smallexpansion over the rest of the month beyond the fragmentary data wehave through the middle of the month. I would say there is some doubtabout that; it could come in higher. But I would put the range ofestimates between 4-1/2 and 6-1/2 percent. I don't think we'reexposed, at least at this point, to a real burst of M2 growth. Twoyears ago we had a huge drop in M1 components in the last two weeks ofthe year, which saved the year in 1981. I think that was the yearwhen we had the sharp [December] drop in M1; we don't have that builtinto this M2 estimate. What we have is virtually no increase in thenontransactions component. You are quite right that the 4-1/2 percentgrowth is something that might not develop, but it's not inconsistentwith the pattern of weakness that has developed in the last couple ofweeks when we have been surprised by the weakness.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These problems are related but I think ourdiscussion of general problems might logically precede discussion ofthe specific problem for the next few weeks.MR. CORRIGAN. Steve, in the larger paper, and I think in theBluebook as well, the point is made on several occasions that we areleft with a 2 percent average reserve requirement on M2 and 1-1/2percent or whatever it would be on M3. The inference is that that isthe problem. My question is: Is that the problem or is it thedefinitions [and] elasticities? Suppose we had an aggregate the sizeof M2 but it was a nice clean M2 like the old M1 or something likethat, then wouldn't a 2 percent average reserve requirement be morethan adequate?MR. AXILROD. Well, if it has a lot more interest elasticityone might have to see; if it doesn't, then it's not going to be. Butone can go into that problem another way, too. We used the 2 percent,but it's an open question as to what really will happen in the shortrun. We could do this [in such a way as] to have a massive effect inthe short run. If we assumed that in the short run there was nothingwe could do about money market funds and all that and that all wecould affect was the demand deposits subject to reserve requirements,then we could construct the path in such a way that when money fundswent up we would force all this money out of demand deposits. Thenthe reserve requirement we are dealing with is 10 percent and wewouldn't be trying to affect everything proportionately because wewouldn't believe that's what would happen in the short run. If we didthat, of course, we would get massive interest rate effects in aneffort to control it. That's what led us to suggest a shadow of 3percent or something in between.MR. CORRIGAN. I guess I understand. I certainly agree withwhat you are saying in terms of the kinds of results we could face butI have some problems with the notion, even as you elaborated it, thatthe nub of the problem is that we have a 2 percent reserverequirement. We would have the kinds of problems you're talking aboutif we had a 5 percent reserve requirement.12/20-21/82MR. AXILROD. Well, yes. I suppose. I haven't made thecalculation. I suppose there is some reserve requirement. If it were100 percent, we would have no problem because we would force whateverinterest rate adjustments were required, and they would be massive.So, at some point, we would find ourselves with a reserve requirement,given the interest elasticity, that would make us feel comfortable.I'm not sure exactly where it is.MR. CORRIGAN. The reason I asked the question is because youhold out the hope that when all this transition is through we may beable to go back to a happy world of M1. I have some trouble, given areasonable guess as to what the components of M1 will be and what itis going to look like, seeing how even by June or July we are going tobe able to operate in that happy little world.MR. AXILROD. I would say, President Corrigan, that we didhold out the hope, but mostly we didn't really want to be in aposition of prejudging it at this particular time. I guess we mostlyfelt that something was needed between the Committee and GNP. If wedon't have some aggregate--I don't see much else to choose from, theothers may speak for themselves--between the Committee and GNP, thenin that case you might just as well start controlling interest ratesdepending on your best assessment of what is going to happen to GNP.That is what we were grappling with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was the happy little Canadian experiencementioned at this meeting or mentioned someplace today? They justabandoned M1. They had this beautiful record of the past 5 years ofM1 steadily going down and inflation steadily going up.MS. TEETERS. Steve, with all the nonreserveable componentsthat are already in M2, aren't you going to have a rather majorproblem trying to estimate what the multipliers are? For any givendollar of reserves we really don't know how much inventory it creates.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's true. There can be a lot moreshifting within M2, but we get a flow of data continuously and we canadjust for that. If money market funds were strong and demanddeposits were weak but M2 was on course, we would simply reduce thereserves for that purpose. Now, with lagged reserve accounting, wedon't have any problem with that. When we get the contemporaneousreserve accounting, then we're likely to be faced with a moredifficult problem because it could happen in a current week that moneymarket funds are strong and demand deposits are weak. If we put inthe reserves as if it were going to be vice versa, interest rateswould drop. So, with contemporaneous reserve accounting there is moredifficulty with multiplier adjustments. They don't come withcertainty after the fact. But in principle, that is what we would bedoing.MS. TEETERS. But then wouldn't you have trouble drawing areserve path if you weren't quite sure where it is going to go?MR. AXILROD. Yes, but that's in the nature of reserve paths.That's right. That's the problem with anything less than 100 percentreserve requirements and targeting on anything that has aggregates init that aren't subject to reserves. The controllability to a degreeis reduced. That's quite right.-14-12/20-21/82MR. PARTEE. In the discussion of M2 and to some extent M3 inboth the paper and the Bluebook, Steve, the numbers that you are usingseem to suggest that you're looking almost immediately for thedownward movement in velocity to end, except perhaps for the shiftadjustment. I note that in the third and fourth quarters we had adecline in V-2 at an annual rate of around 5 percent. If that were tocontinue into the first half of next year and we added that to the GNPnumber we wanted and added another 3 points for the shift adjustmentfrom market instruments into M2, we could have a very large numberindeed, like 15 percent. Is there some reason, other than hope, thatyou think [the adjustment in V2] is about to end?MR. AXILROD. Actually, we're thinking in terms of anunderlying [growth in] M2 in 1983, independent of shifts, of somethinglike 8 percent. And we have nominal GNP growth on the order of 7 or7-1/2 percent, so we have a slight--MR. PARTEE. Very little.MR. AXILROD. --downward movement in velocity as not out ofkeeping with that. It's hard to tell exactly what would happen, butwe feel that when we get to the point of price stability--and I don'tknow whether we'll get there, but assume we get there--that the store-of-value function of money will be restored in some sense. Peoplewill be more willing to hold money at any given level of interestrates for its store-of-value function because they are not losingpurchasing power. At least that is what we think. So, from thatperspective, there'd be a one-time increase in cash balances when thatoccurred. I would be very reluctant to predict whether it would occurnext year; it seems somewhat doubtful to me, but it may. The basisfor our assumption for next year was that some of this presentliquidity that has been provided would tend to be used up. We're notusing up much of it because we still have a slightly downward tilt tovelocity. If we're using up a lot, we might see velocity go up and wewould have a somewhat more rapid recovery. We have projected a rathercalm picture with no rise in interest rates from around current levelsin the course of next year. On that thought we have not projectedwhat many are predicting--that there will be a sharp turnaround invelocity. We do have it calmer.MR. PARTEE. Yes, but [velocity is projected to be] a lotless than it has been. We were getting a decline of 5 percent and nowyou have just a very little decline.MR. AXILROD. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to begin by commendingSteve and his associates for what I think is a very good paper. Imight add that I've heard everyone who has discussed this say the samething. I agree with a lot of its major conclusions, particularly thatwe just can't use M1 as a target in the intermediate period. I thinkM2 is probably the best target that we can use. I don't see where wecan really throw M3 in there. But I believe there is some differencebetween the staff position and my own as to the emphasis we ought togive M1 at this point. The paper clearly recognizes, it seems to me,that it is desirable at some time to return to maintaining some kind-15-12/20-21/82of relationship between M1 and our policy. But [the paper] seems abit vague to me [on that point], and I would like to see us make thata little more definite. Most of you probably are not going to buythat view at this point, but I'd like to see some kind of commitmentto return to M1 targeting by mid-1983 unless it clearly is notpossible to do so. I don't think we really know whether it will beclearly impossible or not. I favor this for two reasons. One is thatI think the pricing policies of Super NOW accounts and money marketdeposit accounts is going to be pretty well set by midyear and thelion's share of that shifting is going to be behind us. From then onout we should be able to use M1 itself or develop some reasonably goodshift-adjusted M1 that could serve for targeting purposes. My secondreason is that in the past--it may not be true in the future butpresuming that it will--M1 has been a better predictor of the behaviorof nominal GNP and prices over the long run, despite all theseregulatory changes that people thought would destroy its validity. Ithink it's quite possible--in fact, this is what I think will happen--that the money market deposit accounts and the Super NOWs will bepriced so that most of the savings and investment money will go intothe money market accounts and most of the transactions money will gointo the Super NOWs. And in that case I see no reason why M1 wouldn'tcontinue to bear a pretty good relationship to nominal GNP and prices.So, I would like the presumption to be that we will go back to M1unless we find that we can't do it. That would be my main emphasis.I have two more points beyond that. One is that I wouldrecommend very strongly that we devote whatever resources arenecessary to see what we can do in the way of developing a reliableshift-adjusted [M2]. I realize that is not an easy thing to do but Ithink it's something we have failed to try. My second point is that Ilike the idea of the shadow target but I reach a somewhat differentconclusion from Jerry on that. I'd feel a little better if we bumpedit a little higher because it's not practical for the Committee toparticipate in these ad hoc adjustments made to the borrowed reservetarget between meetings. So, I would like the automatic part to belarger than it has been in the past. I think I'll stop right there.Well, one other point. If the interest elasticity of M2 isless than that of M1, as it probably will be, and if the elasticity ofM1 is less than it has been in the past because of this innovation,then I think we necessarily would have some larger movements ininterest rates than we've been willing to tolerate, if we're going tostay on whatever path we finally end up with. So, all of these thingslead me to suggest that the automatic adjustment mechanism ought to bemade as strong as the Committee is willing to accept.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I share Bob Black's comments on thepaper. I think it's a very fine paper, and not only because I agreewith most of what is in it. But it does not make it very obviouswhere we should go from here.MR. PARTEE. You mean we have to deal with that too?MR. FORD. He kept looking for the bottom line!MR. WALLICH. I would like to note that if you want a surveyof targeting possibilities, some are not in the paper. While I12/20-21/82wouldn't recommend these, I think there are serious contenders. One,on the basis of the research done here at the Board, is that the useof intermediate targets is inefficient and that better and moreprecise results can be obtained by targeting on the real sectordirectly. On the other hand, there are many arguments against that,including the political one, but it is something that one ought tobear in mind as one makes these choices. Also, I note that there isnothing in the paper about exchange rates. Again, while I don't thinkexchange rates are a proper target for this economy, they are targetsthat are used in other countries, in the EMS countries for instance.That again is something to think about. I would think certainly thatexchange rates might play a greater role in our targeting in thefuture than they have. We have a little sentence [on them] in thedirective but not much attention is paid to them. Finally, there is areference to nominal GNP. You may recall that Martin Feldstein camehere a few weeks ago and gave us a talk recommending that we target onthat. I think that's dangerous advice. It means playing God, and thecentral bank should be a humble technician administering theaggregates and not trying to say what nominal GNP is to be.On M1, I share all the points made in the paper. I think wehave to wait and see if we should use it, if it becomes viable again.What I hear from the market is that the money market deposit accountsmay prove more attractive or may be made more attractive by the banksthan the Super NOW accounts, but we will have to wait and see.Certainly M1 is the one element in money supply targeting that to mecarries any real conviction; with M1 we are dealing with transactionsbalances and there is some reason to think that they do guide theeconomy--of course, always through interest rates. On interest ratetargeting, which is rejected in the paper, the way I feel is that theyare what we should target on if we had the knowledge and no politicaldifficulties. But we have a great difficulty, of course, in decidingwhat the right rate is and it would be difficult to sustain it in theface of opposition. But since I believe the economy runs on interestrates, not on money, it is in one sense better to target directly oninterest rates than it is to target on money and let money determineinterest rates.Well, to come to what is doable, I think M2 is our best betin the short run. We have to keep it very flexible with a wide rangearound it. It is attractive in the sense that trying to control itproduces large changes in interest rates which control the economyeffectively even though we do not control the M2 aggregate itself veryeffectively. We may have to accept considerable deviations. Thebase, I think, perhaps deserves a little more support than we've givenit here, particularly the nonborrowed base. Fundamentally, of course,the base is currency and it's hard to believe that the economy runs oncurrency. However, currency is about the best behaved variable wehave because it's the one about which the least is known! Most ofthese $500 dollars per capita that we have in the form of currencypresumably isn't active in the American economy--[it's in othercountries such as] Mexico or destroyed. The base, because it is afairly stable aggregate, is a safe aggregate to target on and one thatwould not give us a great deal of trouble, particularly because we canmake allowances for misadventures to currency such as [possible] largeshipments to Argentina or a boom in the underground economy. Butother than that, I think the nonborrowed base has something to commendit. On credit, I feel the same way as the paper does. It is-17-12/20-21/82informative; it has meaning but it is technically difficult. The dataare poor, late, and subject to revision. And it is difficult tocontrol. So, I would go for a credit aggregate larger than bankcredit as an associated device. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You didn't mention prices on your listingof targets.MR. WALLICH. Well, as I contemplate setting a price goal,were we to put the CPI at 350, then aim at it for five years andovershoot, we would then have to bring that price level down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that very different from theaggregates?MR. WALLICH. Yes, the price level, of course, is a part ofthe real sector and that's what we need, I agree. But I think that iswhere the emphasis on using instruments protects us against thefailures that are almost certain if we were to target on prices.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Like Bob Black, I certainly thought that Steveand his associates did a fine piece of work. It is a reallysystematic, in-depth examination of the pros and cons of differentoptions. It is a bit frustrating I'm sure, Steve, to have done allthis work and not come up with any positive clear-cut view, but thatis in the nature of these things. We are faced, I believe, in theshort run here with a lesser evil in a way. I'm a little lessoptimistic than you are, Mr. Chairman, about the possibility ofknowing considerably more by February than we do now, and I'd justlike to suggest a couple of reasons why this uncertainty may go on fora while. You know better than I that the DIDC may drop another shoe,so to speak, at some point between now and midyear in the form ofSuper NOW accounts for business. I'm not sure to what extent thatmight change the behavior of the aggregates, Steve. Perhaps you couldcomment on that when I get through, please.Another thing that may continue this uncertainty a littlelonger than perhaps is indicated in the paper is that there is someindication--I think I just read it in this morning's Wall StreetJournal--that the standard money market funds are beginning to fightback now. And that certainly is just the opening gun in a battle thatmay go on for quite a while. The specific instances that you probablyread yourself this morning were with regard to Fidelity and Vanguardfunds, both of whom have made arrangements with banks to shift theirfunds to a bank in case the customer insists on a bank-type moneymarket account. Fidelity is hooked up with some bank; I can'tremember what it is.SPEAKER(?). Continental.MR. BALLES. Oh, Continental. And Vanguard is going with the[Bank of] Boston, I believe. Heaven knows what this is going to do,with the amounts showing up in M1 and M2. So, I just don't have afeel as yet as to how long this uncertainty will go on. But Icertainly agree with what I think was your conclusion, Steve, that itwould be premature to dismiss M1 forever. On the other side of the12/20-21/82coin, I feel it would be premature, using the words that Bob Blackstarted off with, to commit to returning to M1. That [wording] wouldbe a little stronger than I would be prepared to support. But I agreewith Bob's concluding comments that we certainly ought to make itclear that we will be prepared to re-examine M1 when the dust issettled and very possibly return to M1 as a target.Meanwhile, my very, very tentative instincts tell me that ifMl doesn't settle down and start behaving in a way that has apredictable demand relationship and predictable effects on theeconomy, the nonborrowed base might be the thing to look at much moreclosely. But I think it would be a mistake to move to something asesoteric as the nonborrowed base just for some interim period ifthere's any hope at all of M1 finally settling down in a way that wecan use it. The problem of explaining the nonborrowed base to thegeneral public, the Congress, and so forth would, I think, be veryformidable. Meanwhile, I think you have come up with a good--in myopinion, the best--interim solution, which would be to stay with M2for some months ahead and see what happens to the behavior of Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't want to suggest, if that was theinference that you drew, that all this would clarify itself byFebruary. I only drew the conclusion that maybe we would have talkedit through a little more by February, not that the numbers wouldsuddenly clarify themselves. You had a question for Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. One of the reasons we suggested midyear as thetime to relook [at Ml]--and we were a little hesitant about that--wasthe thought that the DIDC presumably would have this interest bearingchecking account for businesses coming on stream, although I'm notsure [that will happen], by early spring. So there would be a littlemore time to see how that behaves. I would assume the adjustment tothat might go a bit faster than for the others but I really have noway of knowing in advance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will have Mr. Morris, and then Mr. Rooswill give us the opposite side.MR. MORRIS. To consider returning to M1 by mid-1983 isextremely unrealistic, I think. Not only do we have the potential ofthese corporate accounts but we also have the experience that it takesa long time for people to adjust fully to changing their cashbalances. The New England experience with the NOW account was that ittook three years to reach equilibrium with NOW accounts. I never didbelieve the idea that the change would take place that much morerapidly in the country at large. And the fact that NOW accounts havebeen growing over the past year at about a 35 percent annual rateleads me to question the maturity of this device. So, I don't thinkwe should expect that the public is going to adapt to these newaccounts very rapidly. It seems to me that goes against the grain ofall our earlier history. Neither should we expect that money marketmutual funds are going to sit back and let the banks take all theirmoney away from them. I would expect, for example, that the next moveby the money market funds would be to offer unlimited checking. Wealready have unlimited checking with Merrill Lynch's cash managementfund.MR. FORD. And no minimum size of check.-19-12/20-21/82MR. MORRIS. No minimum size check and no limit on the numberof checks. One pays for the cost of processing with a service charge.If the Super NOW account turns out to be very popular, which I thinkit will, it seems to me that the money market funds will respond byoffering unlimited checking, which will open the ballgame again. Whenthe dust does settle sooner or later--I think it's unlikely to be bymid-1983--what we call M1 is going to be a very different animal, asSteve indicated, than the M1 of earlier years. And it's going to takeus 5 or 6 years of experience with the new animal to develop anyconsensus as to how it's going behave relative to nominal GNP and howwe can control it. Certainly, there is no scientific basis forexpecting that it is going to behave relative to nominal GNP in thesame way that the old M1 did.There is a lot of theology on M1 floating around at thismeeting. Steve mentioned a couple of things that raised some of thebasic issues. He talked about the vexing questions of cause andeffect in using credit as a target, as if to suggest that there are novexing problems of cause and effect with respect to money, a pointabout which I would raise serious questions. I agree with Henry thatwhat moves the economy is interest rates and not the black box. Stevealso raised the question of whether credit can be controlledindependently of GNP. I suspect that it cannot. But I have not seenany demonstration in the last three years that we control M1independently of GNP. The idea that M1 is so interest-sensitive thatwe can control its rate of growth by interest rate changes so small asnot to have any impact on the economy I find hard to believe. Icannot reconcile that theory, that doctrine, that theology with whathas happened in the past three years when we finally made very bigmoves in interest rates to get M1 under control and those big moveshad very big impacts on the economy. So, I find a lot of conflictbetween the facts and the theology in the case of M1.I think we need a proxy--an independent intermediate target--for nominal GNP, or the closest thing we can come to as a proxy fornominal GNP, because that's what the name of the game is supposed tobe. If we have to target something that is not predictably related toGNP, which M1 has not been in the past two years, one of two thingscan happen. One is that we can do as we did in 1981 and say the M1shift adjusted, which was our target, is coming in too low and we arejust going to let it come in low--we're not going to use it as atarget de facto. I think that was the right decision. If we hadtried to hit our targets for M1 in 1981, we obviously would have puttoo much money into the system. I think the targets have misled usthis year. That is, up until October when we finally caught up withit, it seems to me that the monetary aggregates misled this Committeeinto following a much more restrictive policy than we intended. Andthat is reflected in a nominal GNP growth this year, which we're nowestimating at 3.6 percent, that I don't think any of us a year agowould have [favored] as a target for nominal GNP.It seems to me that the best proxy for nominal GNP in thisworld of enormous change is the rate of growth of debt. Now, that maynot be a perfect proxy, either. But we certainly don't want to goback to interest rate targeting. Politically, I don't think we couldadopt a nominal GNP targeting approach even though theoretically thatis what we ought to be doing. I don't think we can do it. We need aproxy for nominal GNP.-20-12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is that political objection?MR. MORRIS. Well, let's say the President comes out inJanuary and says we are going to have 12 percent nominal GNP growth,and you go up before the congressional committee in your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony the next month and say we're going to finance a 9percent nominal GNP growth. It seems to me it is not well suited tothe needs of the central bank to be that far out on a limb.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How far do you think we can go in thatregard by saying we're going to project a 9 percent credit growth or 9percent M2 growth or something that is inconsistent with the 12percent [nominal GNP growth]?MR. MORRIS. I would merely submit that we've been gettingaway with this on the money supply for a number of years. I'm quiteamazed that we have. But I think it's very clear that theintermediate target should not be politically sensitive. And thewonderful thing about the rate of growth in the money supply, for allof its problems, is that it was never a politically sensitive itemsuch as the unemployment rate, or interest rates, and so on. NominalGNP, if we were to use that as a target, would be a politicallysensitive target, and we ought to avoid it for that reason. But weneed a proxy for it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I think I'm going to miss you. The only way I'llever be able to get my blood pressure up is to go back to arguing withmy wife again! The impression I got from the paper that Steve and hisassociates put together--and I certainly can't add anything to it--isthat all of these targets are flawed in one or more ways and thatperhaps M1 presents fewer problems than the others. I was tempted toconclude after reading that paper that there really may be no way todo the job with any certainty. Maybe we ought to look at a lot ofthings and not concentrate on any one target, as some of us are quotedas saying. But I'm not sure that that will work. In the last fewmonths we have looked at a lot of things; and although the M1 figuresthat we're seeing may be meaningless, that 16 percent growth over aquarter is disturbing to a lot of people.It seems to me that we have two primary objectives in thisCommittee: One is to achieve as low as possible a level of inflation,and I think we should get very good marks for having achieved that,which incidently we achieved by a consistent lowering of M1; the otherand probably the more immediate concern at this moment is to try toachieve an improvement in economic conditions. As I see it, the worstthing that could impede our desire to improve the economy domesticallyand our hope for improved international economic conditions would befor interest rates to climb rather dramatically--if we had asignificant backup in interest rates, at least at the long-term end,which I think is perhaps the most important ingredient in the market'sperception of what we are doing.From the few people I've talked to, I sense a nervousnessamong some market participants in reflection of the problems that theyknow we face and in our statement that we would have to, for veryunderstandable reasons, pull away from M1 [as a target] for a while.12/20-21/82The question on the minds of those that I've talked to is: Is thisgoing to be temporary or is it going to be permanent? Rightly orwrongly the markets and the public generally have come to look at M1as something that is important. And if we're going to reject M1, it'sgoing to have to be done in a very convincing way because that is themeasure that an awful lot of people look at. I would endorse what BobBlack said in that I think that it's terribly important, though Idon't how to do it, to emphasize that we have very serious intentionsof coming back at some time to M1. I would like to see our 6-monthprojections include some M1 figure, maybe with a much broader band,say, 5 or 6 points. But that would at least give credence to the factthat we are not dropping M1 and that we really have something withwhich we're steering this ship. I don't think we can say--andcertainly nobody at this table would want to--that because thisproblem is so complicated we're just going to run our business by theseat of our pants, because that isn't going to be satisfactory and itisn't going to be productive. This has nothing to do with theology.I would hope, just for the sake of market perception, that somecredence is given to M1 and that the Chairman will make a very strongstatement that for the immediate future M1 is seriously flawed butthat it does have certain long-term advantages not shared by most ofthe other possible targets. I hope we will say that we have notforgotten M1, because once the markets think we are in effect closingour eyes because we're overpowered by this complex set ofcircumstances, I think we're in for real trouble. I would just pointout in closing that when the NOW account situation presented itself tous, as I recall, we really overreacted to the complication and the[duration] of the complication due to NOW accounts; that settleditself after a relatively short period of time and we were able toadjust. I think we ought not to abandon M1 totally.MR. MORRIS. I disagree with that statement that we haveadjusted for NOW accounts. I don't think we have at all.MR. ROOS. Well, we were able to drop the adjusted M1, Frank,after less than a year. And according to the analysis our researchdepartment did, had we targeted on unadjusted M1 and never had thatadjustment we would have had a relatively pretty result that year.MR. MORRIS. Well, I would submit that the rate of growth ofMl in 1982 would have been substantially less than it was--that a lotof the NOW account money would be in savings accounts.MR. ROOS. Well, of course, Frank, we have the capability ofmaking our target, whatever it is, perform as we want it to throughour open market operations and other techniques. So, if it didn'tperform in accordance with our desires, it may be that we didn't leanon it to the extent that we should have, but anyhow--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose it is true, Larry, that we canmake it perform just the way we want. Say we put a target out thereand we are right on the target with M1 but the unemployment rate is at20 percent.MR. ROOS. You pointed out in a very persuasive way at thelast meeting that it was a matter of choosing risks, and I would agreewith you. But I fall out with some of this reasoning in that Ibelieve that if the markets get the impression money is growing too-22-12/20-21/82quickly, interest rates are going to shoot up and we're going to befaced with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that is what I'm addressing myself to.If markets have that impression, some people anyway are going to benervous; I think they are today. But suppose we were in this dilemmawhere money has to grow faster to keep the GNP up. What are you goingto do?MR. ROOS. Well, we may be between a rock and a hard place.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that I agree. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. The staff called our attention repeatedly tothe range of uncertainties in these estimates, and I'd like to startby stressing that. If one takes a look at table 2 in the Bluebook onpage 8, one sees the staff estimates that for the year 1983, fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter, flows to M2 will add somewhere between 1/2and 2-1/2 percent to the growth rate of M2. But they get to thatconclusion by going through a whole series of instruments and bymaking estimates that are often clever and often well conceived but inthe final analysis are off the wall. That is said not in any way todenigrate the work of the staff. There is simply no one who can knowwhether out of the $350 billion in CDs $1 billion or $50 billion isgoing to shift. Now, if these uncertainties are bad for M2, think ofwhat they are for M1. From my standpoint, when the estimates for 1983imply somewhere between a reduction of $8 billion and an increase of$24 billion, which is an increment of from minus 2 percent to plus 5percent for the growth of M1, that aggregate is a very dangeroustarget until these things settle down.There has been some suggestion that the way out may be tolook at something like the nonborrowed base. I don't interpret thestaff documents the way others must be interpreting them. The staffsaid that if we start with these problems and go back to the totalmonetary base, we'd be dealing not only with all those problems butone more: the instability of currency demand. Therefore, that isgoing to be a horrible target. Some of this horribleness would beremoved a bit if we went to the nonborrowed base. To focus on whatthe nonborrowed base would mean: If the demand for money is -4 andwe're trying to push out 10, we're going to be dumping in reserveslike gangbusters. So, borrowing will go down to the floor to keep thenonborrowed base exploding and interest rates will fall. And we arejust going to be all over the place. We are going to have wildinstability in interest rates. As I look at what the staff has said,the best we can do at the moment is to focus on a broader aggregatelike M2. I come to that conclusion not without some sympathy forwhere Frank Morris is. But the main problem with a credit target isthat we simply don't get the data with the kind of timeliness we needin order to make it a sensible intermediate target for monetarypolicy. It's just not there.MR. MORRIS. Could I add a point here? My staff hasestimated that we can produce a monthly debt number two weeks afterthe end of the month. We sent their analysis down to Steve Taylor andSteve said it was right.MR. AXILROD. No, he didn't.-23-12/20-21/82MR. MORRIS. Well, maybe he told them it's right and he toldyou it's wrong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The answer to this question depends uponwhether or not one is in favor of a credit aggregate.MR. AXILROD. It's closer to three weeks or four. It dependson how much estimating one wants to do. But on the same basis thatyour staff has, President Morris, we would estimate around four weeksunless we wanted to do a little more estimating than is actuallyimplied in that memo. It's a technical difference, but I think thereis a difference. You might do it in two weeks. The truth is that wedon't have such a series. We don't have it seasonally adjusted. Andwe don't know anything about its volatility characteristics. The lasttime we had one--and we could develop it again--was about 15 years agowhen Governor Partee and Governor Gramley were running the division.MR. PARTEE. It was at least a dozen years ago. It was sovolatile we couldn't--MR. AXILROD. It was so volatile, actually, that we gave upon it. It can be developed. I don't think the lag is two weeks; Ithink it's closer to three or four. But it certainly could beestimated. Our estimate is 65 percent in two weeks as against your 85percent; we could estimate that 20 percent and add it and not beterribly far off. But we don't have it available in any real senseand it hasn't been tested. That doesn't mean it couldn't be developedor shouldn't be developed. But we're not near it, in any real sense,from our point of view. But if the Committee wants--MR. GRAMLEY. My own line of thought on this is that for themoment the best thing we can do is to focus on M2. I think we oughtto shift adjust it; I would agree with Bob Black that we ought to getthe best figures we can get. But I want to call to the Committee'sattention that with the kind of uncertainties we face, there isn'treally a serious choice theoretically as to whether we ought to bestabilizing interest rates or stabilizing quantities. The theory ofstabilization of quantity develops from the hypothesis that demandsfor money are more stable than demands for goods and services so thatgreater stability can be provided to the economy by focusing onquantities and stabilizing them than by focusing on rates. My ownguess would be that we're in a situation now, if we're going to usemonetary aggregate targeting, where we have to be a lot more flexiblethan we have been in the past. And we have to give a lot more weightto seeing to it that interest rates don't go through wide swings. Ithink that's also the implication of what Steve has been telling usfor some time about the insensitivity of demand for M2 to changes inmarket interest rates. If we are not very careful--if we try tocontrol M2 too closely--we're going to see interest rates moving allover the map. And, frankly, I don't think the present very fragilestate of the economy will permit that.MR. BALLES. May I ask a question, Lyle? With regard to yourstatement that you consider M1 to be a very dangerous instrument, wasthat in this interim period ahead or more or less indefinitely?MR. GRAMLEY. For however long it takes for the demand for M1to settle down. Maybe it will settle down by midyear; then we can12/20-21/82reconsider that decision. I'd hate to decide now, however, that bymidyear it will definitely happen, because as you mentioned, John--MR. BALLES. I agree with you then.MR. GRAMLEY. --the new accounts for businesses, which may ineffect end the prohibition of interest on demand balances, may comealong soon or it may not. Who knows what is going on?MR. BALLES. We'll all reserve judgment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait just a second.MR. MORRIS. You started out talking about the flow impactsfor M2 and how they are off the wall; it surprised me that youconcluded that M2 is what we ought to be targeting on.MR. PARTEE. Flexibly.MR. GRAMLEY. What I said was: It is better than M1 and Iknow of no alternative at the moment. And because of thoseuncertainties, I think we have to use a lot of flexibility--in effectgive a lot of attention to how much movement of interest rates we'rewilling to tolerate to shut off an excessive growth of M2 or tostimulate growth that is too low. If we're not awfully careful, we'regoing to be chasing an aggregate the demand for which is being changedby financial innovation rather than something fundamental going on inthe economy. That's why I want to shift adjust this as soon as[possible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Lyle has said verymuch what I wanted to say; I may just go at it in a little differentway. I agree with those, however, who say that we shouldn't bury M1totally. We ought to keep it in the background. It has served usvery well politically in the past. Perhaps it could again. It mayhave some informational content, as everything settles down, that wewill want to use in the future. As a result the fact that we merelyset it aside for some period of time to be looked at again isimportant. Lyle has made the point that I wanted to make with regardto the interest rate volatility of the proposal made in the paper,using what I think is the only reasonable variable to guide us in thefuture, and that is M2. We'll have to pay more attention to interestrates and thus perhaps build in an interest rate target, whether wepublish it or not, that constrains some [rate] movements.I would just ask a question of Steve or others with regard toM2. It looks to be very stable on a quarterly basis, but if you lookat it on a monthly basis, just taking this year as an example, it hasranged from about 4.4 percent growth in February and what would be 4.5percent in December, if we hit that [estimate], up to about 14percent. In about 6 months of that period it was above 10 percent and[in the other] 6 months it was below 10 percent. The question that I-25-12/20-21/82would pose to Peter or Steve is this: How does the Desk propose tooperate without some interest rate constraints? I'm saying, as Lylehas just said, that we have to pay more attention to interest rates; Idon't understand how the Desk would accommodate either an increase ora decrease in the nonborrowed path for the purpose of trying to adjust[operations] in an intermeeting period on [the basis of] a directivegiven to the Desk following the meeting.MR. AXILROD. Well, in general, M2 is less volatile than M1,though it is volatile, of course. But what would happen as it movedoff a path is that the built-in response would, in fact, be lessbecause it is less volatile than M1, fortunately. So the built-inresponse could be less and the practical question would be [whether totake] a $200 million, roughly, movement of total reserves beyond wherethe Committee wanted it on average to trigger an ad hoc adjustment tothe nonborrowed [reserve path]. It may be as we gain experience thatit will turn out to be more [appropriately] like $100 millionmovements if M2 is targeted. That would trigger a downward movementof some amount in the nonborrowed path because the automaticadjustment isn't big enough. That's the nature of what would happen.MR. GUFFEY. But you're going to expand that when you go tothe shadow type of reserve requirement--the 3 percent as opposed tothe 2 percent?MR. AXILROD. Well, that would only be if the Committeewanted to; we just suggested that.MR. GUFFEY. Well, my point is the one that Lyle made: ThisCommittee should pay attention to interest rate movements, if we'regoing to target on M2 as suggested by the paper, using a 3 percentshadow reserve requirement. Interest rates have to be more importantto the intermeeting operations of the Desk.MR. AXILROD. One thing I may not have made clear, Mr.Chairman, is that the way the shadow requirement was set is that wefigured out what would give us for the average variation in M2 thesame average variation in interest rates that we have had. M2 wouldmove a little more [in relation to] that [interest rate] variationthan M1 would have, but the economy would be roughly the same. If youtake M2 times its velocity, you would be getting roughly the same GNP.So, you get the same interest rate movement, but because M2 isn't asinterest rate sensitive you can get a little more [change in] M2 thanyou would have in M1 relative to its path, but roughly the same GNPoutcome because the velocity behavior will be offsetting to a degree.MR. GUFFEY. Isn't it true that if we had been following thisfor the last six months, we would have had interest rates moving up ina period of time, say, in the fall--September, for example--when thatwould not have served the Committee's purpose well?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we were operating with instructions tobe accommodative of some overshoot of M2 as well as of M1.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I guess that makes the point that I wantto make: That being flexible with respect to the interest rate rangethat I think should be established by the Committee at this meeting isan important ingredient of targeting M2 in the period ahead.12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, we've heard from thetheologians and now we will hear from someone who is maybe notagnostic but at least a little more eclectic. To me it's very clearthat we will continue to need some kind of rule that is more flexible.I think we need that for the reasons of self defense, in a politicalsense, that have been identified by many others. But we also probablywill need it for a self-disciplinary reason as well. The point willcome, though I don't know when, when there will be a need to raiseinterest rates or to tighten or whatever you want to call it. And forpurposes of this Committee in terms of its internal functioning aswell as its external relations, a rule serves a very good purpose.Again, it should be a flexible rule, too. There has been somequestion about nominal GNP and things like that. I have a lot ofproblems with those kinds of objectives. If we were to pick somethingat that level, I'd be more inclined to pick the price level, but eventhat to me is a can of worms. It puts us in a no-win situation interms of our ability to deal with other problems, the politicalproblems included. The biggest difficulty I have with a lot of thediscussion, at least implicitly to this point, is that there seems tobe some sense that after all these shifts have taken place ourproblems will go away. I think that may be just when our problemswill begin because after the shifts have taken place, each of theaggregates, M1 included, is going to mean a different thing inrelationship to GNP and interest rates and velocity and the pricelevel and everything else. Now, we try to capture that difference bysaying in some sense that the interest elasticity in the future willbe at least different, and in most cases smaller, than it has been inthe past. But I'm not sure that even that statement fully capturesthe extent to which the various Ms will be indicators that tell usthings in the future that have much of a bearing on what they havetold us in the past.Whatever else all of that means, I think it does meanunequivocally that the danger of interest rate overkill, even with M1after all these shifts have occurred, will be greater and indeedpotentially significantly greater than it has been in the past. I dothink that for the next three or six months if need be we can probablymuddle through--if that's the way to describe it--along the linesimplied in the Bluebook and suggested in the larger paper, partlybecause we have a built-in smoke screen for that period and partlybecause, in my judgment at least, it will be extremely unlikely inthat timeframe that we will have to come to grips with the need totighten monetary policy materially. My suspicion and my hope would bethat when the transition is finished we will know enough about M1 thatwe can use it in a more flexible way, but I'm not even sanguine onthat point. It is probably a premature judgment. But I do think, asmay have been implied by Mr. Guffey's comments, that at some point weare going to have to take a more in-depth look not just at thequestion of which of these indicators should serve as the primaryguides to monetary policy, but a fresh look at the operating side--questions as to how to draw a reserve path and what kind of responsemechanism to build in automatically. Otherwise, my hunch is that sixmonths or nine months from now it is still going to be a pig-in-the-poke in terms of which one of these variables we think is best. Andif that's the case, what will become more important at that time is-27-12/20-21/82the manner in which the Committee wants to go about trying to steer--and I say steer, not control--the variable or variables that it thinksbest suit its overall purposes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hear all these comments about thepolitical viability of targeting nominal GNP, which I understand. Iwant to offer an observation. I would be very surprised if we gotthrough the hearings in February without being asked to reconciledirectly whatever target we have with whatever nominal GNP theAdministration has. And if it does not reconcile, we're going to havea big problem.MR. FORD. You could always change your inflation forecast.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have the nice range on velocity ofcirculation to use to reconcile.MR. MORRIS. If you use a velocity number, they can't proveyou're wrong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we say they have to accept thatfigure. That's--MR. FORD. You're saying you have to agree with their nominalGNP forecast?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There will be an effort to push us intothat, without any question.MR. FORD. Does that mean you have to agree with theirinflation forecast?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's not the problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a little room for maneuvering,but I think we're not going to be so lucky as we were in past years inevading that issue. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Several of us have commented on the probablelength of time of the transition. I'm one of those who come down on[the side of] the long transition theory. It has been said that thelength of time it will take before [we can assess] the behavior of thenew instruments and indeed the old instruments, which also may havetheir interest ceilings changed or removed by the DIDC, depends on theaggressiveness of bankers and their marketing efforts. I think that'sincorrect because I observe that the commercial banks in the countryare going through a few other phases and adjustments right now. Ifyou add in thrift institutions, several dozen of them are failingevery month. That's a rather difficult transition. Now they aregoing to be adjusting to noon presentment [unintelligible] and allthat implies with regard to the clearing processes, and to ten percentwithholding, which is putting a slight strain on most of their papershuffling. There are loan write-offs, international complications,etc., etc. If we shift our view from concepts and abstractions towhat is going on in the institutions that are out there, I think onecan at least make a case that the transition period is going to berather extensive. And I would suggest to you that the consumer isalmost as confused as his friendly neighborhood banker. It's going to-28-12/20-21/82take those consumers a while to settle down and determine where theywant their balances and how much and what kinds of services they wantfrom institutions that are changing their offerings of services ratherfrequently these days.I'm not as concerned about the journalistic recitation ofexpectations of the markets as I am about the behavior of the marketsthemselves. I don't believe that Milton Friedman, my old friend HerbStein, Lindley Clark, and the rest of those good folks are going todetermine how the market reacts to what we do here in terms of M1 orM2 growth targeting, the changes in the directives, and so forth. Ithink market participants are much more likely to react to thecontinued flood of negative or at best neutral information with regardto the company they underwrote last week, last year, or two years ago--literally to the bottom line of a corporation whose securities theyare attempting to make a market for--to unemployment, to the exportindustry complications, to shortfalls in business fixed investment,and to all the rest of what is happening in the real world, and not towhat Lindley Clark says in The Wall Street Journal. Therefore, Ithink we have some action space to pursue some aggressiveness in M2and some tolerance of M1 because the real world is just not shaping upvery well for 1983.So, I'm endorsing what has been said with regard to acontinued surveillance of M1. It is certainly attractive. We've allexercised our due diligence now and looked at many of the othermeasures. And, certainly, we should try to reinstate M1 in thepantheon. But in the meantime, in what I think will be a longtransition period, I would hope to see us discuss in our directivesand our public utterances both M2 and M3. I'm not wild about M3 as amarvelous measure. But look back at those tables on velocity at theend of the excellent work that has been done here. I would hate tosee us confined to one measure among the aggregates when velocity oneyear is +4 percent and another year -5 or -5-1/2 percent. I'd like tosee us have a little flexibility in the aggregates targets and,lacking something better, I would suggest M2 and M3. It's a bitvague; certainly M3 is a bit vague. For that matter M2 is not a modelof clarity. But I'd like to see M2 and M3 specified and a little moreemphasis in our public utterances on interest rates. We're notfooling anybody, you know. The folks out there know that we're payinga little more attention to interest rates. Why not come right upfront with it? That we look at M2 and M3 as the validator is a plus.I think the word flexibility is part of the key to this. I wonderback on the discount rate cut, which wasn't exactly a world beater,what the markets would have done, as they firmed up, if we hadn'treduced the discount rate. So, I opt for flexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how much longer [we cancontinue]. We're not going to get through everybody on this [issuetoday]. Not everybody wants to say something. Maybe we can gothrough a few more. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think it is the time for focusing onwhat works rather than some predetermined theology. That is clearlywhat we need. Jerry Corrigan put it well: An intermediate target isa very useful thing to have both for political and self disciplinereasons. I think it's going to be a while, if ever, before M1 isclear. The idea that M1 is going to clear up enough by midyear just-29-12/20-21/82strikes me as unrealistic. Perhaps it will, but I think it is goingto take a while for the reasons that Pres Martin mentioned. I wouldgo with M2 as a primary target and with M3 as a secondary target,using credit as an informational variable. But I certainly would stayquite flexible, with a sharp eye on interest rates.With respect to the point that you raised about making ourtargets consistent with the Administration's, it does seem to me thatvelocity gives us a fair amount of leeway. [This year] we've had thesharpest drop in velocity in the postwar period, and heaven knows whatvelocity will do next year. It would seem to me that quite wideranges could be very helpful in terms of being consistent with what wethink is appropriate for M2 and M3. As to when or whether we willever get back to M1, I would approach the issue with completepragmatism, not a theological bias, and just keep an open mind. If itdoes clear up and we can make a case that it's a reliable variable atsome point, then it's fine with me to go back to it. But I don'tthink we ought to force it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think this velocity argument isgoing to work during this period; it will work the other way around ifthey are at all smart, which may be an overestimate. They are goingto say "I see velocity went haywire last year, so you have to give usa commitment that you're not going to follow that target but are goingto adjust for whatever velocity does. And you better hit that nominaltarget."MR. BOEHNE. I have a great deal of confidence in yourability to fuzz things up and to cut through to the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Paula Hawkins may not let me. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. What is motivating me in my approach in this verycomplex time that we are going through is that the more complicatedthings get, I tend to react to them by going back to the more simplethings we know more about. There are two things that worry me. Oneis what worries everyone else on this Committee, and that is that thetune is changing on us in our waltz with M1 or M2 or anything else weuse. And if, as a result, we don't provide enough liquidity, then theeconomy is [going to be] down to where the chart outside your doorshows it is. I think there was a time when we had charts on themonetary aggregates on the wall, but there are none left now: it'sjust interest rates and the unemployment rate by your door. When onelooks at what is happening in the world, we are worried seriouslyabout creating a depression here. That is implicit in Chuck'squestion: How do we know velocity won't be even worse? The obviousanswer is that usually we'd be thinking about [the economy] going theother way in a normal, cyclical manner. His feeling and that of manyof the people on the Committee is that we basically are in anhistorically discontinuous mode. Things aren't relating in the waythey used to; innovation is messing up the picture and, therefore, thebig danger lies on the side of retaining some kind of religiouscommitment to any one of these monetary variables we're fooling aroundwith and overstaying the period of recession and causing a crash.That is what is on our minds; that's what it's really about. At allcosts we must avoid not doing the number one job of central bankers,which is to keep enough liquidity out there to keep the economy going.That is what you are worried about and that is what we are reacting to-30-12/20-21/82and that is why we are backing away from most of these things. Theinnovation arguments are part and parcel of that.There's another thing that worries me. It comes from mybackground as a professor of economic development and history. Andthat is that if you look at the longer-range experience of whatcentral banks in this country and other countries have done wrong onnumerous occasions in this century--especially in other countriesearlier in this century--there is another thing we can do that wouldbe terribly wrong. I think we're doing it now. And that is tovalidate the classic mismanagement of public policy of a government,and I mean both domestically and in foreign countries. What I seehappening in our own country under Reaganomics is that we have had anenormous increase in the size of the public sector relative to theprivate sector. There has been a tremendous increase in publicspending and, under Reaganomics, it has shifted away from investment-type activities toward consumption-type activities; defenseexpenditures can even be called consumption.Around the world we are looking at Mexico and asking what iswrong with Mexico. The answer is that the Mexicans are consumingpublicly much more than they are willing to produce and to taxthemselves to support. There, too, the problem is public sectorexpansiveness that they have validated internally with monetaryexpansion and that our banks have helped to fuel with excessive loans,which we are now choosing to call performing loans when the truth ofthe matter is that they are not performing loans. The same goes forPoland. Look anywhere in the world where there's a crisis. Anotherway of looking at the crisis is that one dimension of it involves toomuch public sector expansion that the country is not willing tofinance [by reducing] current consumption in the private sector. So,they're trying to have everything at once. And to me that is the nubof the problem that we're facing as we look around the world, both ininternational and domestic affairs. So, I see us getting into adifferent danger than the one that many of you are worried about andthat is, through everything we're doing right now, the danger ofmonetizing excessive public consumption at home and abroad on a verylarge scale and using all these technical arguments as a way, ineffect, to validate it. That to me is an equally great danger that isevery bit on a par with the depression worry that worries all of us,especially the rest of you. It can lead to exactly the same place.If I am right about this and it's the second danger that weought to be focused on, then a year or a year-and-a-half from nowthere will be a tremendous fiscal stimulus plus the monetary stimulusthat is now building up, not just here but on a global scale. We aretalking about increasing the IMF [quotas] by 50 percent or 100 percentand pretending that all those loans are good, and forcing the banks toincrease [their loans] by 5 to 10 percent. When I add all that up,that worries me. From the other side, we can create a furtherexpansion of credit, which will blow up in our faces and leave usright at the place that we are worried about anyway. As I see it,when we stand back from all the technical issues we're dealing withhere, we have to ask ourselves what we are doing as policymakers. Wehave to recognize that we can go wrong either way. And I think we'regoing wrong in the second direction right now.12/20-21/82It is with that background that I looked at this long paper,which comes to some interesting conclusions. My conclusion was thatthere is something wrong with every single measure. M1 has a fewproblems, as do most of the other [measures]. Nobody would argue thatM1 is perfect. I surely wouldn't vote for it. But I don't think someof the other things mentioned, like credit or debt, are perfect asmeasures. Frank was for L for a while; then he abandoned that one andcame up with debt. The problem for me with debt is not timeliness; ifI were arguing Frank's case, I'd make the argument that if we made thesame effort to get timely and comprehensive data on debt that we do onM1, M2, and M3, we could solve the timeliness part of it with lessresources. But the question is the causality argument in terms ofwhat is happening to the composition of debt. Let's not ignore thefact that there has been tremendous innovation in debt instruments andin composition of the debt, just as there has been on the liabilityside of the things we are talking about. And the view that thehistory there is any more relevant than the changing history of the M1relationship, I just don't see, frankly.So, my bottom line on this is that we should remember we canlose in either direction and the danger is that we will err on theside of monetizing public sector consumption that is excessive notjust here but also abroad. If we do that, how will we know when we'redoing that? I would say we ought to look at everything the market istrying to tell us, not just what Lindley Clark says or what otherssay. I have pages of them here, if you want to see them, and it's notjust from one side. The bottom line of this one is that there is nodoubt whatsoever that the Fed is inflating again; that pretty muchsummarizes what the market watchers are saying, whether or not theyare right. But I'd complement that by looking not at what they say,but like everything in life, at what they do. Gold is up by $150since June. Some of the commodity indexes are starting to turn up.The bond market is starting to get a little shaky on us. Many of youseem to think the dollar is automatically over-valued; I don't knowthat. If you take a look at all these things--what is happening togold, to the commodities futures markets, to the bond market, toforeign exchange markets, and you see all those things start to looklike the world is telling us we are going too far, we had better stopbefore we go too far down that track. And I think we're starting onthat track. Therefore, my bottom line on all this is that, yes, wehave to compromise some with M1. due to all its imperfections. Butlet's not err on the side of expansionism too long because we havealready done a lot of expanding in terms of policy and we haven't yetwaited to see what effects it will have. There's a long lag. We arelooking at today's unemployment rate but doing things that will [not]be felt for months. And the actions we took a few months ago willshow up hopefully in the first and second quarters, when I still thinkwe are going to have some recovery, and I hope things will get better.Overall, that's how I see all this. And I hope these few commentswill help some people to understand why I tend to be on theconservative side of this policy debate we are having. Thank you, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have time--it's 5:30 p.m.--forthe two remaining names on my list, if their comments are not toolong. Mr. Keehn.12/20-21/82MR. KEEHN. I will be brief. It seems to me, for all thereasons we've said, that we are going through a period of very highuncertainty. And during this transition period, while certainly weshouldn't abandon M1, I think we should deemphasize it considerably.I don't know how long it's going to take before we can re-utilize it,if in fact we can, in the way that we have in the past. But I agreewith Governor Martin that the length of time required will be muchlonger rather than shorter. Certainly for the foreseeable future weshould deemphasize it. It seems to me that we have pulled off thisdeemphasis of M1 pretty well; I am impressed by that. I think themarkets have by and large accepted it to a greater degree than Iexpected. In all the public comments that you have made and everybodyelse has made we are putting greater emphasis on M2, which I wouldagree we should do, with a balanced view. And I think there is someconsiderable market expectation now that we will be following M2. Thethe very last thing we ought to do at this point is to introduce somenew esoteric aggregate that we plan to follow, which could serve toconfuse the markets. So, having introduced M2 in this way, I think weshould carry through with it and use it as our principal guide. Italso seems to me, in looking ahead, that we ought to be contemplatingan increase in the range on M2 next year--in my view by a considerableamount. Meanwhile, we have an economy that is awfully sick in myview. We could very well be in a recovery phase. But the people Italk to, particularly on the industrial side, as I said earlier,continue to be very, very pessimistic. I think we should put a veryheavy eye on interest rates, not only domestically but as they pertaininternationally. We simply cannot at this point afford to have anyincrease in the rates we have some level of control over--mainly onthe short-term side--for fear of the possibility that a recovery willbe snuffed out. So, I'd be in favor of M2 but I also would be puttinga very careful eye on following the interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It falls to you, Governor Partee, topronounce an interim blessing.MR. PARTEE. Well, I actually agreed with a good deal of whatFrank Morris had to say. First of all, I think it's clear that wehave to have in mind the nominal GNP under the conditions of whatevertime period we're looking at. And I guess that has a little somethingto do with what Bill Ford said. We don't want a really low nominalGNP because it might just take us right on down the hill. On theother hand, of course, we can't have too much monetary expansion overa period of time or it will affect the inflation rate over the longerrun. Today, given 4 to 5 percent inflation, I suppose we ought tolook for nominal GNP of about 9 percent, which would be 5 to 4 percentreal growth. Now, I don't mean that we should target it, but we haveto have it in mind; that really is what we're trying to get at anypoint in time. We have to have some linkage to the nominal GNP.Well, one linkage is transaction balances. And that, of course, isthe old M1. I supported that [aggregate] for quite a while. But Ireally think it is badly damaged and is going to be badly damaged forquite a while. Even if, as Steve suggests, after the stock adjustmentwe get back to a place where two-thirds of M1 is transactions money,one-third of it won't be. And that one-third will always have aconsiderable potential for movement that will muddy what is happeningin the transaction relationship between what we're doing with moneyand the nominal GNP that we really would like to see over a period oftime ahead. The other connective that I can see is credit. It seems12/20-21/82to me that credit flows are very closely related to the performance ofGNP some time out. I agree with Frank in that I don't see thiscausality argument running any more against credit than it doesagainst money. It's just the way people look at things that makesthem say it in the one case and not in the other. My problem is thatI just don't think we are prepared to go to credit. We don't have thebackground work done. We don't have the figures and we don't knowwhat the behavioral characteristics are; and, therefore, we can't doit now. But I hope we will do it in the period to come. "L" adjustedactually is the best figure in the set of tables, Paul. That's aninteresting thing. Adjusted "L" is the best result.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just the [Divisia L].MR. PARTEE. The [Divisia] adjusted "L," which is--MR. BOEHNE. How would you like to explain that?MR. PARTEE. I just point out that it has the best record;it's better than the rest. But it does suggest that it may be afairly complicated relationship. The thing that bothers me about M2and always has bothered me about M2 is that I really don't see how wecan affect it very much other than through affecting the economy. IfM2 were running high, would you raise interest rates or lower interestrates to get it down? I'm not really quite sure what direction wewould want to move unless one says M1 is running too high and thatmeans the economy is going to be too strong and, therefore, we want toraise interest rates in order to reduce income flows and that willlower M2. One might say that, but that's a different thing to saythan that we are targeting on M2. It's obviously reflective of theeconomy. Well, I agree that we have to use M2, which I thinkinstinctively is the wrong thing, but it's the only thing available tous now. And I would agree with Lyle that we certainly want to be veryflexible in the way we do it because we have very little way ofknowing what the number is likely to be; and then seeing what it is,we have very little capability of influencing it. So, we better havea wide range.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have a complete consensus onaction if not on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will resume tomorrow morning.[Meeting recessed]12/20-21/82December 21, 1982--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can come to order. I think we canproceed with the conversation we were having yesterday evening, ifadditional people want to say something. I have two names staring atme here. I presume that they indicated that they wanted to add to ourdiscussion. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I want also to congratulate the staff on a verythoughtful paper. I've read and listened very carefully over the pastcouple of days and, quite frankly, I think we're back to being asclose to "the feel and tone of the market" as we've been in thirtyyears. The relationship, I think, is to nominal GNP and itscomposition, not just to total GNP. But we want the rightrelationship between real growth and inflation. As I see it, webasically have three instruments of policy. One is reserverequirements, and that line to M1 has become even more muddy; it neverwas very good because we never fully got through the phasing in of theMonetary Control Act. And now we have an instrument that doesn't have[comprehensive] reserve requirements on it. The [reserves] link to M2is very tenuous and it's getting worse. It may well be that themultiplier adjustments will become the major instrument in thedetermination of policy, in terms of actually carrying it out ortrying to figure out what we're doing. The other instrument we haveis the discount rate, which we can move at the recommendation [of aReserve Bank]. And finally, it's the provision of reserves eitherdirectly through the open market or through [discount window]borrowings. And through this we get to money, credit, and interestrates one way or another. We can do it a number of different ways,and we have done it different ways over the years. The problem is howto determine the amount of reserves we're going to put into thesystem. Those normal historical relationships that we've been used tohave become disconnected. We don't have a stable demand for moneyanymore and we have a history of changing velocity this year. Evenabstracting from the financial innovation, those relationships aren'tvery good. And if we add the innovation, they get worse. As I seeit, we used M1 targeting as a means of performing traditional monetary[policy] functions, which was basically to help engineer a recessionin order to slow down inflation. In fact, what we've done is almostclassical. We sort of hid behind M1, but that is what we accomplishedone way or another.It seems to me that what we need to do now is equallytraditional and that is to get interest rates down low enough to getsome real growth going in this economy. I don't really care what wecall it--whether we call it targeting on M1 or whether we have broadinterest rate targets or something of that sort. I'm perfectlywilling to go along and pay lip service to targets if that's going toget us out of this box. Fortunately or unfortunately, for at leastthe next six months, nobody is going to know what to do anyway. Theywon't even know whether we're hitting the targets, given all the moneythat is moving around out there. So, when I thought through my policygoals, at least for the next three months and possibly for the nextsix months, I concluded that what I want is a federal funds rate inthe 6 to 8 percent range and borrowings at the frictional level. Ileave it to the staff to tell me what rate of growth in M2 will get methose two objectives.-35-12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Speaking of prices, let me just interjectin case you haven't heard it: The consumer price index seasonallyadjusted rose 0.1 percent in November. It's as low as it is primarilybecause of declining mortgage interest rates. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also would like tocompliment the staff on an excellent paper, which was done under agreat pressure of time. I happen to know when they started to work onit, and I think it was an excellent job all things considered. LikeGovernor Teeters, I listened carefully yesterday. And while I have nonew insights as to how to deal with our problems, that was not yourfault. The discussion was an interesting one and helpful to me. I dohave some reactions and one main point I'd like to make, if I could.But first where I come out: I would join the emerging consensus andsupport the targeting of M2 at least over the transition period.Regardless of how one feels about the feasibility of targeting theaggregates in the long run, this is not the time to abandon targetingon a monetary aggregate, given the concern that already has emerged inthe financial markets as to the Federal Reserve's determination tocontinue to restrain inflation. So at least for the next few months,and possibly even beyond the transition period--depending on how M2behaves--I would certainly support the consensus that seems to beemerging. I would also agree with Bob Black that we should make everyeffort to shift adjust M2. I would not like to make a commitment atthis time to rehabilitate M1 after the transition period has passed.While M1 may prove to have the desired behavioral characteristics, itwill take some time, as Frank Morris has pointed out, before we candetermine that it does have these characteristics. M1, as pointed outby Mr. Axilrod, will be a new kind of animal and will have to beobserved for some time.Like some others around the table, I share some sympathy forPresident Morris' debt proxy and I think it certainly deserves furtherstudy. The problem with it now, from my point of view, is itscontrollability. I'm sure Frank would say: "What about our luck incontrolling the monetary aggregates?" I guess I would have to saythat we believe we can control the monetary aggregates, even if wedon't. At any rate, at this time there are control problems. I don'tknow how we would get total debt to perform as we would like it to.And, of course, the practical problem is the one pointed out byGovernor Partee. The fact is that we don't have the background yet[to target debt]. But, as I said, I would urge further study todetermine the feasibility of targeting on debt or some broad liquiditymeasure. Now, after the transition period, if M2 does not turn out tobe a satisfactory target objective, I think we are in some difficulty.We may well have to become more eclectic than we anticipate.I'd just like to say--and this is the main point that I wantto make--that I don't agree that the only objective forever and forall time of central bank monetary policy is to keep prices down, torestrain inflation. It seems to me, depending on the circumstances,that the primary objective of central bank policy could be maintaininga steady non-inflationary rate of growth. Or in other circumstances,for example with prolonged stagnation, [high] unemployment, and under-utilization of capacity, it might well be to promote recovery. Itseems to me that the primary objective of central bank policy hassomething to do with the most feasible option with regard totargeting. It may be, and I suspect is the case, that if the primary-36-12/20-21/82objective is controlling inflation, control of the monetary aggregatesmight well be the most feasible object of our targets. It may well beif our objective is maintaining a steady non-inflationary rate ofgrowth that we would want to target on short-term interest rates. Andif we're trying to promote recovery from prolonged stagnation, it maywell be that some variant of the debt proxy or perhaps targetingdirectly on GNP would be the most feasible road to take.And with regard to targeting on GNP, I don't agree that oneis playing God when one undertakes to probe for a rate of real growththat is non-inflationary. I think it makes perfectly good scientificsense to try to find such a rate in an economy at any given time. So,we may have some difficult choices to make with respect to monetarytargeting or other options beyond the transition period. I wouldsimply urge that we maintain a certain open-mindedness or flexibility,if you will, as we live from Federal Open Market Committee meeting toFederal Open Market Committee meeting. Hopefully, in time, the rightoption will emerge clearly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, although we all believe incontrolling the money supply over the long run, some of us are placingimportance on returning to targeting M1 as soon as possible--say, bythe middle of next year--and some of us are more skeptical. I don'tthink that creates a problem in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony; it'sperfectly finessible. [We should say] that we will be watching it andlearning from it what we can, notwithstanding distortions, and that ifwe see that it becomes free of distortions, it could be an appropriatetarget. I think there's a widespread feeling of uneasiness among usabout M2 and M3 as presently constituted. They don't have a trackrecord; we don't know what they tell us about nominal GNP. One thingthat bothers me is this: Suppose next year or the year after we beginto see inflationary pressures develop and we have to start tightening.If M2 and M3 were growing weakly and unemployment were over 10percent, what is our reason for tightening? What do we offer? I feelthat the fig leaf is pretty much tattered and that the mood of theCongress is pretty realistic. The country knows what we are doingand, therefore, that we have an important effect on economic activityas well as inflation. It seems that there ought to be a way offormulating our policy so that it meets the political realities and isa little more honest, and yet doesn't lock us into the bind that weall are familiar with. Therefore, I would recommend for seriousconsideration that we say the following: That we have certainexpectations about where M2 and M3 will end up--and perhaps avoid theuse of the word targeting; that those expectations would beimportantly influenced by trends and levels of real economic activityand trends and levels of inflation; and that we would be drawing ourreserve paths from M2 and M3 as we go along with the meetings. ButI'd be fairly honest about the fact that we're looking very heavily aswell at other considerations that are less important, such as nominalGNP and the exchange rate. Those would be the two important ones. Iwould add to that, just as reassurance to the markets, that our long-term policy, notwithstanding any possible alternate later weakness inthe Ms, would be to maintain positive real interest rates.SPEAKER(?). To do what, Tony?-37-12/20-21/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. To maintain positive real interestrates is our long-run policy. I think it's important to reassure themarkets. There are various ways of formulating that. We don't haveto use the term real interest rates, if that's thought to beobjectionable. We can talk about the levels of prevailing interestrates in relation to inflation. We don't have to get into theexpectations area; we can take the [unintelligible] version of whatpeople mean by that. I would have no objection to substituting forbank credit, which is a very narrow debt measure--as an associatedrange, not as a target--total nonfinancial debt. Again, I think thatshows a certain amount of responsiveness and flexibility on our sideand it is fairly realistic. I don't see that it would do any damage.It could be a monthly announcement but it probably would be aquarterly announcement if the staff and the Chairman felt that theydidn't want to do that much estimating and wanted to wait for harderdata.MR. PARTEE. We don't have a monthly series now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right; I'm aware of that.They could, as Steve said, get it out with some heavy estimating inmaybe three weeks after the end of the period. But if we didn't wantto do that, then it could be a quarterly announcement.There is one last comment I wanted to make and that is that acouple of people commented that they think we ought to do a shiftadjustment of M2. Even though privately the staff will certainly betrying to analyze the movements of M2, I don't see the desirability ofcalculating a shift adjustment for announcement purposes. I thinkit's much too dangerous. And I don't think it gains us that much.That's all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I think M1 has served us well and, indeed, itsbeing linked by theory to our ultimate objectives in the income andprice areas makes it very attractive. So I'm distressed that for nowand the foreseeable future it will not serve us as a reliable rule. Iagree that M2 is what we should be focusing on in the intermediateperiod. The question, of course, then remains how to control it,which has been discussed at some length. But I do think we need tohave enough control over it that it really is a rule and not just adiscussion point for the Committee. How do we assure the world thatwe're still in business? I lean toward having the Chairman make astatement that, while it may be premature to commit to returning to M1at a particular time or perhaps to commit to returning to M1 at all,as soon as possible we would look to return to M1 when experience hasaccumulated that would enable us to use it again. I felt [somesympathy] with Bill Ford's reasoning yesterday that there are dangerson one side of collapse and on the other of monetizing the debt. Thatthat would lead us to looking at other indications of what our policyis accomplishing made some sense to me. On one side we could look atnonborrowed reserves or the nonborrowed base; on the other side wecould look at the price of gold and long-term bond markets and thingsthat are linked by expectations of future inflation. The exchangerate suggestion also, I thought, was a very good one. The danger inthis, of course, is that we gain too much flexibility and don't havethe self-discipline of having a rule. Nonetheless, we aren't in-38-12/20-21/82normal times and looking broadly at a number of other financialnumbers in addition to M2 is perhaps called for. My concern remainsthat, once the economy does pick up, we must make some difficultdecisions about what the future course of the economy should be andperhaps effect a change in monetary policy in that we will be facing asituation with a federal deficit that will not decline adequately tomake up for the pickup in the economy. And M2 is a difficultaggregate to control at that point. But for the foreseeable future, Iagree with the consensus that M2 is what we should be working with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I also would agree with the consensus that M2 isprobably about the best we can do. I'm not ready to concede that M1will no longer be viable. On whether to commit to returning to M1, Iguess I would like to; but realistically that might be slightlypremature. I would couch it in terms of a presumption of returning toM1 if that proved feasible as we gain more experience. In terms ofthe public's perception, it does seem to me that the explanation thatyou gave in October of what we were doing could carry forward rightinto February. We will place less emphasis on M1 and more emphasis onM2, with the explanation of the institutional changes that are takingplace and have been discussed. That's all people read about. I thinkit's pretty understandable. I think a consistent story, much alongthe lines of what we used in October, would carry us through at leastuntil midyear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments? I don't know quitehow one summarizes this discussion. In some ways I think there was aconsensus; in other ways I think there was a lot of disparity. Let memake a comment about the deficit that has emerged from the discussionthis morning. I don't think there is much prospect of the deficitdeclining in any foreseeable time period, which is a more importantproblem maybe than some of the ones we've been grappling with in thelast couple of days, difficult as those are. The Administration'scurrent estimates are going to be higher than anything we've seen andwill remain higher. I think we have to have targets, just by law.And apart from the law, I didn't notice any great tendency around thetable to depart from them entirely in terms of monetary or credittargets.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Does the law use the word "targets"or the words "plans and expectations"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says "growth ranges." I was about tosay that we may want to deemphasize to some degree the word "targets."That may be impossible to do; we've used it so frequently. I takenote of what you have said, but certainly the consensus I hear aroundthe table is that we can't interpret this so rigidly in terms of whatis going on currently and prospectively. There was a good deal offeeling that of all these numbers M2 probably deserves the mostemphasis at the moment, but there are a lot of qualificationssurrounding that, I recognize. I don't think the M1 question is an"either/or" question. I don't particularly ignore it even today. Itssignificance may [involve] a much wider range, but if M1 hadn't beenrising as rapidly as it was rising in the last six weeks, wepresumably would have had an easier policy in some sense. Even now wecan't make out what is behind it; but it gives a lot of people,-39-12/20-21/82including me, a little pause when it is rising that fast even if it'snot a formal target. And that does to some degree influence what weare doing. So, there's a recognition that I wouldn't say [in mytestimony that] we will ignore M1; but it can't have the formal rolethat it had for some time anyway. I'd leave open the question of whenand how we can return to it.As for the total credit measure, I had this interchange withMr. Reuss and said I would put to you more or less formally whether wewould include it. I don't know that I used the word target; I don'tthink I did. Whatever I said was heavily qualified, but I said wewould consider presenting some kind of number for total credit. I'mnot sure everybody agreed with that, but unless I hear someobjections, I take it we will present some numbers for total credit atthe very least on an experimental basis. Exactly which series, howfrequently, and all the rest, we'll have to look at. But we will putsome kind of benchmark in there unless you tell me otherwise. Itcertainly won't be emphasized as a target, in capital letters, but assomething we observe and which may have an influence on us. I'm notsure that we want to control any of these [aggregates] all thatclosely, given the degree of uncertainty that exists and thosevelocity numbers recently. It seems to me that the direction of thesesignals is clear enough if they are all going in the same direction.If we get mixed directions, then we have a different problem. But ifcredit growth is high, M2 is high, M1 is high, and M3 is high, or viceversa, we know the direction in which we want to lean. How muchtolerance we have and whether we say we're going to hit that target,with a capital "T," and all the rest is another question. But itgives us information about the direction in which we would want to go.From that standpoint, if we don't have those targets in capital "Ts"in quite the same way [we used to], I'm not sure that the controlissue and just how interest-elastic they are and all the rest arenecessarily that much of a problem. That's my reaction; other peoplemay have different reactions.I do think we're going to be forced into a more explicitrationale, whatever we do, in terms of the nominal GNP. I'm notsaying we have to target nominal GNP very directly, and there areobviously dangers in that, but I do suspect that we're going to bedrawn out on that subject much more heavily than we have been in thepast. I think there is a real danger in that because it doesoveremphasize what we in practice can do. I think there's greatoveremphasis now on what monetary policy can do either in terms ofnominal GNP or interest rates. And it's very dangerous. It's partlyjust a matter of frustration. Nobody else can think of anything elseto do so they say that the monetary authority must have control overall these things and if they press the right button everything isgoing to come out right. The presumption is that there's a rightbutton to press; I'm not sure there is. Some problems don't have thatsimple an answer. I suspect we're in one of those periods, and weought to devote some attention to arguing that we're not all thatomnipotent. I myself would accept what some people have mentioned:That we keep an eye on such things as exchange rates or maybe evenmore importantly the price trend and the price forecast but that wenot formally target them.I wonder whether we need another meeting. I think there isenough convergence so that we don't need it for this purpose. I-40-12/20-21/82suspect that we may have a telephone meeting anyway sometime betweennow and February just in terms of current policy, and some of theseissues might be raised. Perhaps Steve Axilrod can send out some kindof format or framework as a basis for a discussion of some of thesethings. I'm not worried so much about what the precise numbers arebut about the framework that we might use to present it and to helpfocus the discussion in February. I'd do that considerably before themeeting and maybe even before a telephone meeting so that we can getany comments on it and see whether we're talking about the rightframework when we come back in February with some language about howmuch emphasis, what these numbers mean, and some preliminaryparagraphs--I guess it's not a directive when we present these annualtargets--we might write in terms of presenting the annual numbers. Wewill see whether we can come to some kind of conclusion about the waywe want to present this and we will focus more at the next meeting onwhat numbers we want to put in there or what modifications in thelanguage we want. On balance, I think we're left with what could betermed an eclectic, pragmatic approach. It's going to involve somejudgment as to which one of these measures we emphasize, or we mayshift from time to time. And if they move in diverging directions,we're going to have to make some judgments as to which one is moresignificant at any particular point in time against what nominal GNPis or what the goal is or what the real economy is doing and whatprices are doing and all the rest. I just don't see much alternativeto it. From one point of view it's not the worst thing in the world;that's the way the Federal Reserve used to operate, less elaborately,for years when policy by present standards looked pretty good.MR. BALLES. We seem to make our mistakes scientifically now!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. We may make bigger onesthat way. In today's world, with things so uncertain and upset, itdoes have dangers. It personalizes things much more, which I don'tthink is ideal. It leaves us with more expectational questions. Itmay be fine now, but everybody will say: What happens when the Boardchanges and the personalities change and you don't have a rule? ButI'm hard pressed to condense what we have to do into a simple rule,given all the uncertainties we face and given some of these numbersgoing off track. I don't think we have to apologize for the approach,but I don't think it's ideal. There was some question--Roger Guffeyand some others may have touched upon it a little--of explicitinterest rate targeting. I don't think we have to go to that. It's afine distinction maybe, but there is a distinction between having anexplicit interest rate target and having, as I'm sure a lot of peopledo around this table, some limits of tolerance on what interest ratechange one wants and some general idea as to the direction one wouldlike rates to go as one is interpreting the numbers and setting thetargets and setting the borrowing levels and so forth. And I thinkit's a distinction worth preserving. I'm not sure I'd want to confinemyself to talking about real interest rates or saying we have to havea positive real interest rate. I can imagine circumstances in whichwe might have to have a negative real interest rate. I don't think weanticipate it at the moment, but I'm not sure we want to have too muchat stake on a real interest rate.There was one thing I do disagree with, so I will just stateit. There was some implication and some comment that people would beperfectly happy with even bigger swings in interest rates--I may be-41-12/20-21/82overstating it--in order to keep some of these aggregates on target.That, I think, we cannot afford in the foreseeable future; I justdon't think we can. We have had too much [rate fluctuation] in thepast for my own blood. But given the state of the economy now I donot think we can be casual about thinking of swings in interest ratesof several percentage points up or down and just take that as a by-product of some target we're aiming at that we've not very sure ofanyway. That is one thing I would feel pretty strongly about myself.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree with you on large swings, butthere is some disadvantage in being tied as closely as we are to thediscount rate and not having any fluctuation of even, say, 50 basispoints.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'm not saying anything like that.I'm not sure we're tied that closely to the discount rate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's the way it seems to beworking out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, maybe during this period. ButI'm saying I don't think there's any implication of that at all.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if borrowing stays as low as itis, it leaves--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's because it has been a by-product ofborrowing being fairly stable. But that's a decision we can make allthe time, right? No, I'm talking about swings of several percentagepoints in an effort to get something back on target promptly.MR. PARTEE. It would take at least that on M2.MR. FORD. I'm wondering who is in favor of bigger swings ininterest rates than we've had. I didn't hear anybody say that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I may be hearing things that weren'tsaid. I don't think so, entirely. It's not a question of being infavor of it, but I interpreted some comments as saying that if beingless sensitive to interest rate movements is a necessary expense ofstaying on target, that's okay; we just move the interest rates more.I thought I heard some people saying that, but maybe not.MR. ROOS. How would what you just described really differfrom the 1977 to 1979 eclectic/pragmatic approach? I don't ask thisin a critical vein, but does this all add up to conducting policy aswe did prior to the need for shifting gears in 1979? Are we, ineffect, going back to looking at a whole lot of things and using ourintuition?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, to oversimplify, I don't think itbears much relationship myself to the particular period that you'retalking about. If I wanted to make a comparison I'd go back longerthan that; I would go back to, say, the early 1960s. I think it'smuch more elaborate than what was done then because we are looking atindicators much more explicitly. But it you look at enoughindicators, it does get a bit eclectic. There's no question about it.And I don't think we ought to apologize for that. I think that's the-42-12/20-21/82way the world is at the moment, but it has some disadvantages. Itwould be nicer, from a number of perspectives, if we had a simple,clean-cut rule. I just don't see what that clean-cut rule is for thenext six months or year anyway. And I think that's what I hear aroundthe table, too.MR. ROOS. But it does have a reinflationary potential,doesn't it? Again, I'm not being critical, but isn't this fraughtwith danger in that regard?MR. GRAMLEY. It could easily have a deflationary potential.It depends on how the judgments work out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what you might be saying, Larry,which a number of people have said--and I have great sympathy--is thatthe value of these rules is to discipline ourselves as much asanything. And if there are too many things to look at, one can alwaysfind some way to avoid that discipline. I guess we just have toappeal more to our internal discipline, but I think that is one of thethings we have to lose. I don't want to overemphasize the difference,but very broadly I would say we were willing to emphasize some ofthese things so much because we were preoccupied with that need fordisciplining ourselves and disciplining the economy. We were willingto accept a lot of guff, if that's the right word, and a lot ofpotential side effects because [the goal] was all important. It'sstill very important but the risks have shifted. We have made someprogress on inflation; we got it turned around. It's very importantthat we maintain that, but can we use such a simple rule as we havebeen using when the relationships between the rule and the economy,which never were all that great, have broken down at the moment? So,we have to look at one to one. I don't think I am saying anythingvery different from what I heard around the table.MR. WALLICH. We seem to be talking about the differencebetween the proviso and the rule. We've switched from this in thepast, as you know. We had an interest rate rule provided theaggregates or reserves didn't violate some constraint; then we movedthe other way. We had a money supply rule provided the funds ratedidn't violate some constraint. I think we're somewhat in this areahere. There is a difference in saying we have an M2 target, which wequalify by a number of other things, and saying we are looking at alot of things but we hope that M2 or some other monetary target comesout right and we will try to effectuate that. There is a differenceeven though the two [approaches] meet somewhere in the middle.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we need a framework for. WhatI think I hear, which I don't disagree with at all, is that thecentral target in some sense is probably going to be M2 for themoment. But that is going to be more qualified than the way we havepresented these targets in the past for two reasons. One is that wedon't know what institutional impact there is on M2 and we have toqualify it for that reason whether or not we can in some senseformally measure the shift adjustment. We are going to have to haveat least an informal shift adjustment. But that's not the onlyproblem. We also have velocity going off the trolley with M2 as wellas with these other aggregates. So, M2 is the central target--I guessthat's the right term to use--but it's a somewhat more qualifiedtarget than we've had before. What I think we're groping for is how-43-12/20-21/82to state that M2 is the central target but we also are going to belooking at these other things. One way is a kind of proviso--I don'tknow what formal language we would use--that if these other things aregoing off in a different direction, we will evaluate M2 in the lightof credit declining or rising or whatever or if M1 for that mattergoes way outside some range we would explicitly [take that intoaccount]. I find M1 rather inexplicable in November, not in October;the November behavior worries me and it's continuing into December.Maybe it will all wash out with this new account; it may wash out to aconsiderable degree or not all. So, we will wait and see. If itdoesn't, that worries me. As I said, I think we're tighter than wewould otherwise have been if that had not been going on.MR. FORD. May I ask what worries you about M1 in November?I, too, noticed that the amount of change in M1 went way beyondanything we were looking at in terms of all savers certificates, andthere was some thought that the [maturing] all savers certificateswould give it pop and then would phase out. But the fact is it's morethan that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would have expected the bulge we got inOctober in part because of all savers. But all savers maturities werenot that large in November, and I would have thought that after amonth or so some of that money would be moving into other investmentvehicles. An argument is that there are other things going on too.One argument is that everybody, or a substantial number of people, issitting there waiting for this new account. So that continues to havean influence. Who knows? Maybe we'll get a little more insight whenwe get the numbers on the new account, but we haven't gotten them yet.That's all I mean: I would have expected the all savers impact on M1in November to be rather sluggish, and it wasn't.MR. PARTEE. It could be temporary; it's hard to say.MR. FORD. It's worrisome. It's well beyond what we weretalking about.MR. PARTEE. It could wash out in the period right ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have the other problem thatFrank Morris keeps talking about. We seem to have assumed that theNOW account phenomenon was damped to the point of being nonsignificantin terms of shifts this year, and maybe it wasn't, particularly asinterest rates came down and got more competitive with the NOW accountinterest rate. If you look at the old M1, we had a very restrictivepolicy; even with the old M1-A, we had a very restrictive policy thisyear until just recently. Now, that has begun rising in the last twomonths, too, but in the early part of the year it did nothing.MR. FORD. May I ask your perception on one other thing yousaid? You mentioned that you feel we are not managing interest rates.But when you just look at a chart of daily deviations in the fed fundsrate and actually measure the variance on a daily basis before andafter October--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Targeting interest rates. Targetinginterest rates.-44-12/20-21/82MR. FORD. If you talk to people on the street that I talkto, they are saying that we are not only managing interest rates butare steadily pushing them down and reducing the deviation and thatthat is our policy. That's something I hear. I would like to askTony or you whether you hear or sense any of that and whether or notyou feel there is some element of truth that that is what we're doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's the other side of the coin. Wehave been more tolerant of changes in the aggregates, I suppose, andhaven't reacted all that strongly, and that smooths out interestrates. But that's different, I think, than targeting on interestrates. I don't consider it a bad thing that interest rates are morestable. I think that's devoutly [to be hoped for]. If we can do itconsistent with the other things we want to achieve, great. Ifanything, this fluctuation in interest rates for the past few years tome is very broadly a reflection of the sickness of the economy and thefinancial system. It's not a normal thing to have interest ratesbouncing around like that. They don't in other countries, by andlarge; they never used to here. It is something we may tolerate in aneffort to achieve a larger objective but it is of no merit in and ofitself, in my view.MR. FORD. I certainly don't like those wild swings in rates.Looking back, there's an obvious difference of opinion as to whatcaused that. Some people would say that the very fact that we neverdid stabilize either the base growth or the M1 growth may be whatcaused the fluctuations, which nobody liked, including me. Butlooking ahead, I get the feeling that we are being perceived as verytightly managing day-to-day short-term rates and that the market islooking at us that way. I wonder if my perception is wrong. Tony,what do you think? Is the market thinking that or not?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, the market thinks there hasbeen a definite change in policy. But I would say the majority ofplayers think that what we have been doing is justified. There is atechnical disadvantage in being caught in a situation where theborrowing level is so low. We don't want to tighten the nonborrowedreserve path because we don't want to see interest rates climb up and,therefore, in practice the only way interest rates move down is via adiscount rate cut. That's a more technical consideration and maybeit's only short term; I don't know. But I don't think the market orother people are faulting us one way or another for pegging aninterest rate. I don't think that it has gotten to a point where theythink we are pegging in a targeting sense. If the fed funds ratedoesn't move more than 20 basis points or so except with a discountrate cut and that continues over a period of many months, then I thinkthere will be an increasing feeling in the market that we, in effect--no matter what we say--are actually pegging in a targeting sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The irony is that short-term rates havebeen fairly steady since September while we have reduced the discountrate about three times. The bill rate is now slightly higher than itwas in the middle of September.MR. PARTEE. But Tony is right. The discount rate and thefunds rate have been closely linked.-45-12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are bound to be when we are operatingin a fairly narrow band of nonborrowed reserves.MR. PARTEE. Paul, do I understand that we have been asked togive more of a Committee forecast with the GNP and associated numberslike real GNP and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what I understand is that we wereasked to give a Committee or a Board forecast.MR. PARTEE. Well, which was it: Committee or Board?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it was that explicit.But whichever way it was, it was refused. They were told that wewould give the same ranges that we gave before with an addition,maybe. I said more than maybe, I guess, but it wasn't absolutely apromise. I said we would explore the feasibility, particularly if thedistribution was not symmetrical, of giving some indication of wherethe central tendency of the individual forecasts lay. But it was nota Committee forecast and it was not a Federal Reserve forecast and itwould not be a Federal Reserve forecast, in capital letters. It wouldbe a somewhat clearer description of where the mode of the individualforecasts was. And that's all it has been.MR. PARTEE. Well, it does tend in the direction ofsuggesting that in order to make the forecast we need to know whatpolicy is going to be. And yet if I understand it, the way it hasworked before is that we have made a forecast before the meeting. Isee a procedural problem with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the forecast is going to take alittle more care this time than before. I don't know whether we allmake the same assumption on monetary policy or not, but the thoughtoccurred to me.MR. BOEHNE. We'll have to have a preliminary forecast andthen have a discussion about that.MR. PARTEE. That would probably be the way to go.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question. My assumption isthat we'll at least need to have some chance after the preliminaryforecast for individuals to relook at their forecasts on the basis ofwhatever they want to consider. Whether we should force [theindividual forecasts] into a common monetary policy assumption I amnot sure, particularly if policy is going to be [vaguer] in some wayor another about what the targets are. If we say we may change thetargets during the year, every individual Committee member may have adifferent idea of how that may be changed.MR. PARTEE. But in the end we're going to be stating aCommittee stance on monetary policy. And they naturally will expecteven as individual forecasts that they will be associated with theCommittee's stance on monetary policy, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, when you say stance, that's probablyunavoidable. Whether it is associated with a precise monetary number,though, is something else again.-46-12/20-21/82MR. PARTEE. All right. Well, that's why I said stance. Wehave to avoid the word target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's correct. We make the distinctionbetween stance and [target]. We will have to think about just how wewill do it, but I suspect we're going to need two rounds of forecastsanyway.MR. CORRIGAN. I think what a lot of this discussion reallycomes down to is that we're looking for some kind of steeringmechanism that we can in some sense advertise as a target. Much ofthe discussion has gravitated toward M2 as being put in the role ofthe primary steering mechanism or the primary target, and that's whereI started out. But I'm having some second thoughts even about that.I would at least raise the question of whether we aren't underplayingM3 too much, by inference. Normally, I would never say that. But ifyou think about M3 in 1983, quantifiably it is going to be lesssubject to shifts than even M2. If you look at it in the postRegulation Q disintermediation period, in fact it has really beenquite stable. Whatever the relationship between any of theseaggregates and GNP might be, the relationship between M3 in thisperiod is also less susceptible to change certainly than M2 or M1.And of course it is so vague that it inherently provides us with moreflexibility in terms of short-run operations and avoiding the tendencyof stepping on interest rates too aggressively. So, I would just liketo suggest that in all this we not lose sight of some potentialadvantages that there may be in M3, particularly from a communicationspoint of view.MR. RICE. How much weight would you give it vis-a-vis M2?MR. CORRIGAN. Well, at least equal weight with what I hearpeople giving to M2 right now.MR. ROOS. Jerry, how would you control it?MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that's the problem, though I don't seeany difference conceptually between controlling M2 and M3. As amatter of fact in this period with all these shifts and things, Iwould guess that M3 will be easier to control because the multipliereffects from the deposit shifts can wash each other out more in M3than in M2. I don't minimize that problem. Intuitively, I think itmight be less of a problem with M3 than M2.MR. PARTEE. It may be more stable, but I don't think it'smore controllable.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't think it's more controllable either,but I don't really care about that; it's not less controllable.SPEAKER(?). That's right.MR. PARTEE. I don't think we can control Eurodollardeposits.MR. CORRIGAN. But I don't think it's less controllable. Ithink Frank is right.12/20-21/82MR. AXILROD. We would put the Eurodollar deposits in if wecould get them on time and we're trying to get them on time.MR. PARTEE. Well, I mean on a net basis. Isn't it true, forexample, that M3 growth has greatly exceeded bank credit expansionrecently and that's because banks have been financing their foreignbranches? If that reverses, M3 growth would be much smaller than bankcredit expansion because banks would be bringing money back from thebranches. That kind of thing would be a new dimension and it is ofsome importance.MR. CORRIGAN. No, I concede that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have great definitions of any ofthese Ms.MR. MORRIS. I think Jerry is right. The most scientificstatement made yesterday was Lyle Gramley's statement that the staffestimates of the impact of the new account on M2 are off the wall.And I think that's exactly right. As long as the banks are paying anabove-market rate on the new instrument--and I don't know how longthat's going to go on--there is a tremendous incentive to shift out ofmarket instruments into M2. At least with M3 there is the offset inthat presumably the banks that take in a lot of money this way will betaking in less through large CDs. I would differ with Jerry only tothe extent that I wouldn't have an M2 target at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not going to resolve any ofthese issues today. I think all we can do is send around apreliminary framework, as I said. And if we want to have anothermeeting in January, we can. I don't know if anybody else has thatfeeling, but I don't think we ought to do this before getting somekind of framework.MR. CORRIGAN. Could I ask one other quick question?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One more, as Cagney says.MR. CORRIGAN. If we are going to report this centraltendency in some way or other, do you contemplate that in any explicitway you would try to draw, however gingerly, a connection betweendepartures from the performance of the economy vis-a-vis the centraltendency in terms of what we would be looking for in M2 or M3?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure what you have in mind.MR. CORRIGAN. Just a simple case: Assume that we have notonly a central tendency but a tremendous convergence that says nominalGNP is going to grow by 9 percent; prices will rise by 4 percent andreal GNP by 5 percent to make it nice. Then we say we think M2 and M3and total credit will look like X, Y, and Z. But then this centraltendency [puts our forecasts] in a different light than the oldforecasts if, as we get into the year, there's a marked departure inactual performance of the economy from the central tendency eventhough the Ms and whatever else we use in our steering devices lookall right. The question is: Do you contemplate any more of a direct-48-12/20-21/82linkage between what we would do with the steering devices or targetsand that central tendency forecast?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure; my instinctive answerwould be that I'd try not to make the central tendency all thatprominent in terms of what is desirable. But I think we are going tobe forced into precisely what you are saying, after some statement.It probably will be viewed more against the Administration forecast orsome congressional forecast. They will say: We think a minimumadequate growth is X and if it's below that, are you going to ease?.And if X is low enough, our answer might have to be yes. I don't knowhow to state it or fuzz that up, but at some point that's preciselywhat I would expect to happen.MR. WALLICH. I might have to state the associated increasein inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can't tell. Suppose after allthe different permutations and combinations, the inflation rate ishigh and the real growth rate is low; we'd have a different answerthan if real growth is low and inflation is low. One can [consider]any other combination of those. I'd try to talk my way around it. Ithink the Administration is going to have a low real [GNP forecast],as a matter of fact, because Mr. Feldstein is so preoccupied with notoverestimating. But where I'm a little afraid of getting trapped isthis: If they have high inflation and high real growth and theCongress says that's just fine, we're glad to live with 5 or 6 percentinflation and we want 5 percent real growth--that's not what theforecast is going to be but suppose it were--we would say that's muchtoo much inflation and we're satisfied with much less real growth.Then we'd have a real problem, I think.MR. PARTEE. Yes, if we get a high nominal, then we reallyhave trouble. However it adds up, 11 or 12 percent is a problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I could picture that the happy staffoptimism on inflation is right and it is coming in around [theirforecast], but the real growth isn't doing very well. They might say:My word, you're doing much better on inflation than you're supposed tobe doing in some sense and you're not doing very well on real growth,so you obviously have to ease up. That, I think, is going to be a bigproblem. And it's going to be more so in that connection [dependingon] what we say is the central tendency.MR. CORRIGAN. That reason, as well as the ones I mentionedearlier, led me in the direction of thinking a little more about M3because I think it will give us more flexibility.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if we assume that our annualtargets on M2 and M3--assuming some velocity of circulation we candefend--are compatible with the Administration's forecast of nominalGNP, which I think they are likely to be, we still would want to saythat in setting quarterly targets for M2 and M3, we would be lookingat the trends and levels of activity and trends and levels of prices.I can't see how we could ignore that.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, certainly I'm not saying---49-12/20-21/82MR. PARTEE. That's what we are supposed to be doing.MR. CORRIGAN. That's precisely the point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But it seems to me that that is theanswer to your question, isn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we open ourselves much more tothis [criticism] if we don't have faith ourselves in theserelationships over a period of time, or if we have less faith than weused to have.Just to make this all worse in a way: I got the GNP flash.It may be crazy, but it's going to make all these velocity figureslook worse. They have a nominal GNP increase in the fourth quarter--well, they raised the third quarter a bit but that doesn't make thatmuch difference, I guess. They raised the third quarter by apercentage point, most of which is real. So there's a real increasein the third quarter with a -2.2 percent real GNP in the fourthquarter and only +2.2 percent nominal. So, we have to add anotherpercentage point in the downward direction to all these velocityfigures that we've been looking at if this figure is right on aquarterly basis.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They have come in with a plus for therevised third quarter?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. ALTMANN. It's plus .7 percent.MR. FORD. The one before that was down to zero, so it's nowback up to 1 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They raised the deflator a little. Theyhave +.7 percent on real in the third quarter and +5.0 percent on thedeflator; it was 4.8 percent. For the fourth quarter they have 4.6percent on the deflator, which is 1-1/2 percentage point less than thestaff forecast. We'll see which one turns out better in the ninthrevision down the road! And they have -2.2 percent on the real GNPand nominal was only up then 2.2 percent. So, I guess this is roughly1 percentage point less than we were assuming for the fourth quarternominal GNP, which is going to lower all those velocity figures, if webelieve the others. They have final sales up in the fourth quarter;[the downward revision] is all in inventories, which is not bad interms of the outlook.MR. BLACK. Do they have a percentage change there, Mr.Chairman, on final sales [in the fourth quarter]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's up only $500 million, so it'stiny. I was hoping to see what they have in inventories. I don't seeinventories on this sheet. Do you have the sheet, Jim? It's not onpage 1. Here it is. The change in business inventories in the fourthquarter was -$18 billion; that's obviously a big guess.-50-12/20-21/82MR. PARTEE. There are a lot of guesses in there; final salestoo. They don't have December retail sales figures; they don't haveexports for two months at least.MS. TEETERS. It's not a very reliable number; it just givesthe general direction.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it's not reliable. For what it'sworth, that's what it is. Well, are there any other comments? Ithink we better get something out that will make all this a littlemore concrete.MR. BOEHNE. I just have one more comment on our centraltendency or whatever we're going to call it. Would it make sense toput it in terms of a range? We get a preliminary number [on GNP] andthen a revision and then another revision and that's from the past letalone [forecasting] what the future will be. If we had a range ofwhat our forecasts were, and we could conceivably make that rangeinclude whatever the Administration wanted, wouldn't that give us someflexibility and avoid the over-precision and still avoid a clash withthe Administration? Do we have to have a number?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope that whatever range we getencompasses what other people have. That remains to be seen. Butthis central tendency may not amount to much. It's possible that wewill say here's the range of forecasts and it so happens that theindividual forecasts are well dispersed within that range. I can'ttell you anything more. But it might be that we would say this is therange but most of the people were in the lower half of the range ormost of the people were in the upper half of the range. That's aboutall I intend to say--maybe a bit more than that, but as little morethan that as we can get away with.MR. BOEHNE. But the range also would help to avoid the Fedcoming out with one thing and the Administration with another.MR. PARTEE. Yes, and we've managed that in the past.MS. TEETERS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's going to be much harder thistime, though. What bothers me about the Administration forecast isthat they are likely to have a higher inflation forecast by asignificant margin, not only for [the coming] year but a pretty highinflation forecast out into the future relative to what I think isgoing to happen. And that doesn't indicate great confidence in thesuccess of the anti-inflationary program, for my money. They have acertain institutional bias; partly they have the budgetary problem.But in part it's because at least some of them want to make darn surethey're not very far away from the consensus of other forecasts. Andif you look at the consensus of economic forecasts for the next fewyears, they have a considerably higher inflation rate than our staffseems to be [leaning] toward. So, if they go toward a consensusforecast partly for budgetary reasons but partly just because theywant to be near the consensus, that puts us in the position of arguingthat the inflation outlook is really better and it is doable. Andthey are saying, and everybody else is saying, we ought to besatisfied with a higher inflation forecast and have a more-51-12/20-21/82expansionary policy. That's my biggest concern. And it's not justnext year's forecast. Maybe I'm wrong, but my gut feeling now is thatthis will be evident in the '83 forecast and in the 5-year forecast.MR. WALLICH. Well, in comparing ours with those, I hope wecan stretch the ranges as against the central tendency.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a little premature because I don'tknow what [your forecasts will be]. There may be no central tendency,as I say. If the forecasts are well dispersed, all we're obligated tosay is that the forecasts are well dispersed. And maybe that's theway it will be.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, you raised a question of whetherwe should all be using the same monetary assumptions. That's a prettyimportant guidepost for us to decide on one way or the other. Itmight be advisable, or at least helpful to me at the moment, if wecould turn to the staff for a minute on this chicken and egg problem.You have a forecast, obviously, for 1983, as does my staff. And it'sbased on some provisional assumptions as to M1 growth, abstractingpresumably from shifts in M1 because of these new deposit accounts. Ithink that is what the Greenbook said. Could you clarify, Jim, howyou handled the monetary assumptions for the 1983 forecast you have?MR. KICHLINE. We focused on M2 for 1983. Abstracting fromthe shifts, we used a number of about 8 percent. And compared to ournominal GNP, which I think is around 7-1/2 percent, that gives us verylittle change in velocity, which we thought was about right as aconsistency check. We've gone around on that. The quarterly model,when you feed all the information into it, does dump out an M1 ofaround 6 percent, which we adjust to abstract from those shifts butallow for other demand shifts that come into the model; but it couldbe 2 percent or 10 percent; I don't know. But we are stuck in ourforecast with an explicit assumption of 8 percent M2 growth Q4-to-Q4.MR. PARTEE. Taking out the shifts?MR. KICHLINE. Abstracting from the shifts.MR. PARTEE. That amounts to some unknown amount over andabove that.MR. KICHLINE. That's correct.MR. BOEHNE. And the interest rates are what you had in theback of the Bluebook? Is that what falls out?MR. KICHLINE. Those are consistent with that assumption onthe GNP forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the reason I find your questionsomewhat unanswerable, John, is that one can always say it'sconsistent with this number or that number and think it is today. Butif the Committee is in a mood of saying we may change that number ifit turns out not to be consistent, where are we? Everybody is goingto have his own opinion of it. If we were really saying we were goingto aim at 8 percent M2 shift adjusted and we are going to stick withthat target through hell or high water, then it's valid to say that's-52-12/20-21/82the assumption. If we are saying that's where we are going to steerit now but we are prepared to change it--MR. BALLES. I was just a little concerned, Paul, that theremight be a booby trap out there for you if you're questioned on thisrange of forecasts of the Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a whole mine field out there!MR. BALLES. If it turns out that we're all using differentassumptions on the growth of the Ms, it could be a little awkward.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we go all the way in thatdirection, I literally don't know the answer. What we have then is anominal or a real or an inflation target but everybody is saying thatthey are willing to change these things because that's in some sensewhere they want the economy to come out. How we can maneuver amongthis, I don't know.MS. TEETERS. I'm curious as to how the staff anticipatesdrawing a reserve path.MR. AXILROD. I assume the Committee will come up with, say,an M2 or an M3 guideline, or both, for the period over the next threemonths and we will simply make, as put in the Bluebook, an initialrough assumption of what would happen to M1 consistent with that; it'sall rough. And that would imply a certain total amount of requiredreserves. The Committee, I assume, will come up with an initialborrowing assumption as it has been doing. We will provide an excessreserve assumption and with all those pieces we'd come out withnonborrowed reserves. It's fairly straightforward, except that weknow we're going to be way, way off. So, when the depositdistribution changes, as it undoubtedly will, we would simply redo thereserve path in order to put in the more or fewer reserves that areconsistent with the new deposit distribution, assuming the Ms are ontrack. If the Ms are off track, then we would have to change thereserve path for the change in the deposit distribution but inaddition borrowing would tend to go up or down depending on whetherthe total was high or low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can make up an arbitrary formula as tohow to shift the reserve path in terms of deviations from thesetargets. I doubt that we would want to do that right now anyway.Inevitably we would end up, in some sense, with more importantjudgmental positions about when to change the path in the light of allthese things going on. But I assume, as Steve says, that we willoperate with a reserve path that has a certain degree of automaticityto it, but it probably will be pretty mild. Whether we want to makeit more than that is going to have to be a judgment.MR. AXILROD. The multiplier adjustments are fairlystraightforward. That is, if there is a vast increase in Super NOWaccounts and a drop in savings deposits that we hadn't allowed for--savings deposits having no reserve requirement virtually and SuperNOWs having a 12 percent requirement--then we'll observe that thisweek. The reserves come in two weeks from now and we will have putinto the reserve paths sufficient reserves to accommodate the big12/20-21/82increase in Super NOW accounts consistent with a drop in savingsaccounts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When do we actually get numbers on thesenew accounts?MR. AXILROD. Well, pretty soon. That's one thing I wantedto mention. We are going to be getting the numbers weekly on the newaccounts. We have before the Board a proposal to get from the weeklyreporting banks [data on] accounts over $100,000 that are nonpersonalaccounts with seven days or more maturity. That's in case some of thelarge CDs that are now in M3 shift right into money market accounts.[Mr. Lindsey,] what are you getting explicitly? Are you going to geta breakdown between personal and nonpersonal on these new accounts?MR. LINDSEY. No, we're getting separately on the report ofdeposits a slip sheet, starting with the first week of introductionand for receipt at the Board with about a 10-day lag or so, the macroamounts in the new MMDA in total. And then, as Mr. Axilrod is saying,in addition we are asking for some other weekly information on thereport of the large banks on the MMDAs with amounts over $100,000 andmaturities of seven days or more. Similarly, when the Super NOW comesin, we are going to get information on that account for--in ourproposal--a temporary period of a month on the report of deposits,which is a universe report, and then subsequently somewhat lessfrequently on other reports.MR. PARTEE. But we are also getting the distinction betweenpersonal and nonpersonal. We must be because of the different reserverequirement.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I don't know why [unintelligible] youwant anyway.MR. PARTEE. I'm sure.MR. GRAMLEY. On the report of demand and time deposits? Youhave to because--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have to sort that out. Webetter not sort it out here. Is there anything else to be said onthis broad subject? Does anybody have a feeling that we ought to havea meeting in the middle of January sometime?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much time is there between ourFebruary meeting and [when] you testify? A week?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm trying to make that as short aspossible, but with all these complications--MS. TEETERS. The meeting is set for February 8th and 9th andthe budget comes in on January 31st with the economic report, orprobably two days later. So, we're going to be fairly constrained atboth ends.MR. PARTEE. When is our meeting?MS. TEETERS. February 8th and 9th.-54-12/20-21/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And Paul wouldn't testify until when?MS. TEETERS. Until the 20th.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would like to testify as soon aspossible after the meeting. But it sounds to me as if it's going tobe a whale of a lot more complicated to write this than it was before.Maybe we can do what we did before. We can have that meeting on the8th and 9th and have another meeting, at least on the telephone, onthe 15th or so. [That may be] what we end up doing.MR. BALLES. I liked your idea about asking Steve to try toformulate the framework within which this whole thing could bepresented. I'd simply like to suggest that we wait to get that beforedeciding whether we need a meeting in January. Maybe he's so good atit we won't need the meeting or we could settle for a telephone call.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The more I think of it now, instead of aJanuary meeting, maybe we ought to get that format as soon aspossible. Maybe the relevant question is not having a meeting beforethe 8th and 9th but whether we need a meeting after the 8th and 9th.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. BLACK. I think that's better, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. For a little change of pace,why don't we go to the international report and then come back to [thedomestic side].MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to get into this matter of theswaps a little, but are there any questions or suggestions on the non-swap issues or market developments?MR. BOEHNE. Just a question: The Greenbook forecasts of thecurrent account and trade deficits are much larger than I at leasthave seen from other people. Is it that we know something they don'tknow? Why do we have a so much more gloomy forecast for the currentaccount deficit?MR. TRUMAN. I don't really have a good answer to yourquestion. The one area where we may know a bit more than isincorporated in other forecasts is on the agricultural side. That'san area over recent months where we have lopped $2 or $3 billion offthe current trade and, therefore, the current account forecast.Another factor is that we have been making an explicit provision forthe weakness in the developing countries, which is hard to do, andtherefore we have a somewhat weaker export picture than many of theprivate forecasters have. A third area, which is related to that, ison the services side, where we also think that there will be an impactexplicitly from Mexico of $1 billion or more. That will reduceservice [unintelligible] from Mexico, which is nontrivial, since theirinvestments are so large there. Putting those all together gives us around number of about $50 billion in contrast to the private forecastswhich are now on the order of $20-some billion or something like that.I might add that that $25 billion or so is well within the standard-55-12/20-21/82error of forecasting when we're dealing with numbers that are as largeas they are these days.MR. PARTEE. The standard error is $25 billion?MR. TRUMAN. Well, it's hard to calculate what a standarderror is in these cases, but we're talking about the differencebetween two numbers with a gross total of over $1 [trillion].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The biggest element in all these accountsis this statistical discrepancy. I find our forecast a bitunbelievable in the sense that if the deficits are that big somethingis going to happen and all hell is going to break loose. It's adifficult area. Anything else? It's a major depressing factor on theeconomy. I don't think there's any question about that. It appearsin so many industries and it's not all analyzed in the same way, butthere's no question that exports are going to hell.MS. TEETERS. How much more depreciation in the dollar areyou expecting, Ted?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Plus or minus 25 percent!MR. TRUMAN. Minus 20. In terms of our weighted average, itwas around 1.20 yesterday. I think the direction is more important interms of the forecast than the extent. We have assumed it will godown to about 1.03, so that's about 15 percent.MS. TEETERS. And that will take the relationship to the markto approximately what?MR. TRUMAN. Well, the mark will go down probably somewhatmore than that--by about 20 percent. If the average goes down 15percent, the mark presumably would have to go down more than that.MR. FORD. So that puts it up close to 50 cents for the mark?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. More than that if the mark were down--howmuch did you say?MR. TRUMAN. I said 15 percent for the average.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's 20 percent for the mark, you get48 off the mark and the mark is down to 1.90.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Most of the market participants wouldhave it somewhat higher than that. At least the ones I've talked towould have it more in the 2.20 range.MR. TRUMAN. Well, that would be a 10 percent or 15 percentadjustment. Then we are not going to get as much [of a weighteddecline in] the dollar; if you want to [extend the forecast] into1984, you're not going to have as much of a current accountadjustment.-56-12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming the impact of yourexchange rate forecast has on inflation?MR. TRUMAN. In the longer run, there's always a question onthose kinds of calculations as to whether to treat the exchange rateas an exogenous variable, which I think one can't. But treating it asan exogenous variable, a 10 percent decline gives you something on theorder, eventually, of a 1-1/2 percent increase in the price level intwo years or so.MR. PARTEE. It will be more an '84 effect than an '83effect.MR. TRUMAN. Right. So, as I said the other day, it's not anet [adjustment], because in some sense we haven't yet had a lot ofthe impact from the appreciation of the dollar that we haveexperienced for most of 1982.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the swaps with Mexico, we have someshare of the $925 million. What is that share? I forget.MESSRS. TRUMAN and CROSS. $325 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's $325 million, which is not all paidout yet, but will be paid out presumably by the end of this month.MR. CROSS. Very likely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the part of it that goes back earlieris going to have to be rolled over. I don't think there's anyquestion about that. The earliest that is going to come out or beginto come out is May, with the second phase-in of the bank and the IMF[loans]. Let me go backwards. On the Mexican deal, as you know, thepoint of getting a tranche [from] the banks is far from complete. Idon't know how much they will come up with of the $5 billion total.But we should know this week. And we just have to presume that it'sgoing to come close enough to make the whole thing proceed. If itdoes, one option--the leading option--is that we will get paid backthat original $700 million. We may get paid back some of it beforethe end of the year out of part of an IMF drawing. And the rest of itwill get paid back very early next year out of the combination of IMFand bank money. The position that I've taken is that that should bepaid back to us as soon as there is enough liquidity and that shouldbe there for an instant anyway. There is a major question as to howMexico will get through to the next bank drawing and the next IMFdrawing in May. And it seems to me that what we have to be preparedto do is to get paid--and I think it would be preferable, althoughsome of our foreign partners don't like it--on schedule so to speak,out of these first IMF drawings and, in fact, mostly out of the bankdrawing so that we are down to zero on that old swap. I can'tguarantee that this is possible. But we'd put that back on a standbybasis where it is available to Mexico to meet a squeeze they may havebefore the bank payment. Presume we get paid off again, then. Ifthey do draw in whole or in part, we'd have it ready to come backbefore the next one following that; that is, we'd keep it on a standbybut usable basis. And the net effect of that--if the whole Mexicanprogram goes according to Hoyle--would be that all this central bankmoney can get paid out by the end of the year. The whole financing-57-12/20-21/82plan is based upon that presumption. Obviously, things can go wrong.A major hazard in the case of Mexico, because we know they have hadbad crops, is that they are going to have to import more agriculturalproducts than was really allowed for in this program. Some of thatand maybe all of it can be covered by the CCC, but we [don't] knowthat that will be the case. If there is a significant decline in theprice of oil, Mexico has a problem and they will not be financed.It's a contingency we'll have to meet if it happens. [The financing]has some nice effects, but this is one of the bad effects. Leavingthose kinds of contingencies aside, we should all be paid by the endof the year. We may be out of the $700 million for a period of weeksor months, if all goes according to Hoyle. But I do think we ought tobe ready to put it back in again. I just want to make sure there's anunderstanding of that; I don't know that it has to be a formalCommittee action.MR. ALTMANN. If there are no objections, that's all we need.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But when they draw again that doesn't haveto be any formal Committee action?MR. ALTMANN. Oh, for that size, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the size that doesn't [require aformal Committee action]?MR. TRUMAN. Anything over $200 million does.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we could put some back in without aformal Committee action. But I think there ought to be anunderstanding of that approach, a kind of consensus that it isdesirable or feasible. So, I'll ask you that question at this stage.MR. PARTEE. I certainly think they will need to have someflexibility and this is supposed to provide it. I think it's theright thing to do, so I would be favorably inclined.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do we do if the Mexicans come inand say: We are so short of reserves or liquidity that we ask you todefer--not to take repayment and just roll over the loan for anotherthree months or six months?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have to make two assumptions.On the assumption that the program goes through, I don't think thatcan happen early in January because they're going to have so much paidout to them at that point that they are going to have enough money forat least a little while. They are going to have $2 billion paid outto them all in one lump sum. It may not last all that long but for awhile they're going to have the liquidity. That question arises latethis month before they get the big payment, and I think we just haveto be a little flexible about this. It's a question of whether we geta couple hundred million paid before the end of the month or whetherwe wait until January 7th or something like that. But that's on theassumption that the program goes through. If there's not enough bankmoney in there, or if there's no bank money, there probably won't beany IMF money either. If the program doesn't go through, we can't getrepaid.-58-12/20-21/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let's say we're halfway between thescenarios: The bank money is coming in slowly, though not for thefull amount, and the IMF money is going ahead. Do you still thinkthere will be enough to pay us out and then we would put it back onstandby?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can think of all sorts of in betweenswhere we would get some of it paid out but not all of it. It can goany place from being paid back $1 to being paid back $700 million.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The substantive difference is simplythat we keep them on a tighter leash if we insist on getting paid outand then put it back on a standby basis and release it only in bitsand pieces as we feel is justified. I think that's the rightapproach.MR. PARTEE. It just seems too uncertain, though, doesn't it,Tony? We just don't know. That bank credit might be [$4] billioninstead of $5 billion or something like that. I don't know what alittle shortfall like that does to their arithmetic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will be more than $4 billion but thequestion is at what stage is it so small that the IMF doesn't feelable to go ahead?MR. PARTEE. That will really be serious.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we have a real problem. But theyalready have [commitments for] basically more than $4 billion exceptthat some of that is contingent on getting more, so it's not perfectlyclear yet.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some of it is contingent also on nottriggering the 1 percent SEC disclosure requirement; some of it iscontingent on not exceeding the legal limit; most of it is contingent,in theory at least, on everybody else putting up their share.Certainly the IMF would accept $4-1/2 billion; whether they willaccept significantly below $4-1/2 billion is the question.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think the IMF has said they wouldaccept $4-1/2 billion except as a starting point--that they might goahead temporarily if Mexico will be getting the rest later. Well, wejust have to wait and see. But that's the general strategy. OnBrazil, which is not irrelevant even though we have no money in there,the Treasury lent them $1-1/4 billion a couple of weeks [ago], whichis the total amount of the Fund compensatory finance and firsttranche--MR. CROSS. Gold tranche.MR. TRUMAN. Gold tranche, reserve tranche.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is the gold or reserve tranche and inthat sense is secured. The Treasury then went ahead and lent themanother $250 million to bridge them over until they could meet withthe banks last week and get some more bridging money from the banks.That amount will be counted against a BIS facility, which is underdiscussion. The Treasury would participate in that to a total amount-59-12/20-21/82of $500 million, of which they've already put up this $250 million.Other countries would [put in] $700 million. That seems to be ontrack with the BIS and probably will be finalized this week, with thepossibility of another $200 to $300 million from Thatis designed to keep Brazil afloat until they negotiate new money withthe banks, they hope by early January. That process just beganyesterday. There will be, to choose the words carefully, a voluntaryrollover of existing maturities for Brazil next year--which amounts inpractical effect to a standstill, in the Mexican pattern--and $4-1/2billion, roughly, of new bank money plus $1-1/2 billion that theythink is already committed for next year. So it's really a total of$5.7 billion, roughly, of new bank money next year, all undernegotiation at the moment along with some other things like keepingtheir branches and agencies afloat. Hopefully, that will proceed withthe BIS paying out all this money and with the Treasury in for up to$500 million during the next couple of weeks--the Federal Reserve isnot involved at all--bringing the total Treasury exposure up toroughly $1-3/4 billion in Brazil. Again, all the financing plans arepredicated on the proposition that all that money will be repaid overthe course of the next year. In fact, the existing $1-1/4 billion ofthe first section of Treasury money is to be [repaid] quite promptlyout of the Fund drawings in a matter of weeks, if all goes well andaccording to plan. Again, that is predicated on everything goingaccording to Hoyle and the banks coming up with $4-1/4 billion or$4-1/2 billion, which I presume is going to take a certain amount offront loading too. None of that is decided, but that's the plan thatis being presented. So, the Treasury would be paid most of its moneyfairly quickly if everything goes well. The remaining $500 millionwould be paid out over the course of the year and probably late in theyear. But there is a considerable Treasury exposure there.Moving farther south, we have Argentina. Less money isinvolved, but there is a plan for the banks to put in some bridgingmoney and then put in some medium-term money later in the year,increasing their exposure on the order of $1.1 billion or somethinglike that.MR. TRUMAN. That's the bridging. At the end of the yearthat exposure would be $1.9 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A $1.9 billion total increase in exposure?MR. TRUMAN. Without taking account of the fact that some ofthe money will be repaying some of their arrears.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is pretty well negotiated by thebanks. A lot of that money does go, as Ted said, toward payingarrears. It is not enough money to get Argentina, in terms of timing,anywhere near up to date early in the year. So, the theory is the BISwill provide, with United States and other support, say, $500 millionin the next few weeks to Argentina. That money together with bankmoney would eliminate most if not all of their arrears. That wouldget them back on a current basis. Again, if the financing programworks out the way it's supposed to work out, and this is more agreedthan the Brazilian program--there are many fewer banks involved, onlya few hundred instead of over a thousand and the amounts are smaller,so it's much more manageable--the central bank money would come outbasically in May and August.12/20-21/82MR. CROSS. Well, before six months.MR. TRUMAN. Well, maybe, six months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, a little before that.MR. CROSS. By the end of June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By June?MR. CROSS. That's the scheme.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If everything goes according to Hoyle.The plan discussed for Argentina is that the BIS would advance all themoney under an arrangement in which they already have aof some considerable size--they've had it for some time--fromArgentina. Argentina hasTheBIS would advance all the money knowing that if it is not repaid, theycan exercise their right of offset against the That isnot entirely free of legal doubt because there are negative pledgeswhich our legal counsel tells us do not apply to a right of offsetfrom an existing but that could be contested. It wouldbe paid formally out of Fund drawings. There is not only bank moneyin Argentina but there's a Fund drawing and the Fund drawing [amountsto] $1.3 billion or something like that over the course of the year.So that would be some multiple of this BIS assistance. But,obviously, there are two contingencies. One is that the right of theBIS could be contested legally if it came to that.And the general contingency is that if something goes wrong with theprogram, even if they get the Fund money--and they may not get theFund money--there may not be enough money there to pay off the BIS.And the BIS doesn't particularly want to end up withIt's just too big an amount.So there are several risks that the BIS has to be protected against.And the arrangement is that central banks or governments would protectthe BIS against those risks by--I get a little out of my depth here onthe technicalities--temporarily providing a deposit to the BIS if theydon't get repaid. But ultimately, if theySo thecentral banks would agreeMR. FORD. When is then?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whenever it was done. It means that ifthey haven't been repaid, they eventually would we'reprobably talking two years from now.MR. FORD. The question is: Do the central banks take themout of the riskCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After they have The BISwould-61-12/20-21/82So that's one contingency they want to beprotected against, and I think it's appropriate. Another one is thatif in fact there is a successful legal challenge towhich would repay them. I suppose it's a similar risk. If eventuallyArgentina doesn't pay them, they want the central banks just to takeover the loan, in effect. So an agreement has been drawn up to coverall those contingencies in which the United States will participate;in fact we originated this. There is still a question as to what theU.S. share will be. If it's 50 percent, which is the preliminarythinking, it would be $250 million, obviously. It may end up beingmore than that. And then there is the further question of whether theFederal Reserve or the Treasury does it. That has to be looked at inthe light of the Treasury's exposure to Brazil. I have had somediscussion with the Treasury that we would either do this or maybeinstead take over part of their Mexican exposure and let them doArgentina in whatever the amount is. But I have to get your opinionon these matters.MR. FORD.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But if wetake the Argentina loan, we would agree eventuallyto these contingencies.MR. FORD.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. None of this requires any formal action--although I will take advice on this--because we are not lending; theBIS is lending the money initially. It's going to be lending themoney against these guarantees from the United States, whicheveragency does it, and from other central banks. We do have to enterinto the agreement with the BIS, but it's not a swap or a loan now.But it is an agreement under certain contingencies to make a loan oneyear or two years down the road. And you have to understand that andagree to it. As I say, it doesn't necessarily have to be us andArgentina. Argentina is an Article VIII country, which is one placewhere we draw the ring around swap agreements. Brazil is not. Butwe've never had a swap agreement with Argentina; we wouldn't have tohave one now but we would be committing ourselves under certaineventualities to have one at some point. Or the Treasury might agreeto our just confining our activities to Mexico, where we have aprecedent, and they would do Argentina; I don't know. Plus, I'm notsure it makes a lot of difference. The only difference I can reallysee is that if we do it with Argentina--and I think there are somepluses--the minus is that we have extended the possibility of a swapagreement to a country where we never made one.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, isn't there a complication inthe very unlikely event that we end up12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, butMR. TRUMAN. Sure,CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we do it, we will immediately make anarrangement with the Treasury, I presume, thatMR. TRUMAN. The issue isMR. BRADFIELD. Yes,VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Exactly.MR. BRADFIELD. TheyMR. BALLES. That sounds like a real good deal!MR. BRADFIELD. They haven't worked that out exactly.MR. PARTEE. Well,MR. BRADFIELD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They would have toMR. CROSS.MR. BLACK. We'd better check with Mr. Edwards before--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the TreasuryMR. TRUMAN.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think so.MR. TRUMAN.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That Treasury is as broadas all outdoors.MR. CROSS.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.-63-12/20-21/82MR. CROSS. I think so.MR. BRADFIELD. The Exchange Stabilization Fund couldThey couldVICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, from that point of view it wouldbe better for them to do the Argentina deal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are details.MR. FORD. Why are we doing all this? We are not a full-fledged member of the BIS, as I understand it, for historical reasons.I take it the reasons we're taking BIS out of what appears to them tobe a substantial risk is because they are performing the service ofgetting these other central banks in on the deal and that's the mostefficient way to do it. Is that it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, basically yes. We could do it allourselves directly but there are legal problems with our doing itdirectly and They happen to haveBut the other substantive point is that itmakes it multilateral instead of bilateral, and it's a convenient wayfrom that standpoint.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought theAre you saying it'salready legally--MR. CROSS. It's alreadyCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It'sMR. CROSS. WeMR. BRADFIELD. It is theMR. FORD. Get your Ayatollahs straight!MR. GUFFEY. The maximum exposure would be $250 million,roughly?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't say that for sure. If it'sa 50/50 split, it will be $250 million. But, frankly, the UnitedStates was the progenitor of this and we told them we, the UnitedStates, would do more than 50 percent if that was necessary.-64-12/20-21/82MR. FORD. Why 50/50? Even in the United Nations, we don'ttake 50/50 any more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've had endless discussions aboutthis. That's the price of world leadership, I guess. The Treasurygot its back up on this Brazilian deal, quite rightly, and that's whythat one is 500/700. And, of course, it's 500/700 in that portion ofthe agreement. They already had $1-1/4 billion [in loans to Brazil].And the BIS wanted them to put in 50/50, particularly considering allthis other stuff. And that was finally accepted with some effort.MR. WALLICH. Well, this is partly a reflection of the factthat we don't participate in situations like Hungary and verymarginally only in situations like Yugoslavia. So, they feel theyhave their clients and we have our clients; that is working out to ourdisadvantage right now, but it was to our advantage earlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You stated that a little too generally, Ithink, Henry. The historical fact was--but it wasn't a policy andyour comment may have been interpreted as general policy--that we didnot participate in Hungary for purely political reasons. TheAdministration was anti-eastern Europe. That grates on their mind,and it hasn't helped in this case, but it was just the particular caseof Hungary where it turned out that we did nothing and the BIS wasvery proud of themselves for taking the whole thing. But it certainlyis in their mind as are some of these other things: Latin American isyour area; Hungary and Yugoslavia we would [unintelligible]--MS. TEETERS. What are the resources of the ESF?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Cross, what are the resources of theESF?MR. CROSS. I think their balance sheet is about $6 billionbut a lot of it is tied up at this point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's higher now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's always a matter of interpretationwith the--MR. TRUMAN. They have, for example, $2 billion that they oweto the general fund.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a question in the end of how muchrisk they can take care of. They can always borrow or expand theirresources, but there's a limit to the risks they want to take.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Will they have to warehouse with usin order to do some of this? Are they sufficiently liquid to do allthese transactions?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, of course, Argentina isn't going tocost anybody any money in the United States initially. The BIS isgoing to finance it all. I don't know what the--MR. TRUMAN. Nor will Brazil.-65-12/20-21/82MR. CROSS. Also with the Brazilian deal the BIS provides thecash and there's nothing to be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. In Brazil they are going todo it that way, too. So, the Treasury is just going to backstop theBIS for the--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, but the Treasury also isconsidering a $300 million swap with Mexico and a $500 million oiladvance.MR. TRUMAN. Not the Treasury.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would affect the liquidity ofthe ESF.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure about the oil advance;it comes out of appropriations, I guess. But it is true, and I forgotto mention it, that the Treasury is willing to advance a further $300million to Mexico in the next few weeks to ease their bind. That'salso going to get paid out next year.MR. FORD. Ahead of us, behind us, or at the same time?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Behind us--behind our first [advance], notthe BIS part. Where do we stand? On this $700 million, to the extentwe put it back in, we will be behind everybody else. Again, the wholeprogram assumes that this will all come out during the course of theyear. But when that $700 million goes in we can't be ahead of the BISincluding the part we have in the BIS. We don't leap frog over that.MR. FORD. In other words, we're not just making a decisionto re-establish our $700 million swap; we're re-establishing it in aless creditworthy position in the line-up. That's what it boils downto.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A more delayed position in the line-upanyway.MR. PARTEE. Well, we're the banker.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.MR. FORD. I'm still thinking like a commercial banker.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, that's right. It hasn't been arrangedyet, but I think that's the realistic presumption: That it will comeout after the BIS. There should be enough money. Again, you've justgot to assume--presuming that the program works--that there will beenough money to pay off the BIS in May and in August, including ourportion of the BIS loan in May and August. Some of that, of course,is not out yet. Some of it went out in September; that part will bepaid off in May. The part that's going in now will get paid off inSeptember, if everything goes on schedule. If the whole thing fallsapart, it falls apart. That's been true all along, I'm afraid. Oh,we are secured by this oil [collateral], but the BIS part is not--notthe swap.-66-12/20-21/82MR. GUFFEY. At current prices?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it's the amount of oil sufficient topay off the debt.MR. BRADFIELD. It's not the assignments of payments that arecoming due, so it's not related to the present crisis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's secured by enough oil to pay it off.MR. CROSS. Right.MR. GUFFEY. Whatever the volume of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or whatever that's worth.MR. BRADFIELD. And it's oversecured; it's about $2-1/2billion for a $1.8 billion credit.MR. BALLES. What is the legal basis, Mr. Chairman, of ourmoving in at the last minute, so to speak, on these loans to the threecountries you've mentioned and standing in a superior position toprivate banks? I have a recollection that that has been challengedlegally. But I'd like to get brought up to date on that.MR. BRADFIELD. This is a question of our having a superiorposition to the banks?MR. BALLES. Yes. I thought some private banks werechallenging us.MR. BRADFIELD. The only case that I know of at this pointwas the challenge raised by Citibank to the Export Import Bank'spreferential position in connection with the loan to Zaire. And thatnever went to a judgment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what John may be referring to iswhether we are violating the negative pledge clauses that are here,which is--MR. BALLES. Yes.MR. BRADFIELD. That's the same issue that was raised in thatcase and there has never been a clear adjudication of that. We havedesigned the arrangements to be consistent with the negative pledgeclause.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We think. But they are not free fromchallenge.MR. BRADFIELD. Well, no. We've designed them so that theyare--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To the best of our ability they have beenso designed.MR. BRADFIELD. They've all been very broadly drawn. Some ofthem say "any arrangements designed to provide preference," and that-67-12/20-21/82is so broadly phrased it is very hard to find complete avoidancetechniques with respect to negative pledge clauses. But the Mexicanarrangement is designed to provide a deposit with the BIS and theright of set-off. And the right of set-off has consistently been heldnot to violate negative pledge clauses. Every agreement that we'veseen that has a negative pledge clause also has a set-off provision.And this set-off provision, for example, under New York law, is verybroad, which is what we intended to use So,essentially we're taking advantage of a method that allows fordeposits to build up, which iswith the right of set-off in case the debtordoesn't pay his obligations. And the right of set-off has been knownto be consistent with negative pledge clauses.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is why we don't wantin the case of Argentina. It raises lessquestion about whether this is setting up a preference arrangement.MR. BRADFIELD. The agreements by the various countries hadtheir IMF deposits and were not creating any security interest inthose IMF obligations or IMF drawings. So there's no inconsistencythere with existing agreements either. The promise of Mexico to payus out of the first IMF drawings is similarly not a violation ofnegative pledge clauses.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is one difference, let me say, in ourtaking over more of the Mexican one [versus] doing the Argentine one.None of these is black and white in the sense that if we basically doArgentina, I think the Treasury would go in there for a [small amount]just to show that we're in there together. But if we do Mexico, itwill mean an immediate swap agreement because that's the way theTreasury is financing this Mexican agreement. If we do Argentina,[the loan] may never [be made]. All we would be doing is making apromise to [lend] later under a carefully defined set of conditionsthat we do not think will materialize. They will only materialize ifone of these contingencies is triggered--basically that Argentinacan't repay the loan on schedule andMR. PARTEE. It sounds to me as if there's distinctly lessexposure there than there would be on another $300 million to Mexico.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in any event, if we do the Argentinething, I would want the Treasury to do at least a little of it just toindicate that it's a joint effort. But is that the preferable coursein terms of the [Committee's view]?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If the technical consideration ofis not significant--if it's purely doable but a greatertechnical complication for us to do the Argentine thing--then from amore substantive point of view, rather than increase the Mexicanexposure, we might very well take a substantial share of the Argentinecommitment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only negative in the Argentinecommitment, just to repeat, is that it's a new country [for us].-68-12/20-21/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. But it's an Article VIIIcountry.MR. WALLICH. It would open up a new swap relationship?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Possibly. I just want to get theassurance from the lawyers if we do it this way that we have to makean agreement with the BIS.MR. BRADFIELD. With the BIS, that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that doesn't take a Committee vote?MR. BRADFIELD. No. This would be the placing of a deposit,and it is within the jurisdiction of the Board to approve the actionsby the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and [unintelligible] with thatsimilar situation with respect to The NewYork Bank can enter into an obligation from the BIS. Thatwould also be an action that the Federal Reserve--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, it would take a formal action by theBoard?MR. BRADFIELD. Yes.MR. TRUMAN. An eventual action, Mike.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But presumably we--we, the Board ofGovernors--would take an action now against the contingencies?MR. BRADFIELD. That is correct. The Board would have tomake the agreement now with the BIS to undertake the two obligationsto place the deposits with the BIS in the event that it had liquidityproblems arising from the fact that Argentina couldn't payCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying we will take a formal actionbut because of the particular form it will be a formal action by theBoard of Governors and not the Open Market Committee?MR. BRADFIELD. That's correct.MR. TRUMAN. What about that proposal on the eventualworkout? If there were an eventual workout way down the road, if theBIS wasn't paid, then that could also be done on the basis ofMR. BRADFIELD. That would [involve] working out therepayment of the deposits. If the BIS, after a period of, say, twoyears, were unable to be repaid by the Argentines, then we would ineffect take over the claims against Argentina in repayment of thedeposits. That would be the backup.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I basically left out this interim step inmy original description. We would only, in effect, get to a swapagreement way down the road after this deposit had been there toolong.-69-12/20-21/82MR. TRUMAN. But we need not even have a swap agreement inthat case. I think that's what Mike was saying.MR. BRADFIELD. What we would be doing is buying aparticipation in the BIS's claim against Argentina. The reason we'redoing that is to maintain the BIS's right to set-off against whateverassets they might have with ArgentinaCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I have the sense of the [meeting]at this point. From a general policy standpoint, we prefer to do itwith Argentina, probably with at least a little participation from theTreasury directly to show the flag. And whatever formal actions haveto be taken will be taken by the Board. Let's have a little break.Oh, we have to ratify the transactions.MS. TEETERS. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the possible renewal of the swaps.MR. MARTIN. Moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So ratified.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] about Argentina, aboutBrazil.MR. PARTEE. Is that the end of your list? You don't haveany others on your list?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Other countries? Yugoslavia is the otherpossibility, but that's mainly a governmental medium-term credit.Just to repeat a point, if we get Mexico, Brazil, and Argentinasettled, and perhaps Yugoslavia would be useful in another part of theworld, I think the rest of these can go and hang there, to put itbluntly. I don't think it presents a threat to the world bankingsystem if we have these big countries stabilized, and that has beenthe [focus of the] whole effort. We haven't gotten them there yet,but that's the strategy. If we can get the Mexican and Braziliansituations stabilized, and Argentina is also big, I think we will havethe whole situation stabilized because there's nothing else big enoughand they'll never sell it to--MR. BOEHNE. In other words if there is a default in one ofthe smaller countries, the banks could eat it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.MR. BOEHNE. Maybe they even should eat a little.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Exactly. They should have eaten some ofthis. Well, they will in some of the private credits. There are anumber [of risks]--even if everything in our financial manipulationgoes well. For Mexico there is the obvious threat of an oil pricedecrease, which would be very destabilizing to Mexico. It would help-70-12/20-21/82Brazil some; Argentina happens to be fairly neutral there. The otherthing is if we don't get some economic recovery here, none of thesecountries is going to have a good enough current account position tomake the arithmetic come out. Nobody is projecting a great ebulliencein the economies of the industrialized world. But if we had [norecovery] at all, it probably would be impossible for these countiesto meet the current account objectives that are in all of these IMFprograms. And, of course, they all have the risk that even in areasonably favorable world environment they may be unsuccessful incarrying out their programs. So, we're not exactly home free. But inthe next couple of weeks we might be in a position where for themoment we have it somewhat buttoned up.MS. TEETERS. Isn't there also a problem of potential civildisorder in Mexico if they become too austere?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's part of not being able tocarry out the program. That is present in all these countries.MS. TEETERS. Less so in Argentina?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in Argentina the dimensions aredifferent. I think the general consensus is that they have a mucheasier economic problem, but they have such a weak political situationthat they may not be capable of carrying through even a more modestprogram because their political situation is so weak.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Bill, you were making some remarksyesterday afternoon that this assistance to Mexico and Brazil, etc. isall part of an inflationary danger. I don't see that. It seems to methat the bottom line in those countries is that they are going to haveto have much tighter fiscal and monetary policies as a result of theIMF adjustment programs. And there's the fact that they are going toget a much smaller amount of new money than they got last year and theyear before, and so forth. I don't quite see why you conclude that weare adding to inflationary pressures with this assistance.MR. FORD. First of all, the question is: What is happeningto global monetary liquidity as a result of all of these things? Youcan take it either as a statement or a question. The statement isthat there's a danger that global monetary liquidity can beexcessively expanded through all of these credit [extensions].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think that is what ishappening. We are getting some contraction in the interbank creditmarket globally.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. World reserves are going down quiteprecipitously now. These actions tend to keep them higher than theyotherwise would be, but they are going down rather rapidly. The nextdanger items may be some countries in the industrialized area of theworld. France has lost on a net basis what--$19 billion or $17billion of reserves in the past 18 months?MR. TRUMAN. $17 billion is what we came up with.MR. CROSS. I have a $19 billion estimate.-71-12/20-21/82MR. FORD. The other aspect of this that bothers me is thefact that the Presidents of the [Reserve] Banks that I have talked toare all very uneasy about having someone in their Bank make phonecalls in which we are in effect saying to the banks: If you will putforward your share of the new package of $4 to $5 billion, we wouldwink at the realities of the creditworthiness of your loan. Thatmakes me very concerned.MR. WALLICH. That wasn't the language that was used.MR. FORD. What I'm saying is that that is certainly the wayit's being interpreted in the marketplace.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are a couple of newspaperreporters who have taken that line. Sydney Marks--do you know him?--did in a column recently. He is not in one of the major newspapers.But I have not heard the view expressed in the markets in anywidespread way at all that we are encouraging irresponsible behaviorby our approach to this regulatory problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There was an article in The New York Timesthat suggested something in that direction. But we have not beennearly as forthcoming as the banks would like us to be. I understandwe have not given them any assurance that they wouldn't have todisclose this [lending]. What we have come very close to saying butwe haven't said it yet--the specific question was on the prior Mexicandebt--is that we would accept [the following] arrangement: That ifthe Mexican private debtors can get up the pesos and deposit them withthe central bank and these banks agree eventually to take it over, ifthey have to, [we would call that] a new loan to the central bank.MR. FORD. We'll pretend it's in dollars.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is in dollars. The loan hasalways been denominated in dollars. We are saying for the time being,and it's a bit of a stretch, that the dollars [are] in the hands of acentral bank as opposed to the companies [and we] will count that loanas being current, provided the banks agree to lend them the money topay the interest, which is what they are doing with the whole thing.But every one of these countries is being lent money to pay interest.If you went all the way in the other direction, you'd have to say allthese loans were nonperforming because they are all borrowing to payinterest. This is a little more direct.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's true for domesticcorporations. If a bank came up with new money for a domesticcorporation so it doesn't fall into arrears, that's still considered aperforming asset.MR. PARTEE. It depends on the terms. If the loans are atcommercial terms, they would not be nonperforming. But if they are atconcessional terms, they would be nonperforming.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. These aren't concessionaleither.MR. FORD. I don't want to prolong the discussion, butobviously there is a substantive distinction. To be sure, all debt-72-12/20-21/82grows over time as assets grow and nobody ever pays off big loans.That's one argument one could make. But one way to look at is to ask:If these banks could do these loans over again, what would they do?From the phone calls that we've had, these banks would all want to beout tomorrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question that this has someflavor of compulsion--I mean internal compulsion--in that the onlyreason they're making the loans is to make the old loans good,individually. There's no question.MR. FORD. And the new element is that the IMF is requiringit. Isn't it the first time in history that the IMF is saying: We'renot putting up ours unless you put up yours?MR. TRUMAN. That is a popular and widespread misconception.The IMF has in fact been essentially doing that for several years now,basically because the Fund cannot provide enough money by itself inmany cases to cover what--as Governor Teeters was remarking--is areasonable adjustment program in the first year, especially ifallowance is made for a country bank getting out. They will notpresent a program to the Board which says that there is this bigfinancing gap.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Bill, it's true that it hasn't beenas explicit in a certain sense because the need wasn't as muchearlier. They used to talk in terms of a cap on foreign borrowing;and even though it's still a cap, now there's a problem of a floor aswell. Formally, it's nothing new; but I think the [unintelligible]concern as to the financing is greater funding--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that these loans arenot liquid in a very obvious kind of way. I think it is also truethat the loans are better after this than they were before because ifthis doesn't work, you know you have a pot full [of losses]. Thebanks not only have illiquid loans, they will have no interestpayments. It's not a satisfactory situation by any stretch of theimagination.MR. WALLICH. The IMF programs have always been on theassumption that they do not finance the country fully but they turnthe country around so that it becomes bankable again. Now, what ishappening here, as I would interpret it, is that they are pulling thatmoment somewhat forward rather than waiting a year until thebankability is demonstrated. They ask for the money right away.MR. PARTEE. They try another way.MR. CROSS. Well, the Fund got burned in a couple of caseswhere they financed some programs and it looked as though some oftheir money was being used to pay off the banks and that made it muchworse. So, they've gone further and further along this line ofinsisting on getting the money there up front.MR. BOEHNE. Well, the bottom line is: What is thealternative? Let it all go to hell or try to put a package togetherif we can get them to play ball? And that is what we're doing.What's the alternative to that?-73-12/20-21/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This is a cheaper way of doing it.If everything goes to hell then the amounts of both public assistanceand losses to the banking system are going to be [huge]. I can'tconceive that the United States would not step in ultimately and dowhat was necessary to restore order in Mexico to tame the chaoticsituation. But the problem may be that political events in a chaoticsituation would take over and we might be confronted with a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we'd better get to our policyproblem. It has been a long time since Mr. Axilrod introduced it.MR. FORD. He's been writing diligently.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's come to the point, Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I think one helpful comment thatcould be made would be to explain the two alternative operatingparagraphs before the Committee. But before that I should make twocomments. One is generated by the Committee's earlier discussion.The staff will go ahead and begin developing a monthly total creditseries to see what its statistical properties are and how fast we canget it and how it develops. I would like also just for my ownprofessional peace of mind to go ahead and try to do some econometricwork on supply and demand relationships in total credit if we canpossibly uncover them, somewhat like what we had tried to do withsupply and demand for money. And if we got that far, I think we wouldbe at the frontiers of the economic profession. But we'd like to makethat effort. So, we would propose to proceed in that way on the totalcredit. I don't know how far we'll get before midyear but hopefullyfairly far. Another related point on the operational paragraph of thedirective, if you turn to lines 55 through 58 on the draft with thenumbered lines that was passed out to the Committee--MR. PARTEE. Alternative one?MR. AXILROD. Yes. Before that it says: "The Committee alsoindicated that it was tentatively planning to continue the currentranges for 1983 but that it would review that decision carefully inlight of developments over the remainder of 1982." We have somelanguage that might seem more apropos than that since 1982 has only aweek-and-a-half to run. We'll have it typed up and given to theCommittee, but it reads at the moment: "The Committee had alsoearlier indicated that it was tentatively planning to continue thecurrent ranges for 1983, but it will review that decision carefully atits February 1983 meeting in light of economic developments andinstitutional changes associated with the new deposit accountauthorized by the Depository Institutions Deregulatory Committee." Ithink that's just a technical holding-in-place. It sounds moreapropos than what is in there at the moment. But we'll type that upand send it around.SPEAKER(?). What line is that Steve?MR. AXILROD. Lines 55 through 58.MR. GRAMLEY. The one we have says it's lines 39 to 42.-74-12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think you have several versions ofthis thing floating around.MR. AXILROD. Oh, I'm sorry. It would be the last sentencebefore the operational paragraphs.MR. BLACK. Steve, could you read the last part of thatagain? I got most of it but not--MR. AXILROD. Well, we're going to type it up and send itaround. On the operational paragraphs, alternative one as proposedallows for a high M2 growth, something that would accommodate a shift--if you believe our 3 percentage points--of that order of magnitude.But because that number for M2 would be pretty large---- would have tobe, say, 11 or 12 percent really, and that may present some problem ofcredibility--it would almost seem to call for an early estimate of ashift adjustment factor. That is, if you decided on the 11 or 12percent but thought two or three or four percentage points of that wasshift, once you go that route, then I think it inevitably involves acontinuing shift. While that is one reasonable approach, the staff--or certainly I--would tend to prefer the approach of alternative two,which allows for a smaller rate of growth in M2 and also includes anM3 growth that probably, as President Corrigan mentioned, is not goingto be as much affected by shifts. So, that's our tentative thinkingin this current period.MR. ROOS. Why do you reject alternative C or three?MR. AXILROD. I'm talking about directive language, PresidentRoos, alternatives one and two of the directive language. The secondalternative allows for a slower rate of growth in M2 and gives an M3rate of growth and then has language which says growth could be higher--and probably more felicitous language could be developed--if therewere substantial evidence of more shifts than had been allowed for inthis notional number, based on analysis of incoming data and otherevidence from bank and market reports. If the Committee went thatway, then after the fact a range or some qualitative indication of theextent of shift might have to be given, but it would not be ascommitted to a definite shift adjustment. It is really for thatparticular reason that, in terms of directive language, alternativetwo might seem somewhat preferable. Of course, no matter which ofthose alternatives you choose in terms of phrasing the language, thepolicy issue is more on what level of borrowing the Committee choosesto start, since presumably over the next few weeks there might not bemuch variation around that level of borrowing unless the behavior ofthe aggregates is really extreme--unless it becomes clear that theshift distortions may be enough to fuzz up one's analysis of theunderlying strength of the aggregates. So, it becomes crucial whatlevel of borrowing is chosen, but it is not insignificant, really,what underlying growth in the aggregates you would tend to want.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder if [this approach] would clarifyour discussion. The points that Steve raised are very relevant, butkeep in mind what kind of general growth in M2 and M3--I guess in asense that's what we have to put in the directive--you would want tohave without these shift adjustments. Then it's a separate point asto how we make those [adjustments] and how we state them. [We wouldneed to decide] whether we add [shifts] in to begin with or whether we-75-12/20-21/82essentially use the directive that Steve is suggesting, which gives anumber that allows for little or none but says we may have to allowfor [shifts] if they develop. One other point I would make is that onour current projections, which obviously are always subject to changewith every bit of [new] weekly data, it looks as though M2 and M3 arecoming in lower than the present directive suggests. [Their growth]was higher in November, but if you put November and December together,it looks as if it's coming in below the track that we forecast, whichin itself tends to push the borrowing level down a bit. Butpresumably if that gets confirmed, it would move it down more just onthe basis of the existing directive. Now, we reset that at thismeeting but if we weren't meeting today and the trend developed as nowprojected, presumably the borrowing level would be coming down anyway.I think that's correct, isn't it? It would be [down] a little anyway.MR. AXILROD. Yes, if the balance of December comes out asprojected. If it's down about as much as the data through [mid-monthsuggest] it would be [down more].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can comment on the basic trend thatyou would like to see in M2 and M3, what your preferences are, and howto state that in terms of these alternatives and the borrowing level.I think those are the key variables.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I ask Steve one clarifyingquestion on this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No!MR. BLACK. Could I slip him a note? Steve, on this secondalternative, suppose we settle on "B." Would you put in there for M211 percent or 8 percent?MR. AXILROD. The second alternative is designed as somewhatof a compromise; I think it would be somewhere in the 9 to 10 percentrange. You could even continue with the 9-1/2 percent you now have.That would accommodate some shift--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I see it, just to make it clean,alternative two wouldn't allow for much shift.MR. AXILROD. No, some.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying "some." Very little tonone, I guess, just to keep the choices cleaner.MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've allowed for what--a 3 percentagepoint shift in the aggregates?MR. AXILROD. Yes, we think--and it's just our guess--that 8percent is not an unreasonable number without any shifts. Thisnumerology is all based on estimates.MR. PARTEE. You have absolutely no current information thatI can see, including the flash report on the GNP, that indicates thatvelocity is turning around. It is still going down fast for M2.-76-12/20-21/82MR. FORD. Nothing but the history of every other recoverywe've ever had.MR. PARTEE. But we haven't got a recovery.MR. CORRIGAN. We haven't got a recovery yet.MR. FORD. Whenever you wait until the recovery is obvious,you wait too long.MR. PARTEE. No, I don't think that's true now.MR. AXILROD. We still have a negative velocity [growthprojected for] the first quarter, Governor Partee, but it is a lotless negative velocity [growth] than we had earlier.MR. GUFFEY. Steve, may I follow up on Bob's question? Youwere talking about 8 percent as the basic growth for M2 and you arelooking at 9-1/2 or perhaps 9-1/2 to 10 percent to go into thedirective. And you're thinking of a 3 percentage point shift. Thosenumbers don't work out.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's why with the language ofalternative two--if the Committee did put in something like M3 growthof 8 percent and M2 growth of 9-1/2 percent, say, and then it turnedout that M2 was stronger because of evidence of shifts but M3 was ontarget, one would assume--depending on the Committee discussion--thatwe would just accommodate that because that's what the directive wouldliterally say. And one would hope that the moderation of M3 would bean obvious counterfoil to the somewhat stronger M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think in your alternatives here, which Ihave not explored with great care, you are not allowing for much, ifany, shift in M3.MR. AXILROD. None. Well, there's a little maybe.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, presumably that is the kind of figurewe would put in for M3. And you are saying putting in a number apercent or so higher would allow for just a little shift, which we'dhave to explain in the text somehow.MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe in the directive itself we shouldmake some allusion to the fact that we've allowed a little [forshifts].MR. AXILROD. We're basically assuming that bank creditdemands are not going to be very strong in the first quarter. And,therefore, if the banks get more money in through these money marketaccounts, they will not be pressing in the market as much and theremight even be some direct movement of CDs into these accounts. So,it's a combination of both. That's what we're assuming.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Putting the shift issue aside for themoment, how much of a negative growth in velocity of circulation are-77-12/20-21/82you assuming for the first quarter? What is your figure for nominalGNP growth for the first quarter?MR. AXILROD. It's 6-1/2 percent, I think. And for M2 on aquarterly average basis, which is different from the December-to-Marchgrowth, I have 9.8 percent here. But I have to take something between2 and 3 percentage points off of it, so it's more like between 7 and 8percent. So it's a minor negative velocity growth of something like 1percent, let's say, as against the sharp negative velocity growth ofsomething like 5-1/2 percent over the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me get clear on this. You have aquarterly average of 7 to 8 percent with what from December--?MR. AXILROD. Well, abstracting from shifts, about 8 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How do you break down that nominalGNP figure in the first quarter? How much is inflation and how muchis real?MR. KICHLINE. In the first quarter, it's 2 percent real and4-1/2 percent inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, you had a question before.MR. BALLES. Well, I think my clarifying question has beenasked twice now. I gather that the alternatives set forth in theBluebook on page 6 would be consistent only with alternative one ofthe directive, which you don't prefer.MR. AXILROD. There are differing numbers in thosealternatives. I'm suggesting that you might use alternative two,which incorporates the lower numbers that do not fully allow for theshifts. If you use the M3 numbers that are there but subtract 2 to 3percentage points from the M1 number, you would not be making as muchadvance allowance for the shifts as is in the text, which is our bestestimate of the shifts. However, the shifts may not occur.MR. BALLES. You said M1; did you mean M2?MR. AXILROD. I'm sorry, I meant M2--I meant M3 actually. Weused the numbers for M3, but we reduced M2.MR. PARTEE. Those you think are pretty good?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. PARTEE. For the M3 numbers.MR. BALLES. Just to nail that down once more, how manypoints off the M2 numbers in the Bluebook?SPEAKER(?). Three.MR. AXILROD. To get a sense of the underlying demand, forwhatever that's worth, you take 3 points off. But I would suggestputting a somewhat higher number than 8 percent. If you took 3 pointsoff the 11 percent for "B," you'd get 8 percent because it seems to me-78-12/20-21/82it would be reasonable to allow for some shifts. And the Committeealready has 9-1/2 percent for M2 on the record for October toDecember. And that would seem like a continuance of that; that wouldbe just one compromise between the two.MR. BALLES. Okay. Thanks.MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, where do you and the market thinkborrowings are these days?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I may have to give you two differentanswers for that. We've been aiming at around $250 million or alittle below; it's been $230 million in the recent weeks. A number ofrecent weeks have tended to come out above that because of exigencies--some shortfalls of reserve projections or greater demands forexcess. In the current week borrowing is averaging around $300million. As for where the market thinks it is now, they probablywould just take an average of the recent weeks, which would be betweenabout $250 million and [$350] million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We always talk in shorthand about thisborrowing level, which is very convenient, but it seldom comes outthere because what we're really doing is setting a reserve path. Ifexcess reserves are high, the borrowings are high. And we're enteringa period, the year-end period, where the excess reserves may be veryerratic. So as shorthand for setting a reserve path maybe [we shouldtalk about] a free reserves number rather than an actual borrowingnumber, particularly when excess reserves are going to be volatile atthe end of the year.MR. WALLICH. It's the reserve path that decides--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. We're just setting thebeginning point of a reserve path. Well, in the absence of anybodyelse talking, let me say this: Simply because these other numbers areso big and we have to give an explicit estimate of a shift adjustmentwe don't know anything about, I like the alternative two approach. Idon't know how much to allow for, but I'd allow for some shift; ifwe're allowing for some, we have to be very clear either in thedirective or the text that this is a higher number than we would haveput down except that we are assuming some minimal amount of shift.MS. TEETERS. Well, if we just put in 9-1/2 percent and leavethe borrowings there, does this language in alternative one say thatif it actually comes in around, say, 11 percent, that we wouldtolerate it? That's the way I'm reading it.MR. AXILROD. It's the language in alternative two. I wasgetting some better language [typed up]; I had hoped it would be done.Yes, the language would imply that if there were evidence fromincoming data and reports from the market and from depositoryinstitutions that there was a shift--and I added in brackets ifunderlying demands for liquidity were exceptional, if the Committeewants to say that--[stronger growth would be tolerated]. So, therewould be plenty of scope in the directive to allow for strongergrowth.-79-12/20-21/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But what it says is that our first bit ofevidence would be if [M2] came in high but [M3] did not; then we wouldbe more inclined to think it was a shift than reality. If they bothcame in high, we would tend to discount the very first--MR. AXILROD. Unless we found some evidence of a huge shift.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless there were other strong evidence.MR. WALLICH. Building the shift into the number inalternative two seems to me to take away some of the virtue ofalternative two, which is that it allows for what we think ought to bethe right number but then allows for an overrun in case [a shiftoccurs]. It seems to me that is in many ways preferable. But if wealso raise the number, then we've taken the high number fromalternative one and we still have the overrun of alternative two.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree. I think alternative two isclearly preferable. It would seem to me that we're still allowing notonly for a one percent shift but also for one to two points negativevelocity [growth] if we accept that 9-1/2 percent figure. We couldsay 9 to 10 percent or we could put in 9-1/2 percent like we did lasttime. But the initial borrowing assumption ought to be $175 to $200million because I think we would like to see the markets ease a littleon their own and not be pushed down so obviously and aggressively by acut in the discount rate. If [the Board] does end up cutting thediscount rate, we again would appear to be following the marketssomewhat more. So I would think we can leave the fed funds rangewhere it is, at 6 to 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just for the sake of completeness, what doyou have for M3?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 8 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. What is your M2 number, Tony?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. M2 would be 9-1/2 percent, assumingwe're going the alternative two route.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And assuming we say someplace that we areallowing for a little shift.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know what the adjectivesshould be, but alternative two would read--MR. GRAMLEY. Is this supposed to be a shift-adjusted numbernow?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON ET AL. No.MR. GRAMLEY. The whole idea of alternative one was to put ina number that had no shift adjustment. I thought alternative two wasto be an alternative in which we had a shift-adjusted number.SPEAKER(?). No.MR. PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. They're not big enough.12/20-21/82MR. GRAMLEY. That isn't the way it reads. The way it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the Axilrod version, it is aconservative estimate of a shift.MR. PARTEE. For alternative two.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For alternative two.MR. PARTEE. I think so, too; 9-1/2 percent doesn't soundhigh enough.MR. GRAMLEY. If these estimates are right, 9-1/2 percentimplies a 6-1/2 percent shift-adjusted M2 growth. And that'sridiculous.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, wait a second. The actuallanguage of alternative two reads: "The Committee indicated thatgreater growth would be acceptable if there is evidence of substantialshifts of funds into broader aggregates because of the new moneymarket account."MR. GRAMLEY. What kind of a path is he going to draw fromthis?MR. AXILROD. Well, if the Committee wanted 9-1/2 percent and8 percent, I would take our M1 estimate based on that, which is prettyhigh--something like 8 percent--and draw a path based on the relatedrequired reserves. But that wouldn't affect the money market if M2were coming in strong because with the virtues of lagged reserveaccounting we would know the required reserves two weeks later and wewould simply accommodate to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you thought there was a shift?MR. AXILROD. That's right. If there were shifts and M2 werestrong.MR. PARTEE. Shouldn't that say "greater growth in M2 wouldbe acceptable"?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right.MR. PARTEE. It doesn't say that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I see. Yes, I think that wouldbe a help.MR. BLACK. That's about what it says, as I read it.MR. BALLES. At the risk of muddying the waters, Steve:Would there be any virtue in an alternative that abstracted altogetherfrom shifts and then left us with an option of adjusting for it ad hocas we got the evidence?MR. AXILROD. Well, that's what this in effect does. I thinkthe issue is only whether you put down 8 percent, if that's what yourunderlying preference is, or whether you put down a number that's a-81-12/20-21/82little higher so you give some notional sense that shifts may occur.Thus far, that is what the issue seems to be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Also, the reason why we would want9-1/2 percent without shifts is because we don't think velocity[growth] in the first quarter is going to go back to zero, which is anhistoric norm.MR. GRAMLEY. Now you're talking about this as a not shift-adjusted number.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about 9-1/2 percent andthat we would tolerate a modest amount of growth beyond that if therewere evidence of substantial shifts.MR. GRAMLEY. But we're already expecting 3 percentagepoints.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but that's 3 percent at anannual rate.MR. GRAMLEY. I know. But if we're talking about 9-1/2percent as a not shift-adjusted number, that implies about 6-1/2percent shift-adjusted and if we have velocity declining in--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the other way around.MR. BLACK. It's the other way around, Lyle. And this is ahybrid anyway; it has 1-1/2 [percentage points] in shift adjustmentnot taken out.MR. GRAMLEY. I'm thoroughly confused.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know quite what Tony has in mind.In the Axilrod version, just putting in Tony's number, he is sayingthat allows for one percent or so of shift adjustment, which we thinkis minimum. It's the equivalent of saying between "A" and "B" on theother numbers. If you were really right that the shift was 3 percent,who knows?MR. FORD. That doesn't square with table 4, does it?MR. PARTEE. Where's table 4?MR. FORD. Page 11 of the Bluebook. If I read this Bluebooksummary of your estimate of the shifts right, it says that for theDecember-to-March period we're talking about you think the shift in M2could be as little as 1 percent and could be as much as 5 percent.Oh, you're getting 3 percent by averaging.MR. AXILROD. No.MR. STERNLIGHT. It's 1 percent for the year, but 3 percentbecause they expect a lot of it to be concentrated in the firstquarter.MR. AXILROD. For the December-to-March period our bestestimate was one to five. I would like to make clear to the-82-12/20-21/82Committee--we tried to say how we got to that estimate--that the rangeof uncertainty here is really vast, though the numbers weren't quiteoff the wall, as Governor Gramley suggested. All I'm suggesting isthat the Committee put in the directive a number with which it feelsgenerally comfortable; and if it turns out to be bigger, then themarket would tighten if there are no shifts; and if there seemed to beshifts--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will return to my interpretation for thepurposes of clarity. We can do it differently, but let's get somecommon basis here. I'm won't say this is what Tony said; I'll sayit's what I'm saying now. We can put in a 9 to 10 percent figure, forinstance, or 9-1/2 percent just to make the arithmetic correct, andsay someplace--probably right in the directive--that we are allowingfor a modest increase in M2 from a normal trend because we think thereis going to be some minimal amount of shifting. In fact, we areprepared to see a bigger shift, in accordance with the staff estimate.If the evidence develops that way and the staff is right about the 3percent, the 9-1/2 percent is equivalent to 11-1/2 percent. In fact,nobody is going to know with any precision if it is in the end. Butanalytically that's what I would suggest we are saying. In otherwords, 9-1/2 percent is equivalent, without allowing for any shifting,to 8-1/2 percent.MR. BALLES. I think that clarification would take care ofthe problem I was worrying about, Mr. Chairman.MR. WALLICH. I would prefer the 8-1/2 or 8 percent for thatreason. It keeps separate the original unadjusted number and theshift.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can understand that. But it'sjust a matter of preference. You would be putting down a number whichthe staff at least thinks is too small. And we will never make it.MR. MARTIN. Yes, we'll never be able to make it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that has its difficulties, too. Mysense of the this is that if we're allowing for any shift here, weprobably ought to say it right in the directive. We could say in thenext sentence that this number for M2 allows for some exceptionalincrease in M2 because of this switching. If there's more than thislittle we allowed for--we keep the [suggested] sentence that's there.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The 8-1/2 percent then permits anegative velocity [growth] of 2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, if the GNP number is right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I was not very clear aboutthat. By suggesting that 9 to 10 percent or 9-1/2 percent, I wasfuzzing together the negative velocity [growth] and the minimal shift;and then if there were a substantial shift, M2 growth would be abovethat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are right where I described it,I guess. There seems to be some general feeling that we ought to workwith alternative two. Can I assume that?-83-12/20-21/82MR. GRAMLEY. I was thinking of going the other way. Mythought was that we need to include in the directive a number that isrealistic and also has some indication of shifting. I think thealternative two as you now propose it is alternative one prime; it isno longer alternative two as it was in the Bluebook. I would preferto use a number like 11-1/2 percent and say that it includes an amountof shift ranging from one to five percentage points. I want toemphasize the uncertainty. The 11-1/2 percent comes from the sameshift-adjusted 8-1/2 percent we started with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can put in a number in[alternative] one and say this allows for a shift ranging from one tofive percentage points; we would have to put in a range of 3 or 4points around the number. We would have to say we are aiming at 9 to13 percent or something to allow for a shift of one to five points.I'm not sure that helps.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's awfully dangerous to be thatexplicit on the estimate of the shift.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The argument against alternative one, asnearly as I can understand, is composed of two related arguments. Wehaven't the vaguest idea, really, what the shift is going to be. Ifwe just put in a visibly high number, not knowing what the shift isgoing to be, we may get a psychological problem, which we don't needto be read into this right now.MR. GRAMLEY. Maybe.MR. PARTEE. We carried 9-1/2 percent this last time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Let me ask my question over again.You responded. I don't know whether you're convinced or not. Do wework with directive two? Okay, that seems to be [the consensus];let's work with directive two. Let me repeat the proposal we have onthe table. Whether or not it's exactly Tony's--and I think it comesclose--we put in either 9 to 10 percent or 9-1/2 percent, whichhappens to be the same number we've been working with and 8 percent[for M3], as I understand it. We say explicitly--Steve just gave mesome language: "Allowing for some shifting into broader aggregates,particularly M2, resulting from the introduction of the new moneymarket accounts." So, we've explicitly said that 9-1/2 percent allowsfor some and then we keep something like the next sentence that isalready there.MR. GRAMLEY. Could we say "a modest shift"?MS. TEETERS. We don't know if it's going to be modest.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But in this first sentence we said[unintelligible] allowing for modest shifting or something.MR. GRAMLEY. I want to protect against the possibility thatwe may have to allow M2 to grow by 14 or 16 percent or some numberlike that.MR. AXILROD. [That would be covered in] the next sentence.-84-12/20-21/82MS. TEETERS. The next sentence says that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we might even be justified incalling it a minimal shifting.MR. GRAMLEY. "Allows for a modest amount of shifting."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see: "allowing for modestshifting" or "some shifting."MR. PARTEE. "From market instruments." We're not talkingfrom M1 up to M2.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. From market instruments and largeCDs.MR. CORRIGAN. That's why I think that sentence has to belimited to M2.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, it should be limited to M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, we'll say "allowing for someshifting into M2," if that's the way you want it. This states it theother way around, resulting from the introduction of the new moneymarket accounts. It doesn't say from where but it says--MS. TEETERS. Then the phrase about M3 should come down tothe bottom so that all of this obviously applies to [M2].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think if we say M2, it's clear enough."Allowing in the case of M2 some..."MR. AXILROD. Well, there could be a bit in M3. Maybe it's amild degree of perfectionism--just guarding against all possibilities.It's not clear that they are going to offset.MR. PARTEE. Except that as a bank funding device it seems tome that it will tend to offset.MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] unexpected bank influence on M2because they aren't going to have any credit demand and they're notgoing to want to extend credit anyhow.MR. AXILROD. But there are the thrifts, Governor Partee. Idon't know what they're--MR. PARTEE. Well, they don't have any credit demand either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can come back to the precise language.The proposal on the table is 9-1/2 percent, which implicitly allows--Iwill say--for 1 percent of this shifting in M2 and for zero shiftingin M3 with a figure of 8 percent. Tony said about $175 to $200million for the initial borrowing figure.MR. PARTEE. That's down some.-85-12/20-21/82MR. RICE. It may be a little low.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's down from about $230 million.To get some perspective on what that means, I'm told that a 1 percentdifference in the target for M2 would mean over a period of one montha difference of $34 million dollars in reserves. Therefore, if we aremoving the borrowing from, say, $230 million to a shade under $200million, it's the equivalent of having a 1 percentage point higher M2target for one month. So, I would say that at the maximum we ought toset it at $200 million but we might go as low as $175 million.MR. BOEHNE. And what does it mean for the funds rate?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it would be somewhat under8-1/2 percent; how much under, Peter can make a better guess than I.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, varying around 8-1/2 percent, butmaybe a little more likely to be under than over.MR. BOEHNE. Under 8 percent?MR. STERNLIGHT. Under the 8-1/2 percent discount rate.MS. TEETERS. Under 8-1/2 percent. Borrowing of $175 millionwould take it down toward 8 percent, wouldn't it?MR. STERNLIGHT. Not that far, Governor. I think with $175million it would be more likely to vary under the discount rate,between 8 and 8-1/2 percent, but not necessarily closer to 8 percentthan to 8-1/2 percent.MR. WALLICH. Do you figure $100 million [in borrowing] isequal to 25 basis points [on the funds rate]?MR. STERNLIGHT. Roughly, yes. That falls out of these time-honored relationships, but they don't necessarily hold up in the shortrun.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not very reliable from week to week,and the funds rate will be affected by whether people think thediscount rate is coming down or whether the economy is improving andthe rate decline is over or whatever.MR. GUFFEY. At this level aren't we at or below thefrictional level [of borrowing]? As a result wouldn't we have lostthe advantage of the path and what it might imply?MR. AXILROD. Between $175 and $200 million used to strike meas quite frictional; [now] I would think we would be getting belowthat level when we get down to $50 million or so. I would agreethoroughly with Peter that unless there's a big expectation of adiscount rate drop, the funds rate would tend to hang around thepresent discount rate and would be a little more likely than it is nowto be below it. It isn't below it now; it has been running above itexcept for today.-86-12/20-21/82MR. GUFFEY. With the level of excess reserves that the bankswant to hold, if that continues, this has some implication it seems tome for the federal funds rate in the period ahead. Is that right?MR. AXILROD. Yes, the funds rate would go up if weunderestimate the demand for excess reserves. We would, of course,make every effort not to; we have models that turn out not to be toobad, in fact. Sometimes they have been better than our judgment onthat. So, we have a fairly good way of trying to estimate the demandfor excess reserves. And Peter makes his own estimate over the courseof the week if he sees that it isn't working out right.MR. PARTEE. We have a number of pretty sick banks. If wewere to have some unexpected borrowing at the window by those sickbanks, you would not count that as adjustment borrowing?MR. STERNLIGHT. Where it's a big identifiable borrowing, wemake an allowance for that.MR. AXILROD. Certainly if it's over a sustained period, itwould be [counted with] nonborrowed reserves. If it's a bank thatjust happens to be at the end of the queue and comes in for a day andis out, that strikes me as adjustment borrowing. But if a bank is infor a sustained period, then it's more clearly nonborrowed.MR. PARTEE. Of course, they tend to be at the end of thequeue because they are generally regarded as weak banks.MR. AXILROD. That's right. But if, for example, Continentalis in one day and then out and it just happened that the borrowingfell on Continental, as it would naturally--MR. PARTEE. I was thinking more of, say, some of these bankswho at least partially lost their access to the Euro-markets. Theymight have to come back in for a rather substantial loan.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's easier at that point to adjustfor it, but in the initial stages it's likely to be hazy.MR. PARTEE. Yes. I see.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I can accept Tony's formulationof this. I would guess we ought to go to $175 million [rather than]$200 million, but I don't think it makes a lot of difference. I alsofind myself a little [uneasy], given the length of time until the nextmeeting and all these uncertainties. I'm not necessarily suggesting afull blown FOMC meeting, but I think it would very wise if a coupleweeks into January we at least got updated on where we were.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is correct, and I would planto do that.MS. TEETERS. I can live with this for three or four weekssubject to a re-evaluation at that time.MR. WALLICH. What would be the evaluation of the market ifthey could perceive this correctly? Is this somewhat similar to thelatest discount rate action?12/20-21/82MR. RICE. I think it's close, but it preserves the statusquo.MR. WALLICH. Well, that is what I'm asking. Is it that orwill it be seen as another push and does it run the risk of beingcounterproductive at the long end?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If M2 and M3 growth are as weak inDecember as Steve is projecting, then I don't think this will beperceived as an aggressive push.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Technically, I think it's slightly tighterthan the last directive if one literally--MR. CORRIGAN(?). That's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What would bother me in terms of themarkets--and I think [the likelihood] is not great--would be if thegrowth doesn't come in that weak so we do get some natural decline inthe fed fund rates. If the fed funds rate stays around 8-1/2 percentand then the Board simply aggressively cuts the discount rate 1/2point without there having been any softening in the fed funds market,that would give a very strong impression of aggressiveness. That hasboth positive and negative aspects to it but I think more negative.If we go somewhere along these lines, what we're saying is that unlessthe weakness develops in M2 and M3 in December, the fed funds ratewill tend to stay more or less where it is.MR. PARTEE. It's pretty much a status quo.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what we're saying if we adoptthis set of numbers. If there is weakness, then the fed funds ratewill probably go lower and the Board may or may not choose to ratifythat with a discount rate cut.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments?MR. GRAMLEY. It sounds all right to me.MR. RICE. I agree with this proposal.MR. PARTEE. I'm a little nervous about M2. I don't think M2bears any relationship to anything. I don't think it's off the wallany more--a number that somebody conceived of. But it doesn't seemvery [unintelligible] by itself. I guess I would accept this.MR. BLACK. Despite all this discussion of what theaggregates might do and despite my strong predilection towardtargeting aggregates, I don't think we have much choice other than totarget interest rates in the short run.MR. PARTEE. And that's what this is doing.MR. BOEHNE. Carrying that tattered fig leaf for one more--MR. BLACK. But I must say that my feeling about what are theappropriate rates is conditioned by four months of what I think hasbeen very excessive growth in M1. I don't pretend to know what caused12/20-21/82all that; it may have been precautionary demands for money. But everytime the federal funds rate has come down by 6 points or so, as it hasover the period since June, we've had a spurt in the aggregates. AndI think that drop in the federal funds rate must have played a prettysignificant role in itself. I'm very reluctant to go lower on thefederal funds rate than we are now. I would want a floor, a lowerlimit of 8 percent on it. If the aggregates come in weak, I would notmind the rate coming down to 8 percent, but I'm very leery about goingbeyond that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The assumption, implicitly, is that thefederal funds range in the directive stays at 6 to 10 percent. Idon't see any particular reason to change that, as Tony suggested.MR. BOEHNE. I'm not voting but if I were, I would supportthe formulation that Tony and Nancy and others have subscribed to.There is one point: If the judgment of the Board is to lower thediscount rate, to ratify this, I think it would be better perceived ifwe could see a little more progress on the funds rate toward 8 percentbefore a discount rate change came along. That's in keeping with theidea of having a mid-January meeting because if the funds rate coulddrop and then the discount rate followed it, I think that would bedigested better than the other way. The other way looks a bit toomuch like pushing and raises the risk of a perverse effect in thelong-term bond market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I see. We can all say we're targetinginterest rates and all this is a meaningless exercise, but in fact weare targeting a reserve path which has some influence on the fundsrate. If the aggregates are not coming in at a level which justifiesmoving the funds rate lower at that point, under these directives wecan't do it.MR. CORRIGAN. I have no problems with this formulation. Ithink it's fine.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What happens, Steve, if M2 and M3come in so weak and the demand for reserves is so low that there isvirtually no borrowing and we start getting an indeterminate fed fundsrate? What will we do at that point?SPEAKER(?). That's exactly the--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think that should stop usfrom going down now to the $175 to $200 million area.MR. AXILROD. We would certainly alert the Chairman if thatwere--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think the funds rate is going tobecome all that indeterminate all that soon. But at some point wemight want to reduce the discount rate and tighten up on the reservepath.MR. PARTEE. It's hard to imagine that for M2 in particular.How could it be that weak?-89-12/20-21/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve is talking about 4 percentgrowth in December and it's possible, though not too likely.MR. BLACK. Did you say it was revised up to 6 percent?MR. AXILROD. No, I was just muttering [about how we might]find an [unintelligible] range.MR. CORRIGAN. You're not supposed to do that, Steve!MR. BLACK. We might have to go through this again, Steve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to rush you here, but I don'thear any contrary views. Is there a preference between expressing itas 9 to 10 percent or 9-1/2 percent in the first place? I hear 9-1/2percent. And 8 percent for M3?MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to raise a question about8 percent for M3, given the performance of M3 over the past twoquarters and what is estimated in the first 2 months of the fourthquarter. It isn't clear why 8 percent is a magic number for M3. Itlooks to me as if it may be somewhat restrictive.MR. AXILROD. M3 has been slowing down very recently and wewere influenced in good part by that, of course. But for the year ithas been--MR. GUFFEY. For the year and for October-November it is over9 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes. We have estimated a very weak Decembercoming up. Whether or not that will develop, [I don't know]. This issomewhat stronger than we think the average of the three months--MR. GUFFEY. So, you're anticipating that that trend willcontinue for the next 3 months. I don't understand on what basis youmake that projection.MR. AXILROD. We go through the various components and thenmake some estimate of credit growth at banks and how they mightfinance that, given what we think of the others. And this is whatcomes out in a sense.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The banks are cutting back verystrongly on large CDs, Roger, as they get money in the money marketaccounts, particularly since credit demands are weak. That's a verysubstantial cutback we are beginning to see.MR. AXILROD. If there were a considerable expansion in bankcredit growth, this number could well be higher. Or if there were abig switch and banks decided to finance through borrowing here ratherthan abroad, that could affect this. We have not allowed for that; wehave allowed for a generally weak economy and still some--MR. GUFFEY. There's a real possibility that bank credit willgrow simply because of these new money market funds. Funds are beingattracted at 10 percent. They don't have any loan demand; they aregoing to have to put those funds to work in some way.-90-12/20-21/82MR. CORRIGAN. They will go make some more lousy loans!MR. GUFFEY. That's right. They're going to have to makesome loans because the only rate that can give them any spread iseither on commercial or consumer loans.MR. PARTEE. They can use the money to pay down their CDs.MR. AXILROD. Pay down CDs. If that doesn't happen--MR. FORD. The borrowing assumption in this package is $175to $200 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to decide upon that. Let'sjust take the numbers [for the aggregates] first and come to theborrowing assumption later. The numbers proposed are 9-1/2 and 8percent. I suggest language for the rest of the sentence saying"allowing in the case of M2 for modest shifting into the new moneymarket accounts from CDs or market instruments."MR. CORRIGAN. Large CDs.MR. PARTEE. Yes, large CDs. That sounds fine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Is that sentence agreeable?Then we go on with another sentence--just to complete the directiveand we will get back to the borrowing. Did you have new language forthe directive?MR. AXILROD. I think you have it right there. It's what Igave you as the new language. It is just typed funny.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you give me? It's this page I'vebeen writing on? Okay. "The Committee indicated that greater growthwould be acceptable if analysis of incoming data and other evidencefrom bank and market reports indicate that the new money marketaccounts are generating more substantial shifts of funds into broaderaggregates from market instruments."MR. CORRIGAN. Should that be just M2 there, too?MS. TEETERS. No, that covers M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This covers both as written.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I have a preference--since theamount of shifting to M3 is going to be small--not to have our handstied by having to have evidence that the shift is occurring in M3 aswell. It would seem to me that there's some advantage in having eventhat sentence refer to M2.MR. GRAMLEY. It doesn't say M2 or M3; it's general.MR. VOLCKER. No.MR. GRAMLEY. We can interpret [the evidence]; that gives usflexibility to--12/20-21/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It sounded to me as if--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think it clearly gives usflexibility. Is that okay? There was a bracketed portion in theoriginal draft reading "or signs of exceptional liquidity demands."Do you want to leave that in or out?MR. RICE. In.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have so many qualifications.MR. BOEHNE. It's just another way of saying we can't predictvelocity. It seems to me a very honest thing to put in there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not going to bleed and die one way orthe other on this one. I don't know whether that on balance is goodor bad. Let's have a show of hands just from the voting members onthis portion of the sentence--a referral to if there are exceptionalunderlying liquidity demands.MR. BLACK. Is this for leaving it in or taking it out?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's make it for leaving it in, in thefirst instance. It looks as if we have a minority of members whoprefer that. Let's leave it out for the moment.MS. TEETERS. Maybe you should poll for taking it out?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's going to rest upon the strength ofone's conviction, I guess. Comments about taking it out?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I'm in favor of taking it out.MR. GRAMLEY. I would take it out also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have more for taking it out. And wehave 6 to 10 percent on the federal funds rate range. All right, thattakes care of the directive language. We're left with the borrowing.Let me just try out $175 million as one end of the range that wassuggested. Who prefers that? Four. Who prefers $200 million? Theremay be other numbers. Five.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. $187.5 million!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The answer is $187.5 million. Let mesuggest that we use $200 million, but in these great decisions we makefrom day-to-day that we make them on the side of being a little belowrather than a little above. Is that acceptable? I guess we have donethe whole thing. Well, we have that language that you were talkingabout at the end of the previous paragraph.MR. AXILROD. Yes. We have it; it could be distributed.MR. BLACK. I would like to have a copy because I can't getthe words down as fast as they pour out.-92-12/20-21/82MR. AXILROD. Norm is distributing it. I'm sorry about thesevarious forms in which the [draft] directive is being provided. Therelevant language is in lines 55 to 58.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's very important because this will onlybe released after we've already done it.MR. FORD. If all goes well.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does this sentence achieveparticularly, Steve? It just shows that we were talking hereprivately but haven't talked any more about the long-term ranges?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's pointing out that we will review thedecision carefully in the light of developments over the remainder ofthe year. Literally it says our decision is going to be affected bywhat happens in the next week and a half and that looks a little odd.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree it does.MR. AXILROD. That's all I had in mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's trivial.MR. AXILROD. Yes, no one would pay much attention one way orthe other.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We could delete the whole sentence inthis earlier form or in its new form. I don't know what it adds.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know.MR. ALTMANN. Well, it has a reference to 1983.MR. PARTEE. To delete the sentence tends to delete thereference to 1983.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a sacred piece of boilerplate. Ireally think it has no significance whatsoever.MR. AXILROD. That's right. I didn't think so either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley suggests that the firstsentence in the whole directive should be changed.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't like to say final sales strengthenedwhen they went up about a tenth of one percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He is suggesting: "Real GNP declined inthe fourth quarter, although final sales apparently were roughlyunchanged" or "were maintained."MR. PARTEE. There was a very small percentage increase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can accept that change. Iguess we are ready to vote.12/20-21/82MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black NoPresident Ford NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesTen for, two against.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Do we have anything else?MR. ALTMANN. Just the luncheon and, on the agenda, the nextmeeting date.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ought to think in terms of thepossibility of a meeting after the 8th and 9th. We will have at leasta telephone consultation sometime in the middle of January.MR. FORD. Could we pick a date tentatively today?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it's usefulright now because I don't have my calendar here nor do other people.We will send something around. Okay, I guess we can eat.END OF MEETING