Meeting of Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 15, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held onThursday, July 15, 1982. This was a telephone conference meeting, andeach individual was in Washington, D. C., except as otherwise indicatedin parentheses in the following list of those participating.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice Chairman (New York)Mr. Balles (San Francisco)Mr. Black (Richmond)Mr. Ford (Atlanta)Mrs. Horn (Cleveland)Mr. MartinMr. ParteeMrs. TeetersMessrs. Guffey (Kansas City), Keehn (Chicago), Roos (St. Louis),and Timlen (New York), Alternate Members of the FederalOpen Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne (Philadelphia), Boykin (Dallas), and Corrigan(Minneapolis), Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banksof Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman (New York), Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis (Cleveland), Keran (San Francisco), Koch(Atlanta), Prell, Siegman, and Zeisel, AssociateEconomistsMr. Cross (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account7/15/82Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. McIntosh (Boston), First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of BostonMessrs. T. Davis (Kansas City), Eisenmenger (Boston),and Stern (Minneapolis), Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus (Richmond), Burger (St. Louis),Nichols (Chicago), and Soss, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis,Chicago, and New York, respectivelyMr. Lang (Philadelphia), Research Officer, FederalReserve Bank of PhiladelphiaMr. Pearce (Dallas), Assistant Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of DallasTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Callof July 15, 1982MR. ALTMANN. Murray Altmann here in the Board room. Asusual, I will call the roll by District. Gentlemen, we arebroadcasting. If there's any change from the attendance that you havewired to me, please so indicate as I go down the list. [Secretary'snote: Attendance roll was called]. Thank you very much. We expectto have in the Board room the Chairman, Governors Martin, Partee, andTeeters, and some staff. If you'll stand by, I expect the Chairman tobe here any minute.SPEAKER(?). Murray, do you have a number for us to call ifwe are disconnected?MR. ALTMANN. Yes. Should you be disconnected, call 202-452-3042 and we'll try to get you back on as quickly as possible. Thankyou. Let me ask one question: Is there anybody who did not receivethe wire that I sent not very long ago? Good, I'm glad not to hearany response.MR. PARTEE. Paul is now here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you ready? Well, ladies andgentlemen, greetings. I sent out this wire. I'm sorry I am so latebut I thought it might be helpful just to get some words in front ofus so we know what we're voting on, assuming we want to go in thisdirection. [Secretary's note: A copy of the draft language sent toCommittee participants is included in the Appendix.] Before gettingthere we might just have a little updating on where we stand in themore immediate sense. We have been putting a little money in themarket, as you know, and putting borrowings down. That would havebeen implied by the money supply developments, in any event, and wewere more alert to do so than we might otherwise have been--to keep alittle ahead of the market in putting some money in. I don't thinkthe market reacted all that well. For a while rates went down andthen there wasn't much carry-through and some reversal. I don't knowquite where we are at the moment. We ended up with borrowings ataround $500 million last week, if I recall correctly. They were alittle lower than I might have aimed at on path grounds alone but,since we're in the process of increasing the nonborrowed reserves pathin any event in response to the money supply figures, they probablywill be still lower this week.The latest money supply figure is not nearly as favorable,unfortunately, as the preliminary indication. It appears to be [anincrease of] between $5-1/2 and $6 billion--that's just among us--which is certainly in the range of market expectations, and it's not abad number put together with those of the past couple of weeks. Itshows, I think, essentially no July bulge. What it shows is anerratic downward movement last week replaced by an erratic upwardmovement this week, both in demand deposits rather than in NOWaccounts where the bulge was supposed to come. So, in itself itdoesn't look like a confirmation of a bulge. It's not really. Isuspect the money supply in the first week in July will be slightlybelow the June average level. As you recall we were anticipating abulge in July. I guess it's too soon to say that that possibility iseliminated entirely. But the kind of pattern we foresaw would have7/15/82allowed for a pretty big increase in July and then much smallerincreases in August and September. July would have to be bigger thanprojected at the moment to get up to the path evenly distributed overthe 3 months. And that is a basis for increasing nonborrowed reserveseven apart from disturbances we have had elsewhere in the market.I don't know what I can say about the Penn Square fallout.Having heard of the name of this bank only a couple of weeks ago, Ihave tried to forget it. But I think the obvious thing to say is thatwe haven't heard the last of it. We have had some repercussions inscattered banks, particularly in the Southwest, of a more or lessdirect nature in uninsured deposit withdrawals. We have some localbanks that were affected by the participations themselves. But thebigger questions, of course, are how the large participants will fareand how it will affect the whole tone of the market--the nervousnessin the market about financial institutions in general. We have nothad a rapidly unravelling situation but it is far from a normalsituation and there is a lot of tentativeness in the market,particularly with respect to the obligations of the institutionsdirectly affected. And enormous numbers of rumors are beinggenerated, which get reported to me regularly, about other financialor nonfinancial institutions. I think there is an undertone ofnervousness in the market. That is a very general summary. I don'tknow whether Mr. Axilrod wants to say anything more precisely and thenwe'll turn to Mr. Sternlight.MR. AXILROD. No, Mr. Chairman. You covered the aggregates:In the first two weeks of July, [ending] the 7th and the 14th, thelevel is just about equal to the June level: M1 is running well belowthe path level for July which was up around $454 billion. So, it'srunning around $3 billion below that path level.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do you mean, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, the Committee adopted a path for thataggregate for June through September of around 5 percent. We allowedfor a bit of a bulge in July--not much, around 7 percent--and theaverage level in July, to hit that, would be close to $454 billion.It's running around $451 billion. That's all I really meant.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The $451 billion includes the $5.8billion [increase] we will be publishing?MR. AXILROD. Yes. For another reference point, the top ofthe range for July would have been $452.7 billion, so we're runningwell below that also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Slightly below. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. I'll only add, Mr. Chairman, that the fedfunds rate has come down some in the past week, averaging about 13-1/8percent rather than the 14 percent plus levels of the previous week.And it's also in that 13 to 13-1/8 percent area today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any questions or comments onrecent developments? I assume all this discounting of the receivercertificates is going on smoothly or otherwise--7/15/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Which Districts have received them?We haven't had any in New York.MR. BRADFIELD. Mr. Chairman, there has only been one issuedand that was to the Wright Patman Credit Union. There haven't beenany issued in addition to that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There have been a number of inquiries,haven't there?MR. AXILROD et. al. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. In Kansas City we've had a number of inquiries.But in talking with the FDIC people, apparently they haven't been verydiligent in getting these certificates out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Issued?MR. GUFFEY. It's not in the hands of the holder.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's turn to completing the meetingthat we had earlier and the portion on the longer-term ranges. Thelanguage I sent you attempted to encapsulate my interpretation of whatwe said. What I have in mind in adopting the decision is that insteadof just flatly having ranges in the directive--it appears essentiallyas boilerplate in the directive--we would repeat the ranges as usualbut add this bit of gloss to it. Of course, something similar wouldalso appear in the report we make to the Congress and in my testimony.But I think it's just as well to put this--whatever we agree on--inthe record so that there is some reflection of the interpretation inthe directive boilerplate as well as just the bare numbers.MR. ROOS. When will the testimony be?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Tuesday.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, in regard to the last sentence:"The Committee also indicated that it was tentatively planning toadopt the same ranges for 1983," it seems to me that there might besome slight advantage in saying instead "The Committee also indicatedin view of present uncertainties that it was tentatively planning tocontinue the same ranges."MS. TEETERS. We're always uncertain at this time of theyear.MR. MARTIN. I think that argues against our maintaining aposition that we need flexibility.MR. PARTEE. Tony, I prefer the second phrase of thatsentence, which you didn't read, as the reason for our beingtentative. That's a pretty good phrase--that we'll be watchingcarefully and we certainly will feel free to reserve on those rangesafter we have looked at the second half of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you see any significance in sayingcontinue the same ranges and saying--7/15/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I do. I had the feeling that"adopt" sounds like a firmer judgment as to the target ranges we wantin '83 whereas "continued" sounds like a holding action. I think itwas the sense of the FOMC at its meeting that if we were going to do arevision, we would skew it downwards. It would be easier to do thatthen whereas it would be hard to do an upward revision, and that iswhy we were continuing the same ranges tentatively. I don't know whybut I have the feeling that "continued" sounds better than "adopt."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't any strong feeling about it. Ithink we ought to have separate votes when we get around to the vote--I guess that has been the tradition--for the remainder of this yearand for next year. Since you raised the issue, let's discuss nextyear and get that settled for a tentative decision anyway. The pointhere, and there was of course a lot of support for it before, was thatwe would retain the same range in the knowledge--and this would be inthe report too--that continuing the same range gives us ample scopefor an actual reduction, if that seems appropriate. And that would bementioned. I don't think it has to be mentioned here but it ismentioned in the Humphrey-Hawkins report, and my testimony says thereis nothing inconsistent about this and having lower actual growth nextyear, if that's what we want to do. But it is worded to make it alittle more tentative than usual. That was the effort, and if"continue" helps, that doesn't bother me. Any other comment on 1983?MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Bob Black. I'd rather knock off ahalf point at the top. I just think [retaining the 1982 ranges for1983] might raise unnecessary doubts about the degree of seriousnesswe attach to the targets. At the same time, we could also pull up thebottom. I don't think anybody would want anything as low as 2-1/2percent. I realize this would narrow the range from what most peopleprefer, but I believe 3 to 5 percent would have a more salutary marketimpact than what you have stated.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, this is Karen Horn. Just to followalong on Bob's comments. I have some concern about changing the policythat we've had for some time now of [reducing the M1 range by] 1/2percentage point each year, or even indicating with this tentativenessour thoughts about changing that policy for fear that it might be asignal to the markets that in fact this Committee was contemplating asignificant change in policy. And at this time I think either verysoft language with regard to not changing the target ranges oractually saying something about lowering the targets by 1/2 pointmight instill more confidence in the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a little problem, which Imentioned in my own testimony, in that someday this velocity may notincrease so rapidly. If we had, let's say, 5 percent [M1 growth] nextyear--which may turn out to be right and it may turn out to be lowerthan that--that assumes, in order to get any kind of economic recoverynext year, that we have to have a higher-than-trend velocity figure.It would have to be well up into the ranges of what we get with a goodrecovery and rising interest rates. I gulp a little at this stage insaying that that is necessarily consistent with even the projectionsthat we have, in the light of all the uncertainties that exist aboutthis. We sit here and imply--if we want growth above 5 percent, whichI guess is what you're saying--that we have to have about a 4 or 5percent increase in velocity through the year to get real growth in7/15/82 -5-the economy of 3-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent. That's assuming that velocityis absolutely normal. And I don't know that we can make thatassumption.MR. FORD. Paul, this is Bill Ford in Atlanta. I want toexpress myself on the side of the last two speakers but add to whatyou're saying. I'd be inclined to go ahead with our program that weestablished a couple years ago of continuing to try to notch thetarget down a half point a year but perhaps add on the caveat you justexpressed that we are anticipating a normal cyclical positive factorto [unintelligible] for adequate growth in the economy, and should itdevelop--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to say that anyway. A 1/2percentage point [reduction] isn't enough to make a difference there.It just aggravates the problem.MR. FORD. In any case I would prefer to stay with theprogram at this point, with a caveat that allows some leeway on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The program is not to reduce the moneysupply forever; it's to get rid of inflation and have a little growth.MR. FORD. I don't really believe that a 5 percent increaseis as low as we ultimately want it to be. I don't know if you regardthat as the lowest we ever want growth in the money supply to be inthe future.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. If velocity ended up atzero, I wouldn't want to end up much lower than that.MR. FORD. Yes, that's right. But normally we don't seevelocity at zero when we are where we should be in terms of the stageof the cycle.MR. PARTEE. We certainly did in the first half, Bill. Infact it was negative. I'm led now, on the basis of the comments ofthe last several speakers, to support Tony in changing that word to"continue" rather than "adopt." I have two reasons for it. One isthat, substantively, I'd be opposed to narrowing the range. Rememberthat the midpoint of the present range is 4-1/4 percent. There islots of room for reduction if we want to specify that we're going tobe more toward the middle or that we [look at the full] range ratherthan that we are shooting for the upper part of it as we have thisyear. But more importantly, in order to maintain our options, I thinkit would be significant to say that we'll continue with the currentranges until we see some reason for varying them on the basis of thesecond-half experience. If, as Karen suggests, we reduce the top by ahalf point and, as Bob suggests, we increase the bottom by a halfpoint, we will be giving a sense of specificity to the plan that thenbecomes extremely difficult to get out of. I'm very much opposed tothat kind of doodling with the numbers at this point.MR. FORD. The way I see it, Chuck, what you're proposing, asit is in the telegram, is doodling with the numbers because the marketis anticipating that we're going to continue to bring the planned rateof expansion in the aggregates downward for some time yet. I don'tthink anybody I've talked to in the market thinks that even 5 percent7/15/82is the ultimately appropriate rate of growth in the aggregates. Sothe doodling in my view is the one that does not reduce the rate 1/2percentage point. That's the change in policy.MR. PARTEE. But the point is, Bill, that we have plenty ofroom to make the policy more restrictive within the present ranges.And by saying we're going to continue the present ranges, we retainthe option to review the information from the second half. Icertainly agree with Paul that if we're not going to have any increasein velocity, I'm going to support a sizable increase in the moneysupply next year. And I don't know whether that will be the case ornot.MR. BLACK. Chuck, this is Bob Black. [Unintelligible] onyour position that we have room to do what we want in the existingranges. The thing that bothers me is what the market will think if wehaven't made at least some little move in the direction we've allstated we wanted to move.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I'm worried about a differentproposition here, and that is: If we signal that we're going to lowerthe money supply next year--and we have never changed our [July]projections made 18 months ahead of time--it seems to me that themarket would take that as signalling that we want interest rates to goup and that there is an even greater probability of interest ratesgoing up as the recovery proceeds.MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne. If I had my druthers, Iwouldn't even set a 1983 target at this point. There is an unusualamount of uncertainty, but we do have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We tried that once but it didn't work.MR. BOEHNE. --but we do have to set it. I think we'd wantto have some language and a position here that gives us as muchflexibility as possible. And saying that we're going to stick withthe current ranges until circumstances dictate otherwise should conveythat notion. If we begin taking a half point off from whatever, thatconveys a degree of precision that we don't have--and I don't thinkanybody else has--with respect to the economy in 1983.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I happen to agree with that ratherstrongly. The weight of the opinion last time was to [adopt the sameranges for 1983]. We've heard from a couple of objectors. Do Iassume that the others who were in favor of doing this remain in favorof it?MR. MARTIN. I would certainly come in, along with Tony andothers, on the side of talking about a continuance of the ranges.Several of us have referred to the market. If we wish to be a littlemore literal and a bit short termed and realistic, the market peopleare now talking about illiquidity; they're talking about what bank isgoing to fail next; they're talking about surprises from the corporatesector. The market has an unusual degree of uncertainty and indeedfear right now. For us to drop the top of the range would indicate, Ibelieve, to many of these individuals and firms and banks and overseasholders of dollars that we are not taking seriously the downside risk7/15/82inherent in an unstable, illiquid market and set of corporations. Ithink that would be the wrong signal to send to them now.MR. BALLES. Paul, this is John Balles. In thinking of theproposal Tony made, I'd like to piggyback on it and perhaps offer somelanguage in the sentence that we're talking about simply by referringto the phrase you used: "In view of present uncertainties theCommittee also indicated it was tentatively planning to retain thesame ranges for 1983," etc.MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos. I would be most agreeablewith the wording of the wire that was sent out to us. I don't thinkanyone, including the markets, thinks that a half point one way or theother is an achievable objective. I think there is a downside risk.I certainly feel that we should continue to attempt to control themoney supply to bring down inflation. But if money really came in onthe low side of either of these suggested targets, I think that mightdo in aggregate targeting forever and ever and we'd have anothersoftening in the economy. So, I would opt for the wording that was inthe wire and whether we use "continue" or "adopt" I don't think makestoo much difference.MR. BLACK. Let me emphasize that I'm not talking about thelower end, Larry, in case I misled you on that. I'm talking about thehigh side.MR. ROOS. Well, Bob, the way we set these ranges in light ofthe strength in recent years is not as important as where we end upwithin a range that's either a half point higher or lower on either[end] or [whether we] indicate that we will shoot for the upper partof it, which I think would be satisfactory. I have no trouble withthe wire as is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments? I concludein the absence of any other comments that the majority wants somethingabout the way it is, with some little fiddling with the language, andwe'll test that later. But let us look at it in light of the nearterm. The first question is whether we keep the targets the same [forthis year]. Any comment on just that point? This is not language,now; this is simply saying we're going to keep the same targets thatwe set in February. To some people it may depend on what thesubsequent language says.MS. TEETERS. You're talking about '82?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about '82 now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have mixed feelings on that sectionthat says we would tolerate some kind of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm only talking about the numbers at thispoint.MR. PARTEE. I think that we have to leave them where theyare, although I certainly believe that we ought to err on the highside in our actual performance because it would be too much of a shockto the market--not the city of Washington but the market--to change7/15/82them. So I would support, as we discussed at the meeting, leavingthem where they are and erring on the high side.MR. BLACK. I agree with Chuck.MR. BALLES. I agree with Chuck as well.MR. KEEHN. I agree with that also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections? Well, we'll turn to thesupplementary language now, but I'm presuming that we will keep thesame ranges.MR. BALLES. John Balles, Paul. There's just one little finepoint here that you might want to consider. I like the way thelanguage is now and it would be acceptable to me as it is, only fine-tuning it a bit. In the second half of the sentence that reads "andwould tolerate for some period of time growth above the target rangeshould unusual precautionary demands for money and liquidity arise,"would you want to consider saying "continue to arise"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My only problem with that is that rightnow we're within the targets. I certainly will argue in my testimonythat we had unusual demands earlier in the year, that we may stillhave them, and that we have to be wary about them. But--I'm beingvery technical in some sense--we presumably allowed for that in ouroperations and right now we're within the target. Just as you weretalking I thought of a more neutral word instead of "arise." First ofall, let me say that in the absence of hearing anything else on thenumbers, we are now passing to the gloss. If we say "should unusualprecautionary demands in money and liquidity be evident," that'srather neutral as to whether they are now or have been or will be.It's not so future looking.MR. BALLES. That would be better in my view because the word"arise" implies that there are not yet any.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I understand your point. And theonly reason I am a little hesitant about it is that if we have thoseunusual demands now, why aren't we above the target?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, with regard to that second halfof the sentence "and would tolerate for some period of time," etc.first of all, not only is your suggestion of "be evident" instead of"arise" a good one, but also I'm a little concerned about not havingan adjective in front of the word "growth." It seems to me that anadjective--something like "modest"--before the word "growth" isnecessary. I wouldn't go as far as Nancy went in the last FOMCmeeting as to indicate how much growth above we would accept, but Ithink there ought to be an implication that we're not talking aboutunlimited growth. I'm a little concerned about the way some peoplemight read that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're in a dilemma here. I don'tdisagree with what you're saying in some sense. We can put in theword "somewhat" or "some modest" growth. On the other hand, [I'm]trying to get away from this feeling in the market that every timewe're $1 billion above target--or even $5 billion above if it came out7/15/82that way at some point--that it's something terrible and we'reimmediately going to react to get it down. So, if we put in the words"modest growth" or "somewhat above" or something--MR. CORRIGAN. I have a little of the same uneasiness. Idon't want to muddy us up with another suggestion but one thing thatmight take care of both of these concerns would be after the comma tosay "and would continue to evaluate developments in the light of anyevidence of unusual precautionary demands." Maybe I'm splittinghairs, but to me that would suggest a posture not unlike what in factwe did during the first half of the year and it might also get atTony's point a little in suggesting that we're not talking aboutletting this go crazy on us.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's a little too cryptic,Jerry. I don't know that that would be more clear both to theCongress and the market than saying something like "would tolerate forsome period of time." That's just my initial instinct on that.MR. PARTEE. Well, it also calls into question thenotification process to Congress if we have evaluated and decided.That is, if a reevaluation indicates that the range should bedifferent, we're supposed to tell the Congress that. The way it'swritten here we are giving ourselves a little cap over the range thatis specified. I would associate myself with those who want to say"somewhat above." I think "modest" has the wrong ring to it becauseit's not modest if it's above and it might need to be, before a littletime, a considerable figure. I also would like to suggest just alittle notching up in the nomenclature here. Rather than saying thatgrowth toward the top end of the range would be "acceptable," I wouldlike to say that it would be "appropriate, given the low base" andthen I would say with regard to the second phrase that growth somewhatabove the upper end of the range would be "acceptable" not"tolerable," if this unusual liquidity demand persists.MR. FORD. I think those are good suggestions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know; that goes a little far. Itsounds a little more aggressive.MR. PARTEE. My problem, Paul, is that I think this is toogrudging.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is a fine distinction we aredealing with here at any case. I think the market will read"acceptable" as saying growth is going to be up there. But I don'tknow what is going to happen.MR. PARTEE. Acceptable if this condition persists.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER The "acceptable" doesn't bother me so muchin the second part; it's the "appropriate" pinning us right to the topend of the range in the first part of the sentence. We don't knowwhat is going to happen.MR. FORD. Paul, this is Bill Ford. I think the lastlanguage that Chuck Partee said just might do it [unintelligible].7/15/82There's a real chance of it being interpreted as dealing with the[unintelligible] demand.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Bob Black. Let me try something; Idon't whether it will appeal to anybody or not. After the comma say"and indicated that it would tolerate growth somewhat above the targetranges temporarily, should extraordinary liquidity pressures arise."MR. FORD. I'd feel a lot more comfortable with somethinglike Bob said.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure my ear heard any substantivedifference in that.MS. TEETERS. The "unusual precautionary demands for money"is what was taken out.MR. BLACK. What bothers me, Mr. Chairman, is theprecautionary part. One can certainly make a good case for it, but Idon't think we can prove that. I think we have clear liquiditypressures; we all know that. I guess I'm worried about ourrationalizing too much of an overshoot by saying that demand for moneyhas shifted when we really don't have any empirical evidence that ithas.MR. FORD. One more thing on that, Paul. I'd like to hearwhat Pres Martin says about that because his comments earlier aboutwhat the market thinks were interesting to me, and I've been veryworried, as everybody is, about the possibility of another Penn Squareor some other institutions that we don't know about or even someinstitutions that we do know about. That's where I see thedistinction in what Mr. Black is saying: that the market emphasizes[unintelligible] and that if there are real liquidity problemsevident, then none of us is going to be in favor of clamping down onthe market and threatening or precipitating a financial crisis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must interject. I see no substantivedifference. If there's an unusual demand for liquidity whether wecall it precautionary or liquidity, I don't know what the distinctionis. If you're making a distinction, I think you have to raise thetargets. If the economy needs more liquidity, it needs more liquidityand we should raise the targets.MR. FORD. We're talking about the liquidity problems in--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The term "liquidity problems" to me meansthat people will temporarily want to run into money, which is whatprecautionary balances mean.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I must say, even though there isn't alarge difference, that I think Bob Black's language implies a muchgreater willingness by the Fed to "cave in," so to speak, if there isa liquidity problem in the economy, whereas what we are saying is thatif the velocity of circulation is less than what it normally would bebecause of precautionary demands as well as demands for money andliquidity, we will factor that in. So, I think that we stay moreconsistently and soundly based on technical grounds if we stay withthe same language; Bob Black's language implies a much greater7/15/82willingness to ease monetary policy if the real economy continues tobe in difficulty. Some people might expect almost an immediateeasing, given the present liquidity situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that's my sense of it, too. Theeconomy clearly has liquidity problems and if we're worried aboutthose liquidity problems just in the general sense we ought to beraising the targets.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'd put in the adjective"extraordinary" liquidity problems. I think that really restates ourwillingness, as always, to serve as lender of last resort eitherthrough the discount window or by supplying reserves. I think aboutfinancial institutions and businesses in real trouble beyond whatwe've yet seen, whereas the idea of precautionary balances--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have got trouble beyond what we've yetseen; I tell you, we have trouble.MR. BLACK. If it gets that bad, I'd have no problems withdoing this; but if we just think we have a shift in the demand curveand we really don't have any statistics to [support] that--. I'd bereluctant to leave that precautionary demand wording in there becausewhat we have had was not enough to make me want to overshoot thetargets up to now. But I can easily see, as you seem to be concernedabout it, that we could have problems where I'd want to overshoot.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know. You seem to be mixing thediscount window with aggregate monetary policy, Bob, in a way that istricky. I would assume that if we made [available] extraordinary useof the window in the period to come, we would at that level ofanalysis also attempt to offset that in the open market. Are yousuggesting that we wouldn't offset it in the open market?MR. BLACK. I was saying that there are some institutionsthat might have liquidity problems which we couldn't reach through thediscount window because they don't have eligibility to borrow and thatwe might have to put [more liquidity in the market] for somebody elseto supply their liquidity to them.MR. PARTEE. And there is, of course, the effect on thepublic or the general populace of the perception of these problems.The public may run to more liquidity and it's not an institution. Itmay be the public, which in response to its perception of problems inthe institutions, goes into cash or goes out of market securities intoM2 forms and that kind of thing. And we have to allow for that, itseems to me. As far as the first half of this year is concerned, I'veno doubt, given the level of economic activity, that there was achange in the demand for money. There was an increase inprecautionary demands. Virtually all of the increase in M1 was in NOWaccounts. That, I think, is very, very strong evidence.MR. BLACK. I think that's thoughtful, Chuck, but most[unintelligible] advantages there are. Last year we were saying thatfinancial innovations justified a low rate of growth in M1 and Iwasn't convinced of that. And when I see the same people on the otherside of the issue, I'm not convinced this year of that.-11-7/15/82SPEAKER(?). What's the precautionary lag?MR. BLACK. [Unintelligible], I think. We probably had doneit last year and it was too low. That's, of course, something that Ican't prove; but no one has disproved it either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have had a massively expansionarypolicy this year!MR. PARTEE. As reflected in all the credit that's flowingand the sharp drop in interest rates and the ease in markets!MR. BLACK. If we think the demand curve has shifted and wetry to offset it and it hasn't--if it has shifted back--we are goingto create a monetary disturbance. If it does shift and we don'tdetect it, we will create a monetary disturbance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's our dilemma.MR. BLACK. Either way, we're going to mess things up!MR. MARTIN. Even more than they are today!MR. PARTEE. Thank you, Mr. Patman!MR. MARTIN. Mr. St Germain, I believe you meant to say!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments? Doesanybody else feel strongly about some part of this? We have to returnto Mr. Partee's suggestion, I think, and analyze that. But are thereany other comments to be put in the hopper here?MR. BLACK. One comment, Mr. Chairman, and I'll say nothingelse at all. The language that I threw out was intended to suggestthat we would abandon our targets only in case of a clear emergency.I guess I didn't do that with my language and I would accept gladlyany language that would do that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Partee suggested changing it basicallyby taking out the word "acceptable" and replacing it with"appropriate." I think the market will read this as it is worded asour being quite content with the top of the range, but he converts ittechnically into aiming at very close to the top of the range.MR. PARTEE. Let's make it "appropriate to be in the upperhalf of the range."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's no change from what we said sixmonths ago. That doesn't say it's wrong, but this is precisely whatwe are doing. I don't know what precise wording we used, but theindication was that we expected [growth] to be in the upper part ofthe range.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to support Chuck'ssuggestion. I think it's very consistent with our posture. We wouldbe very unhappy--I think substantively unhappy--if growth came insignificantly lower than that. It seems to me, in view of the-12-7/15/82undershooting last year and in view of the situation in the economy,that coming in close to the top is appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. That's probably rightor I wouldn't use this language. But if we get a distinct surge inthe economy and interest rates are going down and somehow M1 is not atthe top of the range, I wouldn't be too unhappy. I don't know thatthat's going to happen; I don't think it's going to happen. Butstranger things have happened.[Secretary's note: The transcript for this conference callended at this point. The two decisions on the longer-term rangesreached at this telephone meeting were recorded in the Committee'sRecord of Policy Actions as shown below:(1) The Committee reaffirmed the following ranges forgrowth of the monetary aggregates over the year fromthe fourth quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982that it had adopted in early February: for M1, 2-1/2 to5-1/2 percent; for M2, 6 to 9 percent; and for M3, 6-1/2to 9-1/2 percent. The associated range for bank creditwas 6 to 9 percent. At the same time, the Committeeagreed that growth in the monetary and credit aggregatesaround the top of the indicated ranges would beacceptable in the light of the low base period for theM1 target and other factors, and that it would toleratefor some period of time growth somewhat above the targetrange should unusual precautionary demands for money andliquidity be evident in the light of current economicuncertainties.Votes for this action: Messrs. Volcker, Solomon, Black,Ford, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Martin, and Partee. Vote against thisaction: Mrs. Teeters. Absent and not voting: Messrs. Gramley, Riceand Wallich.(2) The Committee indicated that for 1983 it was tentativelyplanning to continue the current ranges for 1982, butwould review that decision carefully in the light ofdevelopments over the remainder of 1982. The vote forthis action was unanimous.It was also noted in the policy record that Messrs. Gramley,Rice, and Wallich, who had been unable to attend this meeting but hadbeen present for the main discussion of the longer-run ranges formonetary growth held at the meeting on June 30-July 1, associatedthemselves with the Committee with respect to the ranges for both 1982and 1983.]END OF MEETING-13-