Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 16, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 16, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. Martin 1/Mr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, Roos, and Timlen,2/Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele,2/ Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman,2/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Ettin,2/ J. Davis,2/ R. Davis,2/ Keran,2/ Koch,2/Parthemos,2/ Prell,2/Siegman,2/ Truman, and Zeisel,2/Associate Economists1/ Entered the meeting following acceptance of Report of Examination ofSystem Open Market Account.2/ Left the meeting prior to discussion and adoption of domestic policydirective.11/16/82Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,1/ Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn,1/ Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey,1/ Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach,1/ Burns,l/ T. Davis,l/ Eisenmenger,l/Mullineaux,1/ Scheld,1/ and Stern,1/ Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas,Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Soss, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew YorkMs. Clarkin,l/ Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 16, 1982CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a number of things to deal withapart from policy today. I am distressed about what happened afterthe last meeting, as you well know, and I am distressed by the actionsthat had to be taken for this meeting. We will return to that subjectafter we complete the policy discussion. But I think the procedure[regarding limited attendance during the Committee's discussion ofmonetary policy at] this meeting has been outlined to you. Now weneed to deal with the minutes.MR. PARTEE. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will approve theminutes. Next we have the report of examinations, which has beendistributed to you. Do I hear any questions?MR. PARTEE. It looked like a clean [bill of health].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no questions, we can have amotion to accept it.MR. GRAMLEY. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been moved and seconded and withoutobjection [it is approved]. We will go to Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or discussion?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, as for the recommendation[regarding the Mexican swap drawings], we don't have any alternative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could put them in default. Do wehave a motion on the recommendations [for renewal of all the swaplines for one year and renewal of the drawings by the Bank of Mexicofor three months]?SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been moved. Without objection, wewill approve that. No other commentary? We will go to domestic openmarket operations.MR. ALTMANN. Are you going to ratify the operations?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we have to ratify the [foreigncurrency] operations.MS. TEETERS. So moved.MR. RICE. Second.11/16/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's worth making onecomment. Our current account deficit is beginning to mount up; byalmost any estimate it probably will be at least $30 billion nextyear, but it might be as high as $50 billion. At what point this willchange market sentiment toward the dollar is unclear; that may requiresome other things happening as well. But I would assume that we arebeginning to see a little strengthening in the yen, and the Germansare beginning to see some strengthening [in the mark] against othercurrencies except the dollar. So, there may be a change in thissituation, although I don't expect it imminently.MR. WALLICH. Well, the nature of this deficit is that it isthe result of a high dollar, and the high dollar is the result ofpeople wanting to get into the dollar, forcing, as it were, thefinancing of the deficit on us for the time being instead of wonderingwhether they ought to finance it. That is what I think keeps thedollar up in the face of this prospect of a huge deficit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Another way of putting it is that thecapital flows are swamping the equilibrium trade effect of an exchangerate. There's nothing we can do about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably it will all reverse itself verysuddenly and give us another problem. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions? Discussion?MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, would it be in order to ask Steve aprocedural question somewhere along here? He might not want to do itat this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what you have in mind.MR. BLACK. Well, with our new targeting on M2 and M3, Ithink there are some interesting questions about whether theseprocedures work the way they did when we were targeting on M1. Idon't know whether you would like that issue raised here or at someother point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might as well be raised here.MR. PARTEE. The steering mechanism?MR. BLACK. Yes, the steering mechanism. I've been on themarket call and I've been intrigued as I watched this develop. It hasbeen a very interesting period to be there. We are following the samesort of reserve targeting procedures from all outward appearances. Westill set a nonborrowed reserve path and we have a borrowed reservestarget; and we've made some adjustments to the borrowed reservestarget. As this period unfolded, I began to ask myself whether thisreally makes a lot of sense when we are using M2 and M3 as ourtargets. They include a pretty broad confluence of assets. Some aresubject to reserve requirements and some aren't; some have interestrate ceilings and some don't; and some seem to move in the samedirection as the federal funds rate moves and some seem to move in theopposite direction. So, I'd like to ask Peter if he really thinks it11/16/82makes a lot of sense to use this kind of reserve targeting procedurewhile we are using M2 and M3 as our primary targets, or even for thatmatter if he really thinks there is any effective way we can controlM2 or M3. The bottom line on this is that I am asking whether thefederal funds rate under current procedures is an effective operatinginstrument or whether it tends to become a target in itself.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there are a lot of parts to yourquestion, President Black. Just as a technical matter, I think inusing and revising the reserve path there are some [specific]procedures called for. We had to do some of this adjustment fordifferent factors even when we were targeting M1. But there arefurther adjustments of this kind to allow, as you say, for the factthat many components of M2 don't generate reserve requirements. Stevemay want to comment on this, but what we have done as we've gone alongis to revise the path as though there were reserve requirementsagainst M2 in general, in a sense making up for the fact that someimportant components of it didn't have reserve requirements. When youask if it is effective to control M2 via this means, I would have tosay I have some real doubts as to how good our control mechanism is onM2. But I think that would be true almost whatever rules we live byat the Desk. I do think what we're following, though, is an effectiveresponse mechanism to growth in M2 that is either on track or below orabove track. It is something whereby the performance of M2 cangenerate a greater or lesser provision of reserves that then impactson the money market, on the economy, and so on, and eventually on M2.I think that this is a sensible procedure.MR. BLACK. But the ratio between total reserves and M2 or M3is so low or, to look at the other side, those so-called multipliersare so high. Therefore, if we miss our target--say we overrun thetarget--and we adjust by making the banks borrow that portion by whichwe have overrun the target, that's a pretty weak increase in theborrowed reserve target. Even if we do it on a one-for-one basis andeven if that were the right way, I would wonder whether necessarilydriving up the federal funds rate at a time like this would slow downa good part of M2. I think we would count on it affecting the M1portion and probably the part of M2 that is subject to rate ceilingsor reserve requirements. But some of these components are reallymoney market instruments and they seem to move in the same direction.This is the kind of thing that has concerned me about it. I felt aswe went through the period that the old apparatus was rather out ofdate when we were using this particular kind of target and that maybewe ought to go directly to [targeting] the federal funds rate, whichprobably sounds like heresy to a lot of people who have listened to mein the past, but--MR. PARTEE. How would you slow down M2?MR. BLACK. I don't think we can slow it down except throughaffecting M1 and those few assets in M2 that are subject to eitherreserve requirements or interest rate ceilings.MR. WALLICH. Well, one way of putting what you said is thatthe funds rate is now an endogenous variable. Is it the result oftrying to restrain M2 with reserves, or is it the other way--that wemove the funds rate and try to restrain M2 and that more or less givesus the reserve level that is needed?11/16/82MR. BLACK. I think that's a good way of putting it. Thewhole thing just bothered me and I was hoping for some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to make any comment, Mr.Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the comments I'd be tempted tomake would be in a fairly broad range. There is a dilemma between theshort run and the long run. It is probably true that because most ofM2 doesn't have any reserve requirements this 2 percent averagereserve requirement on M2 relative to total reserves is giving us avery weak response in the short run to overruns in M2. That assumes,if we just go to the 2 percent, that the response is somewhatproportional and that M1 together with the nontransactions componentwould be roughly [as variable as M1]. But as President Black pointedout, in the short run they clearly won't be; as interest rates go up,the market will raise rates on the nontransactions components and theywill respond. So, in the short run probably we ought to react, [ineffect,] by moving the reserve requirement on demand deposits. Thatis, if M2 is strong, the really practical option is to lower demanddeposits substantially; so we'd have to use a demand deposit ratio inthe multiplier--for the purpose of the [technical] adjustment [to thenonborrowed reserve path]--rather than the M2 ratio. In that case wewould get a very powerful interest rate response. To reduce demanddeposits sufficiently to offset an expansion in the nontransactionscomponent would require a very substantial rise in interest rates.That's just another way of saying in technical jargon that theinterest elasticity of M2 is low relative to the interest elasticityof M1.So, to try to control M2 over a very short-run period risksvery substantial interest rate movements. In the end, we would haveto have enough [of an increase in interest rates] to bring income downand reduce the amount of money available to put into M2. That's thereason that we started using the 2 percent ratio--to moderate thisparticular impact, consistent with the Committee's decision. Also, ithas a certain reality. When you think of the market response, thecontrol horizon for M2 is [necessarily] somewhat longer than thecontrol horizon for M1. Whether the Committee would then want to godirectly to the control of the funds rate and make a deliberatedecision about that instead of leaving it implied from a reserve path--knowing the control horizon for M2 might be a little longer, butimplied M1 movements would still be substantial--strikes me as anissue that has more than economics in it. My personal preference, ofcourse, would be to stay with a reserve path because I think it makesit a little easier in practice to get the movements of interest ratesthat the Committee probably would find tolerable and desirable underthe circumstances.MR. BLACK. Well, that's very helpful. I did not mean in anysense to be critical of what was done. I think Peter and Steve did afine job in implementing exactly what the Committee had in mind, whichreally was a sort of money market directive. I was just getting atthe kind of problems we would have if we continued this for someperiod of time. I think Steve and Peter both elucidated those verywell. That was very helpful. Thank you.11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of comments. Idon't think there's any question that the mechanism creeps when it isadapted to this purpose. I would not overestimate the precision ofour control technique on M1 either, but there is no doubt that itlooks more strained when we are doing it this way. I was going tomention later, but I will just mention it now, that we will have apaper prepared for the Committee looking toward the targets for nextyear. It will not be primarily on the control mechanism, although itmay get into that. It seems to me almost certain now that [as aresult of DIDC actions] we shortly will have a full transactionsaccount with a market rate of interest. We are very close to that nowanyway, and we'll have another account. We may have very close totransactions accounts without any reserve requirements on them. Wevirtually have that now. It raises all kinds of questions both aboutthe impact this will have on differential growth among the aggregatesand even total growth of the aggregates during some perhaps lengthytransitional period. And it also has a bearing on the controlmechanism. I don't think we can solve those problems today; I'm surewe can't. But we can get this paper prepared well before the meetingat which we have to set targets for next year. We will get itdistributed before the meeting and have a discussion then; I don'tthink we will resolve it then but we ought to be in a better positionfor resolving it at the following meeting.MR. BALLES. Paul, I found the [DIDC] announcement in thismorning's paper fascinating. Would it be premature to ask you whetherin your opinion we will end up classifying these new accounts as M1 orM2?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've been assuming we will put them in M2and it probably is premature to say that. It's a very ambiguousaccount. Beyond that, I don't know when it will be introduced. Butthere is a meeting of the DIDC not very far off--in three weeks orsomething like that. I don't know whether the DIDC will approve whatin effect will be a lifting of the interest rate ceiling on NOWaccounts, but I think it will go a long distance toward that. In twoor three months prospectively, I think we will have that. This thingis so much like a transactions account now. If banks use it as asweep account--it's not quite clear that they will--it's on the marginthere. If it were any more liberal than it is, they would certainlyuse it as a sweep account and I don't know how one would distinguishit from a transactions account. I'm not sure we'd stop short of thatmargin.MR. FORD. Excuse me, in that regard, was the newspaperarticle accurate that the DIDC has approved in addition to the sixtransfers--three checks and three preauthorized--telephone transferswithout limit at least until the next time this is looked at?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be reversed, but that's the wayit is now--[unlimited] telephone transfers into one's own checkingaccount.MR. FORD. Into one's own checking.MR. PARTEE. Or a personal visit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a personal visit was always allowed.11/16/82MR. FORD. On top of the other six transactions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That decision will [be reviewed]. One ofthe people who voted for it immediately wanted to change his mindafter the meeting and he was not allowed to change his vote. So, itmay be reversed in a subsequent meeting. But that bears upon howtransaction-like it is, of course.MR. FORD. Was it a 3 to 2 vote?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It must have been, because the one votewould have swung it. Now, we still have a decision to make on that,frankly. According to our present rules, an account of that sort willhave a reserve requirement. I think that is correct. And if we justkeep the reserve requirement on it, I presume that banks will notoffer that service. I doubt it would be worth it, in terms of payingthe 12 percent reserve requirement.MR. PARTEE. Paul, I think we are going to have to look atthe control mechanism definitely by the time we choose targets formonetary policy for next year. We probably will never be able tosteer on M1 again. But M2 or any other aggregate we might choose,such as bank credit, has to have some concept for translatingundesired behavior in an aggregate to action. And this 2 percent ruleis a minimal response and couldn't be expected to have any effect insteering the aggregates if that is what we really want to do now. Wemight want to take as our aggregate nominal GNP, but even then we needa control mechanism. That is the vital part to be studied, becausewhat we have now really doesn't have any tie to aggregate targeting oraggregate control--not with a 2 percent presumption on running aboveor below on the reserve effect of the aggregate.MR. BLACK. One thing we could do is to make the change inthe borrowing target some multiple of the overrun or underrun.MR. PARTEE. Sure, we need an [amplification].MR. BLACK. It doesn't have to be one-for-one; that's ratherarbitrary.MR. PARTEE. We don't look at M1, but of course we are goingto affect M1 by what we do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "We don't look at M1" is a littlestrong.MR. PARTEE. I want to put it that way, though. Even if wenever published the figure on M1 or looked at it or anything else, intrying to steer M2 we could have a process that would have big effectson actual M1 or the availability of Ml.MR. BLACK. It would inevitably have to work that way.MR. ROOS. Would you think it would be helpful in making someof these very basic decisions, if some input were invited fromwhatever Reserve Banks might be interested in getting into the act onthese studies, as far as just expressing themselves? There are somevery fundamental changes in the wind and I would think that anyone11/16/82within the System who had intelligent input to offer should beencouraged. I think we ought to hear the Reserve Bank points of viewas well as those of the [Board] staff.MR. WALLICH. We at one time had a Committee on the Directivewhich got together when there were changes of this kind. Conceivably,we could revive that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's right. But let's see wherewe want to go from the preliminary paper. I think we're going to getit done by the next meeting. We can't be too cumbersome at thispoint, but any Reserve Bank that wants to contribute should be intouch with Mr. Axilrod. He has already been in touch with some peopleat the Reserve Banks.MR. FORD. Will it include something about your idea, Frank,of how to control total credit? What would the control mechanism beunder your idea? Would that be in the paper?MR. AXILROD. We'll look at all the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first focus is on which aggregates [totarget] and how to interpret the aggregates. And that is partly--Isuppose entirely in some sense--because M1 has problems at the momentthat are looked at as a transitional thing. But it's very easy to getinto a more general discussion, starting with a transitional problem,particularly when whatever else happens to M1, it looks as if there isgoing to be interest paid on it, which is going to change its behaviorsoon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We will end up with an adjusted M1A,which will be called the monetary base.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions, andMr. Sternlight made a recommendation to you.SPEAKER(?). I move approval.MR. PARTEE. Peter, did you have in mind longer coupons?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we would look at the whole range; wetypically do when we buy bonds.MR. PARTEE. And you would do it in some volume today?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. It could be roughly $800 million to $1billion. That would be a rather normal bite, I think.MS. TEETERS. Why are you buying? Are you buying for reservepurposes or inventory?MR. STERNLIGHT. We have a reserve need running over the nextfew weeks. We already bought a large amount of bills at the beginningof this statement week and it would be a very normal pattern to followup with a coupon purchase in the market.11/16/82MR. PARTEE. Do you think the market would make anything ofthe fact that this sizable and unusual operation is occurring while weare meeting?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think so, Governor. There have beenseveral occasions when there were coupon purchases on the Committee'smeeting date.MR. PARTEE. They are looking apparently for some sign thatwe are going to move interest rates down. The only concern would be--MR. MORRIS. I would think the market would interpret this asa Federal Reserve concern about the backing up of interest rates.MR. STERNLIGHT. It might draw some mild--MR. MORRIS. I think that would be very constructive.MR. RICE. We might get more leverage if we do it.MR. PARTEE. Well, it's not really a neutral movement that isbeing proposed.MR. BLACK. It is neutral so far as the money supply isconcerned.MR. WALLICH. Do you think an amount of that magnitude wouldaffect the yield structure?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it would affect it verysignificantly. The market might draw some mild encouragement from it,but I wouldn't think they would make a big deal of it.MR. WALLICH. I think some people will say: "I hear theTreasury is issuing these bonds and the Fed buys them."MR. PARTEE. Are they in the market right now, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. The new issues were delivered yesterday.It's a real question, with those coming at a current market yield andsome of the other recently offered issues because of their highcoupons having more attractive yields, whether we should buy them on ayield basis. We are apt to buy very few of the new one that just cameinto the market.MR. GRAMLEY. How long has it been since you've made couponpurchases?MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh gosh, several months.MR. PARTEE. And of this size that must really--MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it was early last summer. The sizewould be a normal size; we did $800 million about 3 or 4 months ago.MR. WALLICH. I am a little skeptical of this. What wouldhappen if you postponed this?11/16/82MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we have a reserve need to meet fornext week and, given its persistence, it ought to be met in sizablemeasure through outright purchases. So, if we don't buy coupons, we'dprobably want to do another sizable purchase of Treasury bills. Itwould be somewhat of a surprise to the market for us to do thatbecause they have come to expect that after doing some sizable billbuying for a while we would intermix that on occasion with couponpurchases. I think they would take it as a deliberate shunning of thecoupon market if we didn't get in there. I don't think it absolutelyhas to be today; it seems like the most logical day to me from thestandpoint of our reserve needs. If we did it tomorrow, then peoplecould read that even more in the context of the Committee meeting thanif it is being done on the day of the meeting.MR. WALLICH. I think you should do a mixed bag of short-medium- and long-term issues.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Governor, when we buy coupons it isjust that. It's not all long-term bonds. We buy the whole range ofcoupon issues. To intermix bills and coupons I think would be aterribly cumbersome, totally novel, excursion in the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think this is the most vitalissue of the day. If there is a lot of discomfort about doing ittoday, it will be done presumably on Thursday or Friday.MR. GRAMLEY. I have no problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that makes people feel morecomfortable, we can do that.MR. MARTIN. I have no problem going ahead today. I'd rathersee us go ahead today than tomorrow given all this mumble-jumblemisinterpretation we've been referring to.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. WALLICH. If we're going to do it this week, it would bebetter to do it today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a motion?MR. MARTIN. I move.MS. TEETERS. You have a motion that has been seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't sure what that motion was.MR. RICE. The motion was to accept the recommendation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we also have to ratify thetransactions and I didn't ask anyone for--MR. PARTEE. The motion I think is to add a billion dollarsto the [intermeeting] limit.MR. MARTIN. Raising it by $1 billion [to $4 billion].11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections?MR. WALLICH. I think I'll vote against it if it's purecoupon purchases. If it's just to add a billion dollars [to theintermeeting limit], I can't be against that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we really want a voteappearing in the record that we voted on a particular operation andhad an objection. If you want to persist in your objection, I thinkwe ought to defer the whole thing.MR. WALLICH. No, I'll withdraw my objection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The action has nothing to do with coupons;it's just to increase the limit.SEVERAL. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We also need a motion to ratify thetransactions.SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Approved.] Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. BLACK. That's finished goods. Jim?MR. KICHLINE. That's right--total finished goods.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we just go on to Mr. Truman andget the complete picture.MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I won't describe the picturedomestically and internationally but open it to discussion.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, looking back over the last sixmonths, it's a little unnerving to witness the failure of prosperity,which was supposed to be right around the corner, to emerge. Layingaside political figures, as I recall, Jim, there have been respectedpeople in the forecasting fraternity who were predicting that anupturn would begin as early as last May or last June. One month afteranother after another right down to the current one, as we know, thathas failed to happen. Looking back, can you put your finger on anyparticular factor that has produced this outcome? I'm thinking thatdespite the tax cut for business last year and despite the October '81and July '82 cuts in personal income taxes and all these wonderfulthings that were supposed to get us off onto a new road here,[recovery] keeps eluding us. Looking back, I wonder why.MR. KICHLINE. I think there are a number of factors. It'snot really comforting to know that we have had a lot of company, butyou are quite correct that the general expectation for the second half-10-11/16/82of the year has not been met. In part, from our side, I think weperhaps underestimated the interest rate impact on a variety ofsectors, and in business fixed investment it was not just the interestrate impact but more broadly an erosion of confidence in that sector.That's the one area that we have written down substantially and itaccounts for the major drop in activity late in this year. The exportside is one that has been weakening as well in recent months, giventhe deterioration in international conditions. So, both of thosesectors are now heading down with a vengeance. I would say there areobvious impacts on income and consumer spending flows from that. Ifyou look around at what went wrong, it is a bit weaker virtually everyplace. I don't know any place in our forecast where we tended torevise [our estimates] up. Some revisions have been large on the downside and others small; but they all have tended to run in a negativedirection. I think it's a whole host of factors. I would say alsothat the tax cut was a little weaker than we anticipated earlier, butit was so small that it pales by comparison with the other thingsgoing on and it just doesn't matter in the aggregate.MR. PARTEE. We didn't have a rise in personal savings,particularly, as a result of the tax cut, which suggests that incomegrowth was so much poorer that it used up the benefits of the tax cut.MR. KICHLINE. That's right. The monthly savings ratenumbers are a little hazardous to look at, but September now is downto the 6-1/2 percent range. The temporary blip has been all buterased and a lot of income has been destroyed in effect or lost fromthe fact that these other sectors were deteriorating.MR. BOEHNE. I think we can trace most of [the economy'sweakness], John, to very high interest rates. That stares us right inthe face. We have extraordinarily high interest rates. If you lookback at other recoveries, real rates have been a good bit less. I'venoticed in my District, for example, that the drop in rates over themost recent months and its impact on the stock market has had apositive effect; there is less pessimism and some increase in hope. Ithink that will be quickly erased if rates reverse themselves to anysignificant degree. I believe the recovery eludes us because ratesare too high, and we won't get a recovery until we have lower rates.MR. BALLES. I happen to agree with that, Ed. I didn't wantto put words in Jim's mouth. I think that's the way it came out,though. The key factor, I think you said, Jim, was the interest rateimpact particularly in the business fixed investment area and theexport area. Is that correct?MR. KICHLINE. I think that's right. I would say that we hadhigh interest rates in our forecast and we still had a recovery. So,looking back, I'd say either we misestimated the impact of those ratesor attitudes changed. But it's very clear to me that one can't ignorethe rate impact in terms of what is happening in the economy.MR. PARTEE. The velocity numbers have been very unusual,haven't they? We've had pretty good monetary growth throughout butvelocity has been negative instead of positive.believe.MR. KICHLINE. Steve is going to be discussing that, I-11-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who sees the recovery beginning?SPEAKER(?). Beginning?SPEAKER(?). Some flurries.MR. CORRIGAN. I do get a little sense of it, at least in ananecdotal sense; there certainly are no hard statistics at this point.But I do have a very distinct sense of a bit of a change in businessattitudes and so forth just in the timeframe of the past month or so.One place where it is very evident, as Jim mentioned, is in thehousing sector. There clearly is a little action developing--I don'twant to say a burst of activity--in the housing sector.who is in the wood products business even acknowledged thatin a very forceful way last week. In termsof the number of plants making wafer board and that type of thing, allof a sudden they are back on 7-day workweeks. So, I think there issomething there. More generally, I do perceive in a variety of placesand contexts a sense that a bit of momentum is beginning tomaterialize.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is going to be a substantialdecline in commercial construction next year, so even though lumbermay be benefit, net, I'm not sure that the overall construction impactis going to be that significant.MR. CORRIGAN. The commercial construction situation isreally very, very bad. Indeed, not only do I suspect that that sectorof the economy is going to remain very soft for a long time but Ithink that is going to show through in another clustering of realproblem situations for the people who are financing these buildingsthat are just being finished.MS. TEETERS. What is the state of the farm economy?MR. CORRIGAN. It's not good. Certainly, the price situationis terrible. These people, though, really do have remarkable stayingpower, in our District anyway. I sent my staff out to visit 6 or 8major agricultural lenders to try to get a first-hand picture of whatthey thought was going on, and I was astonished. We are seeing a lotof problem situations and problem loans and all the rest, but it'sstill the Main Street [retailers] and the implement dealers [that aremainly affected]; the farmers themselves are hanging in there prettywell. The livestock people, again despite low prices for livestock,are benefitting obviously from lower grain, feed, and energy prices.So they actually are hanging in there in a reasonable fashion. Butwith regard to farm-sector purchases of any equipment, they arevirtually non-existent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask the question the other way inthe interest of even-handedness. Who sees a continuing momentum ofdecline?MR. MARTIN. I'd like to speak to the housing sector.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll come back to you in a second.-12-11/16/82MR. GRAMLEY. Let me just make one comment. I have alwaysfound it interesting and useful when I'm uncertain about whether myforecast is right or not to do what I call a "National Bureauexercise" in which I look at what I think are the better leadingindicators of economic activity to see whether they confirm or deny mythinking. Of course, I play this game in my own way; I choose theones I think are best. I don't look at the leading indicators, but Ilook at things like the average workweek in manufacturing, initialclaims for unemployment insurance, orders for durable goods, andindustrial raw materials prices. And they are all still going down.I'm quite convinced we will find that the recession not only has notended in October but that it will not have ended in November either.And while I would make a forecast like Mr. Kichline's that recoveryprobably is right around the corner, I made that same forecast atmidyear, as he did, and I was dead wrong. So, I think we have toreckon with a quite high probability that recession may well continuethrough the first quarter of 1983.MR. CORRIGAN. There's a point that I think is lost here. Wekeep talking about the fact that interest rates have come down. Idon't know what the real interest rate is, but if you look at therelationship between current nominal interest rates and current ratesof inflation, the reduction in real interest rates, if it's there atall, certainly is not very significant.MR. GRAMLEY. The other aspect of this interest rate movementthat I think we need to take carefully into account is that thisrecession is quite unlike earlier ones in terms of the internationalcomponent. A very large part of the decline in real GNP since themiddle of 1981 can be explained by the drop in real merchandiseexports. Now, that's a consequence partly of a worldwide recessionbut also of a very substantial increase in the value of the dollar inexchange markets. And the drop in nominal interest rates has notreversed that. That negative effect is still there in spades, as theInternational Finance Division has reminded us.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though unemployment levels don'ttrack real GNP that quickly, the view on Wall Street--I would say theconsensus view--is that unemployment will continue to rise. I hearestimates of from 10.6 to close to 11 percent. Some people say itwill peak by the end of this year but others say it will peak in thefirst quarter of '83. We could have some plus--a tiny little plus--inreal GNP and still get rising unemployment.MR. PARTEE. Oh, sure.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that wouldn't be perceived asrecovery, I think.MR. WALLICH. Well, we're not thinking in terms of interestrates very much. We should remember that when we used to do this weallowed for a lag of 6 to 9 months before [the economy] turned. Iwould think these lags have shortened, particularly in housing, andexpectations tend to shorten them. But this fall in interest rateswasn't all that long ago that we could expect very great results bynow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.-13-11/16/82MR. MARTIN. I've noted along with President Corrigan a fewsigns of housing recovery. Like Jerry, I've talked with both lendersand developers and found from them the first sparks or glimmerings orvery preliminary indications of some recovery. But we have to putthat into the changed institutional framework in which the lenders andthe developers and the sellers of existing housing now operate. Oneof the positive indicators, of course, is the substantial upswing inFHA applications. That is a positive, but those FHA applicationsgenerally deal with housing, in submarket by submarket, that is at thelower percentiles of the housing market. It would be difficult tohave a 1.3 or 1.4 million housing start number based only on thatsegment of the market. It would be difficult to have that kind ofrecovery in housing from the 800,000 to 900,000 level unless existinghome sales revive and continue to support the month or two upswing innew home sales. The question is whether even that one or two monthincrease in new home sales will persist. The question is where thefinancing is going to come from to handle the need for the financingof the foreclosed properties--and they would be foreclosed if theydidn't have to be shown in certain asset categories of the thriftinstitutions and the commercial banks. That kind of financing, ofcourse, is taking and will continue to take first priority overadjustments and accommodations to the regular borrower. I note thatthere is a question about the thrift institutions with this marvelousnew account, which is primarily a transaction account and will belooked on by their managers as a short-term source of funds. Do wereally expect them to make 30-year fixed rate, fixed term loans with 5or 10 percent down? That kind of contract is going to be what ittakes to get to a 1.3 million level, supported by some multiple ofexisting home sales of 5 million or whatever it takes to support the1.3 million. I don't see it that way.MR. PARTEE. You don't think the public will buy a variablerate mortgage?MR. MARTIN. I think the public will buy a variable ratemortgage. That gets us to the complication of qualifying the buyer,particularly the young buyer, in what more often than not won't be avariable rate but a renegotiable rate mortgage. That gets us to thesecond problem of qualifying the young buyer particularly and otherbuyers where the lender demands a pledged account mortgage--where asavings account has to be put up in order to qualify the borrowerbecause the income-to-debt-service requirement is such that they can'thandle it without debiting a pledged account. In other words, theinstitutional context in this recovery period for housing issignificantly different from any recovery period we've had before.So, if you foresee a consumer-led recovery with housing as theharbinger, I suggest you take another look.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Jerry Corrigancaptured the theme that I wanted to express. And that is that thediscussions in October with businessmen and bond dealers in our areaand at our board meeting involved probably the grimmest, gloomiestreports on the business outlook that I've experienced since I've beenwith the Federal Reserve. Interestingly, at the most recent boardmeeting and in meetings with businessmen in November, there was thisglimmer of hope that things indeed were getting close to improving.11/16/82There was some report, for example, that housing in the Oklahoma-Colorado area particularly, which has been a very vigorous economy, iscontinuing fairly strong.As far as the agricultural sector is concerned, while I doagree with Jerry that the agricultural sector has great resiliency, intalking to the farmers and [others] and also as a result of aquarterly agricultural farm survey that we conduct, we find that theforeclosures or the estimates of near foreclosures, which includesubstantial sales of assets in order to provide liquidity to theproducer, are increasing or expected to increase rather dramaticallyin our area. One other thing we hear from farm credit people as wellas bankers is that they are very conscious of [the desirability of]not putting very much foreclosed farm real estate onto the marketbecause the market is already depressed in value by some 25 percentfrom a year ago. They are going to hold that farm real estate in somefashion rather than flood the market with it, which would push valuesand prices down [further], thus jeopardizing the collateral onoutstanding agricultural loans. The bright spot in agriculture is thered meat area; hogs and cattle, for example, both are in the black asfar as profits are concerned. So there is some hope.MS. TEETERS. How much of the glimmer of hope you are seeingstems from the drop in interest rates and the anticipation of theirgoing down further?MR. GUFFEY. Nancy, I'm not sure I can identify all that goesinto that glimmer of hope. But the fact that interest rates are lowercertainly has to be an important factor. There is obviously somebroad anticipation of a further drop in interest rates. I'd justsuggest that without a further drop or with some backing up I thinkthat glimmer of hope could vanish immediately. It would not only goaway but that would worsen the potential outlook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Just to reinforce what Governor Martin wassaying on housing, the forestproducts industry, one from one of the biggest firms in the West, saythat there indeed have been signs of a little pickup. Translatingthat into what it means for 1983 as a whole, they are still prettybearish in the sense that 1.3 million would be about as much as theyare looking for in new housing starts. And in a broader sense thatindustry is still in the doldrums because of what the foreign exchangebusiness is doing to log exports; that is a very, very severe blow.And finally, the pulp and paper business, which is another importantleg of that industry, is really in the doldrums. So, at least in ourforest products firms, I don't find any great optimism these days.If I could finish with a question, Mr. Chairman, I'd like toask a question of Ted Truman, at the risk of repeating what perhapsalready has been said, which I didn't understand. In view of what hashappened to interest rates in this country, with lower nominalinterest rates at least, is there any good reason you can think of whythat darn exchange rate is not only hanging up there but gettingstronger?-15-11/16/82MR. TRUMAN. Well, as was noted earlier, it has moved down alittle and may be coming [down more]. But the staff, at least at theBoard, has pretty much run out of what I might call good reasons onthat. And, not satisfied by the staff, I've noticed that severalpeople we've had in here--the Board [staff] having been exhausted--were asked the same question. One clear factor seems to be theuncertainty and the safe-haven arguments. There is something there;how much one can't say. That kind of argument is very difficult tomeasure in terms of how important it is. Another factor is thisrecent phenomenon, as Sam mentioned, that there does seem to be asense in the market that even though U.S. interest rates have moveddown, foreign interest rates, even if they didn't move down in thisperiod, are expected to move down further. We saw some of thatphenomenon in the market yesterday when there were reports thatBritish interest rates were going to drop very dramatically over thenext six months; that knocked down the pound quite markedly againstthe dollar and other currencies at that time. So, there is a sense inwhich there is a decoupling of interest rate policy [whereby ratescoming down in] other countries at the same time our interest ratesare coming down has led to some marking up [of the dollar]. One thingthat we do sometimes lose sight of is the fact that our inflationperformance has been better than expected and better relatively thanexpected. All three together suggest that the dollar in a sense isnot quite as high as we think it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, I have [heard] the comments that wouldsuggest that emotionally there is perhaps a better tone in the market,but I really think it's only because the previous period had been sovery, very bad. In answer to Nancy's question, I think [the weakness]is entirely interest-rate driven. With rates having been so high,that created such a very bad attitude that a reduction, even a modestone, has been well received. But looking aside from the emotion intothe basics, I think the situation is continuing to deteriorate. Thebasic industries, particularly those in the Midwest, are continuing todecline. That tone comes through in the Redbook; the Redbook made forpretty consistently gloomy reading this particular time. I think weare at a point where, if the rate structure doesn't stabilize orindeed doesn't continue to go down, this emotional improvement isgoing to deteriorate pretty rapidly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, I would pretty much be where Roger andJerry are. My overall reading of the Eleventh District [based on] ourown internal forecast that we've just gone through at our Bank isslightly more optimistic certainly than the Board staff's forecast. Idon't know how much of this is hope. But I see things that I findvery hard to understand. This is strictly anecdotal, but with regardto housing, Sunday afternoon out of curiosity I visited two housingdevelopments in Dallas. At one, the builder apparently was prettyoptimistic; he had just completed 10 specialty homes beginning at$375,000. And the crowds [were so big] you could hardly get in thehouses. I was impressed with that, so I went across the road toanother new development, and the lots began at $250,000.MR. PARTEE. The lots?11/16/82MR. BOYKIN. The lots.MR. BLACK. That's low income housing in Texas!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a lovely countryside.MR. GRAMLEY. Each has its own golf course!MR. BOYKIN. Three homes had just been completed and were onshow and we could not get in them because of the crowd. They begin at$1 million and they have "for sale" signs on them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People aren't buying; they're looking.MR. BOYKIN. But what builder has that kind of financing andthat kind of optimism to build a million dollar [spec house]? And onethat is about half completed is going to be priced at $1.8 million.MR. MARTIN. Bob, there's an old maxim that builders use,which is: "I'll build anything [the lenders] will finance."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, Bob, isn't the number of rigs inuse up?MR. BOYKIN. The rig count has improved. There is a questionof whether it is a real improvement or seasonal for tax purposes andso forth. But the rig count is up slightly. On the other hand, theseismic surveys are not showing that much improvement, so it doesraise the question of whether it will hold.MR. BLACK. Bob, doesn't your housing information supportPres' statement that the strength is going to be in the low incomepart of the market?MR. MARTIN. In Texas, that's low income!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. Well, I would say I get pretty much the samereadings. I've been through three of my six locations in the last twoweeks and there was a marked change from the last go-around. Abouthalf of my branch directors and Atlanta directors are now saying somepositive things; it's pretty much concentrated, as others havereported, in housing and housing-related areas, which are sensitive torates. One of was absolutely euphoric.He said he had an infinite improvement in building permits; inMontgomery, which is a city with a few hundred thousand residents,permits went from zero to thirty. Of course, that was[unintelligible]. Another reported that he'd seen trucks going out ofthe local lumber mill for the first time in a long time; that ishousing-related and is supported by some statistical data that arecoming out.We did a special survey of thrifts with regard to thequestions that Governor Martin reported on and also the question ofwhere the money is going. We looked at nineteen of the biggest thriftinstitutions in the Southeast and they account for $1 billion of thenationwide total of all savers certificates. Half of it disappeared.11/16/82We compared September 20 to October 20 to see what happened to themoney, and about $500 million ran off from the all saverscertificates. The thrifts were pretty cheered by the fact that thebiggest chunk of it--$150 some odd million--went into passbookaccounts; they wish it were permanent, but they doubt it will be.Another big chunk--about $30 to $40 million--went into IRAs, which islong-term money. That might be the partial answer for why NOWaccounts and IRAs and deferred comp accounts are starting to build up.Basically, I guess I have to go along with the general thrust of thereports here, which is that the only real optimism or rays of hopethat we see are in housing and housing-related industries. There area few minor exceptions; there's a bit of tourism and a littleimprovement here and there, but overall it is in the rate-sensitivesectors.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Consumer credit interest rates arenot coming down very much. I gather they are running 18 to 24percent. Many department stores are keeping their rates at 24percent. The argument is made that they had losses earlier when therewere usury ceilings that they have to make up. Some of the banks sayit is longer-term money that they have to borrow in order to financeautomobiles, for example. Some of the upstate bankers in New Yorkhave said that their auto credit business has not picked upsignificantly. But one banker told me that he has offered a 12percent rate on the condition that the customer open an account or hadan account in his bank. And he said he is absolutely deluged withapplications and that he did an enormous volume of financing of newauto sales at 12 percent. Now, Karl Otto Pohl in Germany made apublic plea to the banks to pass on reduced interest rates in theconsumer credit area, and a few of the banks followed with a onepercentage point reduction. I don't know whether Chairman Volcker isthinking of making a comparable appeal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you recommending it?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think it would be a good idea.MS. TEETERS. I wasn't aware that consumer credit interestrates moved with the cycle. I thought that automobile and mortgagerates moved with the interest rate cycle, but that everything else wasalways at usury ceilings.MR. MARTIN. Well, we have the impact of personal bankruptcybehavior patterns that lenders are taking into account a bit more thanthey did in the previous so-called recovery.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. In looking ahead, I think it's important to keepin mind several fundamentals. I don't think any economist I haveheard from or read about really equates this recovery with otherrecoveries from troughs in economic activity in recent times. Peopleare almost unanimous in anticipating that the fourth quarter of thisyear, which is the time we're speaking of right now, will beessentially flat and that there might be, and hopefully will be, somepickup going into next year, with maybe 2 percent real GNP growth at-18-11/16/82best in the first half of next year. Some of us get exceptionallygloomy when we don't see the dramatic increase that has characterizedprevious recoveries. Just last week we had the chief financialofficers of the largest companies in our area in for lunch. What manyof you have reported was indicative of their points of view. They didrecognize a rebound in home building and home-buying activity, but itwas essentially in higher priced properties. The one significant hintof meaningful improvement came in the retail area where two largenational retail firms, and another, said that they weresensing what they thought was an improvement that they hoped wouldcarry over into Christmas as a significant improvement. But I thinkit's important when we get around to making policy that we not reactin an inflationary manner to a gradually improving probability becauseI don't think there is any way that we will get the sort of dramaticupswing that has occurred in the past without fueling the[inflationary] engines to an extreme. But we saw glimmers ofimprovement among the contacts we had in the Eighth District.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Horn.MS. HORN. I suppose if I were grasping at straws to saysomething optimistic from the Fourth Federal Reserve District point ofview, I would say that the comments I've heard since the last meetinghave [conveyed] in some sense more confidence. But if one goes belowthe tone of the comments and into the statistics business people havebeen basing them on, in fact, the statistics don't seem to show anyimprovement in the capital goods industries. We hear about continuingdeterioration and backlogs, for example. And the farm sector is muchas several people have reported, in terms of what farmers buy andextremely weak land prices. But, in fact, the comments do seem tohave a little more confidence in them, perhaps really because peopleare now beginning to say that they are going to take market share awayfrom somebody else and somehow be at a competitive advantage ratherthan that they are seeing an overall improvement in the economy. Isee this as heavily reflected in the consumer sector in the FourthFederal Reserve District as in any other [sector]. But I could put anoptimistic face on what continues to be perhaps not a negative set ofdata but a stagnant to negative set of data in our District.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One last comment I'd like to make isthat I met with a group of about fifteen business leaders, and thoseamong them who have been doing well in the last two years--three orfour of the fifteen--continue to do well. Those who have been doingvery poorly say they see the situation as absolutely flat; though itis not deteriorating further, they don't see any signs of recoveryyet. And I found it interesting that when I asked about salary andwage increases, all of them, including those who were doing well,talked about increases in a range from zero to 6 percent, with theexception of the New York financial community.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd say that you weren't talking to theNew York bankers.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The wage increases that the New Yorkbank community expects to pay within the next 12 months were running 8to 10 percent, but the increases expected in the industrial communityranged from zero to 6 percent.11/16/82MR. PARTEE. I wonder whether the type of people you all talkto might not be considerably influenced by the 250 point increase inthe DOW. It seems to me that that is one of those things that colorattitudes. It may not add that much to consumer spending or anything,but most business leaders and most people who would buy a milliondollar house have a considerable stake in the equity market one way oranother, and they probably are feeling quite a bit better.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can turn to Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.][Coffee break][Secretary's note: The meeting resumed at this point withmore limited attendance.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to come down to making adecision. The assumption of the Bluebook is that we will keep thesame general framework we had last time. I thought this [distortionin] M1 from the all savers certificates would sort itself out by thistime. I'm not sure that it has; it appears that it has not. We stillhave that problem. A much more fundamental problem, implicit orexplicit in the earlier conversation, is that the business situationdoesn't look red hot. It has a lot of international complications.And, certainly, the relationships between the money figures and theeconomy have run way off the postwar track. We may be ending up witha tighter policy than we intended for that reason and not because welet [the aggregates] run above track. That's a judgment that has tobe made. Without any question, they are off track; and whether theyare going to return to track in the foreseeable future is a matter offaith. It doesn't surprise me, particularly, that they are off tracknow, but one can't judge the amount. I'm not so sure if we're reallygoing to disinflate. We have all kinds of institutional problems withM1, but extracting from the institutional problems I think the basictrend in velocity might change. I've said that before, but I can'tprove it. It certainly has changed in the short run and I'm not surewhy. I would think that the basic trend in M2 and M3 ought to change.But that's really a problem for next year and not for next month.It's just a matter of judgment how much we allow for these liquiditypressures, and I suppose that gets mixed up in interest ratejudgments. Who would like to approach the problem? Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Paul, I would like to start. I have made a listof the key points that have been made. We clearly have a weak economyand the prospects for recovery are elusive at best. The point hasbeen made about some glimmer of hope at the emotional level, but Ithink that is largely a result, directly or indirectly, of lowerinterest rates, and it can evaporate very quickly if rates reverse.The foreign situation, at least from my perspective, is just plainscary. And there is the point that you just made: That the moneysupply figures have to be viewed with increasing skepticism in termsof their economic meaning, at least at this point and maybe for a longtime. I might add a point that has not been made. We have had a muchimproved inflationary situation. There is no room for an inflationscene [but] I think we have to be prudent about the inflation problem.As I add all these up, and admittedly it's a judgmental issue, they11/16/82make a rather convincing case for a monetary policy that encouragessome lowering of interest rates.As for the alternatives in the Bluebook, that pushes me inthe direction of "A." It may be "A" to "B," but I'm certainly closerto "A" than "B." If we did that, I would think that the funds ratewould drop to 9 percent or a little under, and that also would open upa window for an appropriate drop in the discount rate, which I thinkhas been discounted to some extent in the market. Unless we get somemove there, we may give up some of the progress we've made on lowerrates since the last meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think we've gone a long waytoward dealing with our long-term inflation objectives. That is notsaying we won't have to deal with them in the future, but it seems tome that the immediate, imperative policy is to find the level ofinterest rates that is going to permit the economy to turn around. Ithink the evidence at the moment is that the current level of interestrates is too high and that the economy is still sliding downward.Quite clearly, the monetary aggregates are giving misleading signals.Their strength clearly does not reflect strength in the economy, butquite the opposite. It's a reflection of the weakness of the economy.In large part, I think the growth in the aggregates reflects the factthat the business community has not been able to fund their debt inthe long-term bond market in the normal cyclical manner. And that hasproduced the unusual phenomenon of growing, indeed rapidly growing,business loans at banks all through a recession. I can't recall thatever happening before. Again, this sustained business loan demand,which has contributed toward the strength in the aggregates, as wellas the liquidity preference factors are giving us very misleadingnumbers on the aggregates.It seems to me that at the moment we have to go foralternative A; it is the only alternative that makes any sense to me.We have to set aside the aggregates as our prime objective at themoment. But if we go for "A," and I hope we do, that does mean wewill have to inform the markets in some way that it is not necessarilyour objective to bring M2 and M3 within their ranges because, if weget the markets anticipating that the Fed is determined to bring M2and M3 within their ranges by the end of the year, we could very wellnot have the kind of response that we want. But that's a problem foryou to figure out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will be making a little speech tonight.Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Well, I see this somewhat differently from Frank.First of all, I would ask Steve a question because I may be analyzingthis incorrectly. One of the reasons for shifting our emphasis orattention away from M1 was to accommodate the distortions that the allsavers certificates and other instruments might be causing as the allsavers certificates [matured]. If we have the M1 growth that isimplied in any one of these three alternatives and if we project thatgrowth from the present time, aren't we in effect projecting 5 percentin the case of alternative C, or 6-1/2 or 8-1/2 percent from a basethat includes the all savers certificates where they are now? In11/16/82other words, don't we in effect validate that bulge that is a resultof the all savers certificates termination? Don't we take off fromthat higher level and doesn't that give us for the year growth in thataggregate that is way above the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you talking about 1983?MR. ROOS. I'm talking about 1983, yes. What I'm trying tosay, and I guess I'm saying it in a very clumsy fashion, is that Iwould feel no discomfort with 6-1/2 or 5 percent growth from Octoberto December if that growth were after the effects of the all saverscertificates have washed out.MR. PARTEE. He's talking about the bulge.MR. ROOS. I think we're really moving from an inflated M1because of its all savers component; if we put in a 5 or 6-1/2 percentgrowth rate above that, we're really getting a much higher rate ofgrowth relative to our original targets than we had originallycontemplated. I don't know that I'm asking quite--MR. PARTEE. One can see that; it's on the chart here.MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth rates we have here arecertainly higher than we assumed at the last Committee meeting wouldbe consistent with your original M2 targets. The M2 target may beslightly higher, but not very much. A problem, as far as we can seefrom the casual information we get on bank deposits, is that the allsavers certificate money that went into demand deposits has not comeout yet. And we don't know when, in fact, it will come out. For allI know it may sit there and jump into this new money market instrumentthat the DIDC has authorized. So, in some sense, that temporary moneyis still in there and is raising these growth rates. I think that'swhat is causing these numbers--MR. ROOS. Well, I would see the effects of this on interestrates differently from the way Ed Boehne and Frank Morris perceivethem to be. Regardless of what we know about the behavior of theaggregates, there are a lot of people out there doing a lot offiguring. And if money--whether it's M2 and M1 or a combination ofthese various Ms--continues to grow at anything like the rate it isgrowing presently, even though that money growth is authorized as ameans of achieving lower short-term interest rates, I believe theopposite is going to occur, and I think it will occur very quickly.In other words, we will start to get articles and a reaction that willboost rates rather quickly in the belief that we will reinflate.Frank, I don't think we can turn this inflation [fight] off and on inany orderly way; people are still skeptical as the devil as to whetherwe are going to hang in there and keep our anti-inflationary posture.If we have three months or four months of really fast money growth, Ithink we will see these rates skyrocket instead of coming down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with those whohave already suggested that we must find an appropriate interest ratelevel that will further our economic recovery. I'm not sure that-22-11/16/829-1/2 percent isn't it, but it certainly hasn't given a good signalyet that it is the appropriate level. That implies to me that weought to move interest rates to a modestly lower level, and that lowerlevel is, I suppose, something this Committee should decide. All thetalk about targeting reserves and looking at M2 for some informationalcontent as to what policy should be I think is a bunch of baloney inthe sense that we are targeting interest rates. And we ought torecognize that. In that context, I think there are a couple of waysto go. First of all, let me say that I am not suggesting that we doaway with or abandon the regime of targeting reserves and moneysupply, at least for public consumption. But around this table itseems clear to me that [we are on] an interest rate regime and weought to target on the interest rate we think is appropriate to getthe economic recovery started again. Having said that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's quite accurate,Roger, if I may interject. Speaking for myself, I would have lowerinterest rates if these aggregates weren't rising so darn [fast].MR. MARTIN. Would you?MR. PARTEE. I agree with that.MR. GUFFEY. I agree that we have to be concerned about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not exactly what I would target.MR. GUFFEY. Well, notwithstanding growth of the aggregates,I would propose that some lower interest rate is necessary to triggerthe recovery. The way to get there is what this Committee has to dealwith. Others have suggested alternative A and that has someattractiveness to me. But there are a couple of ways to engineerlower interest rates in the intermeeting period. And I would preferdoing it by adopting "B" and having an initial borrowing level belowthat suggested in the Bluebook, which was $350 million. I would makeit $250 million or maybe $300 million, thus setting the reserve pathin such a way that we would get a fairly immediate drop in interestrates; and coupled with a discount rate decrease, that would bring thefunds rate to the 9 percent area. The reason I'm not terriblyattracted to "A" is that, if I understand the Bluebook projectionscorrectly, "A" [contemplates] about an 8-1/2 percent fed funds rate inthe intermeeting period. That's a full percentage point decrease in afive-week period. That may be a little quicker than I'd like to seehappen. I'd like to go down gingerly and see what happens so that wecould continue a downward trend. And thus, I would opt for "B" with alower initial borrowing level as the prescription.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, what I would recommend is not new. Ithink we have to get interest rates down to get the economy started.Therefore, I'd opt for alternative A. I did an interesting thing lastweek. I realized I had never actually looked at the numbers from theearly 1930s, so I went back and took a look at them. There is noquestion but that we are not in a situation like the 1930s. [Then theeconomy] just went straight down; in the current situation, it hasbeen going sideways for three years. But there is one thing that isvery similar to the 1930s and that is the international crisis. What11/16/82made the depression so extended was that all international creditflows essentially stopped. Our interest rates, the lack of recoveryin this country, and the high international value of the dollar arecreating a situation in the international field that could lead usinto something very similar to the 1930s, and I'd be very careful.So, not only for domestic reasons but also for international reasons,I think it's imperative that we get our interest rates down and downto a level that will start a recovery. In addition, more and morepeople and more and more members of Congress are pointing the fingerat us, saying that the lack of recovery is solely a result of eitherhigh nominal or real interest rates. If that continues and more blameis heaped on us, the possibility of major institutional changes islooming in the next year. I wouldn't change [policy] solely for thatreason, but the economic and international outlook are such that wecan't afford to stay at these rates. Therefore, I would stronglysupport "A."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a couple of words aboutthe international situation. We have an IMF agreement--letters ofintent anyway--with Mexico and Argentina. Their problems are far frombeing solved, but that's a very important step. Mexico still doesn'thave much money and their economy is winding down for lack of importsand other things. There is going to have to be a big negotiation withthe banks to get them to put up some credit. I don't anticipate thatwe will be asked to do anything more but it's not inconceivable [thatwe may be asked]. I just don't know how much [it might be] in theshort run. The U.S. government is certainly going to be asked to dosomething on Argentina. I don't think it necessarily is going toinvolve the Federal Reserve. I have taken the opposite view. It's avery complicated situation. It depends upon what kind of securityarrangements can be developed and it depends upon whether any foreigncentral banks will join in. It's in a state of being unresolved.As for the Brazilian situation, they had their electionyesterday. I don't know what happened. It probably will take them aweek to count their votes, but at least they have that behind them.They may have special vote-counting techniques for all I know.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are they counting the way they do itin Illinois?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That comment doesn't go in this report.My only point is that it may clear the way for a more opendiscussion of the Brazilian problem. There was an article in The NewYork Times a day or two ago, which you may have seen, that is fairlyaccurate. That is going to burst upon the world's consciousness alittle more fully in the next few days. The Treasury has provided$500 million to Brazil already and probably will do another $200 to$300 million very shortly just to keep them afloat until the timing isright for them to go to the Fund and try to deal with the problem moreopenly, which is certainly going to have to be done. It is still avery uneasy situation. The IMF negotiations, on the other hand, arebeing speeded up, and that should be of some assistance. I think thatwill be resolved in the next month or so in terms of enlarging quotasin the special fund. I interject that because it arose in a couple ofcomments. Mr. Gramley.-24-11/16/82MR. GRAMLEY. I am with the majority view that is beginningto develop. That view is that we have to do something to make surethat a recovery begins soon. Frank used the word "imperative" and Ithink that is quite right. It's a matter of urgency. Looking at thedomestic economy, I have a feeling that the widespread expectation ofthe business community at midyear that the recession was over and thata recovery would begin led to actions that were deeply disappointedwhen the growth in final sales that was expected to come from theconsumer sector didn't happen. We had a very serious worsening ofexpectations during the course of the summer and a drop in the demandfor business fixed investment among other things. And I think thereis more than a small risk that it might happen again. If I wereforecasting, I suppose I would say it is probable that the recoverywill begin sometime early in 1983. But there are no concrete signs asyet that the recession is over.I agree with Governor Teeters that the internationalconsiderations are pointing strongly in that direction, too, as wellas considerations about what Congress might do. It's not just aquestion of potential anti-Federal Reserve legislation, but we badlyneed to have action that is going to reduce the prospect for growingdeficits in the out years. And it's going to be extremely difficult,if not impossible, for the Congress to go in that direction if theeconomy is still falling. I look at the present level of interestrates and I have to acknowledge that I'm not sure the present level ofinterest rates is inconsistent with recovery. But if it's the wronglevel, it certainly is not that interest rates are too low. On thecontrary, they are more likely to be too high. I don't think there'sany significant danger that what we do between now and the end of thisyear is likely to provoke a massive turnaround of inflationaryexpectations. I think we have established our credibility. I thinkwe have to follow a course now that prevents any possibility thatinterest rates might go up. So, "C" and "B" are quite unacceptable tome. I wouldn't want to take such aggressive action that the marketswould think we were throwing in the towel. I would be inclined,therefore, to go somewhere between "A" and "B" with an initialborrowing of maybe $250 million, as Roger Guffey suggested. Iwouldn't be reluctant to stick with the growth rate of M2 in "A" and Icertainly would want to keep in the directive the statement that weincluded last time about uncertainties leading to exceptionalliquidity demands. We ought to err on the side of providing moregrowth rather than permitting less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, I don't know what I can add to what seemsto be an emerging consensus for alternative A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The consensus is mostly among non-votingmembers.MR. PARTEE. I noticed that.MR. KEEHN. I think interest rates really do matter. Andgiven the noise in the aggregate numbers, we really can't be in thebusiness of slavishly following statistics that may or may not makesense whereas interest rates, as I say, really do have a significantimpact. All the sectors I deal with in the Midwest are precariously11/16/82positioned: The agricultural situation is serious; the industrialsituation is serious also; and the consumer is at this point justplain scared. And I think consumers are not going to begin to moveout until they get some confidence. Nothing will build confidencelike a slightly lower rate structure and, therefore, I would be infavor of "A." I certainly hope that the fed funds rate would be underthe 9-1/2 percent level--that it would tend to be around 8-3/4 or 9percent and no higher than that. I think the borrowing level toaccomplish that would be $150 to $200 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I won't repeat the reasons that havebeen offered already on why I also share the view that interest ratesshould come down. Summing up, I think there is only a 50-50 chancethat we will get a recovery. We need a little more margin there. Weneed some further relief on the international scene. So, the questionis how to do it. It seems to me that even if we reduce the borrowingto $250 million--and I can't see it going safely below $200 million orprobably $250 million--the most we are going to get is less than ahalf-point drop from open market operations. It is going to take adiscount rate cut to move it a half point. If it doesn't offendanybody's integrity, I would prefer to put a figure of 9-1/2 percentfor M2 but have a $250 million borrowing assumption and use the fundsrate range of "A." The funds rate range doesn't have the samerelevance it did earlier because if we have the same kind of languagein the directive that we had last time, there is a considerableflexibility for the Chairman and the Manager. That's the combinationI would prefer, but I could live with a straight "A" if others feltthat it would be very inappropriate to have a 9-1/2 percent target forM2.MR. BLACK. Is that 9-1/2 percent you are talking about forM2 for September to December, Tony?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.MS. TEETERS. Could we achieve that with a 9-1/2 percentfederal funds rate?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I'm assuming is that there wouldbe a discount rate cut within a relatively short period of time. Ifthat happens, then whether we have 9-1/2 or 10 percent doesn't makethat much difference. Maybe it does by the end of the intermeetingperiod; I don't know. Steve might want to comment on this. Assumingwe had a discount rate move in the next week or two, how significantwould the difference be with an initial borrowing such as I talkedabout?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we defer that question until weget into an elaboration and just get the general views now. GovernorWallich.MR. WALLICH. I, like everybody, would like to see lowerinterest rates. But what is the way to get them? The basic reasonthey are so high, I think, is indeed that the targets were too tight;they were calculated on the expectation of something like 3 percentvelocity gains and we've had the opposite. So there is less money in-26-11/16/82the economy than there should be unless this turns out to be atemporary situation, as it quite conceivably may. We have suspendedM1 temporarily; I think targeting on M2 is a good thing to state as aprinciple, but it's not a very easy thing to do operationally. Thebasic decisions we have to make are about the funds rate and theborrowing assumption. I think we have a certain degree of leeway asfar as departing from the targets is concerned. The market hasresponded, I think, very well to our statement that we weren't goingto adhere closely to M1. It hasn't had the effect of causing thelong-term rate to go up, which would be the interpretation of a strictmonetarist position; the long-term rate has come down. How long thiscondition will continue is a real question. Bob Eggert asked thisquestion of his forty economists and got a response that no doubtranges from 0 to infinity. But eliminating the [outliers], he arrivedat seven months as the period of time over which perhaps a departurewould be accepted by the market before people would begin to becomeuneasy and long-term [rate movements] would begin to become perverse.So, we have some leeway and we must make the optimum use of it. I'dbe reluctant to spend it all right away and reluctant particularly todo what the market seems to want and to expect us to do right away,which does look like throwing the book at the recession now. So, Iwould like to postpone a more drastic action and would go with "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, the way I view the currentsituation is that I just don't think it's possible that the economycan stumble along at essentially zero growth for much longer. Thefinancial strains that are there just won't permit it. If we floataround zero for too much longer, with very little difficulty we couldend up in a more severe downside situation. It is clear from theinternational side that the LDCs need to generate some exports. Onthe domestic side, I suppose some consolation can be drawn from recentdevelopments in the financial markets but, underneath all that, theextremely serious financial strains are still very much with us. Myown bet is that, even with the current interest rate structure orsomething very much like it, the prospects for some growth in realterms emerging in early 1983 and getting up in a range of 4 percent orso are reasonably good. But at the same time, while that is my ownbet, I have to concede that the amount I'd be willing to wager at themoment is not much more than a nickel.There is another characteristic of the outlook for 1983 thatI'd like to mention, too. All the forecasts, of course, assume thatunemployment is going to stay high no matter what. I think somethingis going on that may make it stay even higher than the conventionalforecasts. And that is that a lot of businesses have really cut intotheir management and white collar work force during this correctionperiod, and I think they are finding that they didn't need all thosepeople. As we begin to see a recovery, that phenomenon is probablygoing to make unemployment stay higher than it normally would, whichsimply is going to add more fuel to the fire.Having said all that, in terms of the alternatives that arebefore the Committee, if I understood them or if I thought they meantanything, I would be inclined to alternative B. That may in one senseseem to contradict what I said earlier, but I don't think it reallydoes. Again, I'm not sure what any of it means, but the thrust of my-27-11/16/82position is that I would tend to be a bit on the cautious side rightnow, [given] the monetary growth that we are seeing--whatever thenumbers mean. The potential is at least remotely there that we couldfind ourselves facing a bit of a problem in early 1983. The problem,other things being equal, might even call for a slight increase ininterest rates. It seems to me that that is a total no-winproposition. That view is reinforced, at least in my mind, by thepeculiarities of the operating environment that we are in. If we haveto snug up, regardless of what alternative we are working from, giventhe way the path is drawn and the operational mode that we are in, thesnugging up process inherently is going to be slower and less precisethan it would have been under the former procedures.The last thing that is relevant, in terms of being a bitcautious, is this new [financial] instrument. It really won't hituntil December, but it seems to me that it is going to depress thegrowth of M1 when it hits; and on top of that it is going to produce ashift from higher reserve requirement instruments to lower reserverequirement instruments, which as that begins to happen would in turnmean that a given reserve path, however drawn, might have differentimplications for the amount of money growth, however defined, onemight have assumed in the first place. That, too, leads me to theview of being a little cautious among those alternatives. I wouldhedge my bet along the lines of Mr. Guffey's suggestion of putting theborrowing level down a bit from the $350 million that the staffassociated with Alternative B so that we could see a reduction in thefunds rate coupled with or followed by a reduction in the discountrate. I might even be prepared to go one step further. If fortechnical reasons, we aren't able to orchestrate that, I'd be inclinedto take my chances with a reduction of the discount rate even with thefed funds rate trading about where it is right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask you to expand a biton a statement you made earlier, which was that you would like to seelower interest rates if that could happen in an environment of lessmoney growth. I'd like to hear you talk about how much lower interestrates you think the market might tolerate in the context of variouskinds of money growth. As I look across the alternatives in theBluebook, it seems one could construct a situation where any of thethree alternatives could be consistent with lower interest rates. I'djust like to hear you expand your comment a bit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My comment was a casual one, not ananalytic one, but I will try to make a more analytic comment. I justmeant to say that if I were plucking an interest rate out of the air,I'd pick a lower one if I weren't constrained by worrying about howfast the aggregates were growing. I don't know how responsive I canbe to your question. Somebody--I guess it was Frank Morris--said thatthere may be a perversity in the aggregates' growth at the moment. Ithink we do know at the moment, whatever it means for the future, thatthere has been an increase in liquidity preference. It almost seemsto me tautological that we would get a decline in [velocity] of thekind we got. People want to hold more money; they want to hold moreM2 and more M1 relative to economic activity. And it has persistedlong enough so that it has been of some cyclical significance. Whatmotivates that? Well, Steve gave a complicated explanation, which I'm-28-11/16/82not sure I followed entirely, about the differences between liquiditypreference and spending preference or whatever. I'm sure it wasanalytically all brilliant. But there is some element of uncertaintyhere. People want to be more liquid but that is something I can'tmeasure. To the extent that is true, I don't think it's inconceivablethat if people had more confidence and saw the economy growing, at anygiven level of interest rates we would get less growth in theaggregates because they might invest in stocks, for instance, or putmore in bonds, or lengthen maturities, etc. People would begin tolook at assets that are outside these very liquid assets. I guessthat's what Frank may have had in mind in part. I don't think it'sthe interest rate itself so much as a general feeling about theeconomy, which may be tied into interest rates. It isn't 100 percentcertain, but if over a period of time--I'm not talking just about thenext month--we got a different set of economic expectations, we mightfind these aggregates growing more slowly rather than more rapidlysimply because of a return of confidence. One could argue--I don'tknow how far I'd want to carry this argument--that by taking a chancein the short run and departing from the usual analysis or the usualexpectation of the way these things work that we might end up withlower growth in the aggregates than we would expect if indeed therewere a change in the atmosphere and people had some confidence in theeconomy looking out three or four months ahead. But I can't provethat.MR. RICE. Can you imagine that we could do anything aboutconfidence without reducing interest rates somewhat from their currentlevels?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can imagine it, yes. Things couldjust get better at current interest rates. What I'm saying is that ifwe chose to be more liberal on the reserve-supplying side in the shortrun, though this analysis suggests that that would produce higheraggregates we might be pleasantly surprised over a few months and findthat it didn't work that way. Nobody will ever know because we won'tknow what would have happened if we had done the opposite. But thedifferences in these aggregates projections are so small; they arewell within the range of our capacity to foresee developments, withina month anyway.MR. ROOS. Do you have any uneasiness or any fear that if themarkets perceive the aggregates to be growing [rapidly], the movementin interest rates would be upward instead of downward? Is that a[concern] that should be factored into our decisionmaking?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, [though] we may be in an impossiblesituation. The economy does not always develop in a way that thereare any answers except after the passage of longer periods of timethan we are thinking about. And I think that is a danger. That's whyI pay some attention to these aggregates. What we have to balance ishow much we think we can get away with, even if we recognize thedangers in the business situation and want to get interest rateslower. Even if we think that's where the balance of the risks is, wecan't throw discretion to the winds for the reason you are suggesting.Where is that balance? I think that's what we are talking about. Ithink one would have to conclude from what has happened in the marketthat people haven't been that upset by what they've seen so far. Idon't have the figures right in front of me but in fact the surprising11/16/82thing is that while Treasury bill rates and the funds rate are [notmuch] lower than they were in early September, CD rates and privaterates are. And bond rates are way down, which seems to be the inverseof what you would worry about if there were, at this point anyway, agreat fear about what the monetary expansion was doing to us. Now,there are obviously anticipatory effects, but that is roughly right,is it not, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. Yes, [but] the 3-month, 6-month, and one-yearbill rates are down [some].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Once we get out in the maturity range,including as short as 6 months, rates came down [more].MR. ROOS. It does take a little while, though, for therecognition of the change to sink in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's the judgment we have to make.The biggest protection we have against that is that things havechanged. I suppose what the market is telling us is that people arenot going to get worried about that when they have a sense that theeconomy, if anything, is still declining. That raises the question ofwhat will happen as soon as they get a sense that the economy may bein recovery; but we've got to get to the recovery first. Everythingelse is just an extreme example of what we are doing, which isbalancing risks. If we had a clear answer, it would be easy to dumpit into Mr. Axilrod's computer and he would tell us. But I don'tthink his computer is that good.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One thing that puzzles me in themarket comments is that there is a very widespread view that even ifrates come up again in the early part of 1983, they will trenddownward during 1983. And yet these are the same people who believethere will be a modest recovery. I'm not sure how they arrive at thatview. They have a feel for what everybody else is thinking in themarket.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they have seen what is going on.But what I am saying explicitly in answer to Mrs. Horn's question isthat I do not discount the possibility that with a feeling of economicrecovery we could get a very rapid reversal of this velocity movementin M2. I wouldn't be so certain about M1. I think M1 is just [in awhirl] with interest being paid on it and a change in inflationaryexpectations and all the rest, so I don't have the same feeling aboutM1. But for M2 it's a little hard to see why the velocity should godown indefinitely--why people should change permanently therelationship between their liquid asset holdings and income. Onecould argue, I suppose, that institutional competition has made thoseinstruments so much more relatively attractive than they used to bethat we have had a structural shift in terms of how much of that kindof money people want to hold as opposed to stocks, bonds, or whateverelse they can hold their money in.MR. PARTEE. That's a good argument.MR. CORRIGAN. One can't entirely dismiss that either.-30-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe. I wouldn't dismiss it. Theinteresting thing is that M2 really hasn't budged for three years interms of its growth rate, including this year. It has beenpractically the same every year while the economy is going up and downand generally trending lower in terms of inflation and in growth. Wehave had some tendencies toward a decrease in velocity for some time,although it has only been this year that it has become reallypronounced. So, maybe there is a structural change here.MR. CORRIGAN. If one looked at the composition of M2 threeyears ago, what percentage were demand deposits and savings accountsthen? I don't know but it was pretty big, wasn't it?MR. AXILROD. Yes. There has been a shift toward things thathave a market rate of interest.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is rather interesting. Nothing couldhave been much steadier than the growth in M2 over the past threeyears while all this other stuff has been going on.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And we are going to have the sameamount of overrun this year as last year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We keep the target the same and onlyslightly overrun it. One would certainly think, given that inflationis down, real growth is down, and nominal GNP is down, that if M2growth remains at the same rate, obviously something structural isgoing on. But this year it must be something cyclical, too. I don'tknow whether that helps you. You pay your money and take your choice!It comes down to balancing out, as so many people have said, the needfor providing some protection on the down side, so to speak, againstthe danger that it's possible to overdo it, as Larry Roos keepsreminding us. The way to reach that judgment is what we're trying todo today. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I'd like to join all those who feel that interestrates need to come down from their current levels for all the reasonsthat have been given, both domestic and international. I won't try togo through all those reasons again. I'd just like to say that it'sclear to me that real rates are too high to permit a recovery and,therefore, they have to come down from where they are at present.Like Governor Gramley, I don't know to what level they need to comedown. And for that reason we ought to try to get them down gradually.We ought to be careful not to overdo it. But at the same time I thinkwe have to do what we can to move rates in the right direction--downward--but gradually. I also agree with Governor Wallich that wehave a limited amount of time during which we will be able to maintainour credibility and we ought to use that time wisely. The clock isticking and we don't want to wait too long to have some effect on thecurrent situation. I would conclude that we had better use some ofthat creditability soon in order to encourage recovery while we havetime. If we wait too long, we may not make effective use of thiscredibility. Therefore, I would support alternative A in the beliefthat that will encourage a gradual decline in rates. I also think, ifI understood correctly, that alternative B would not result in anydecline at all in interest rates from their current levels. Is thatcorrect, Steve?11/16/82MR. AXILROD. Well, if the aggregates came out that way, yes;it's set that way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if all these other assumptions arecorrect.MR. RICE. So, to support "B" doesn't seem to me consistentwith the objectives that we all say we have. I would be content to besomewhere between alternatives A and B provided it resulted in somedownward [interest rate] movement. But alternative A seems perfectlysafe at this time and that's the way I think we should go.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. May I ask a quick question? If I did myarithmetic right, the midpoint of the fed funds range in "B" is about1 percentage point below the current fed funds rate.MR. AXILROD. Yes, for "B" we just put in the range that theCommittee adopted at the last meeting. But our expectation was for afunds rate more like it is now.MR. FORD. And in "C" the midpoint is about where today'srate is.MR. AXILROD. Yes. We started with "B" as the range theCommittee had, but the range--MR. FORD. Well, I think you have characterized it exactlyright, Mr. Chairman, in saying that we are at a point where we areweighing the [unintelligible]. The consideration is whether or notwe're in a historical discontinuity. When I first joined thisCommittee I thought it was a line-up of Keynesians versus monetaristsas to just what we needed to stimulate the economy. I'd like toreview briefly what kind of stimulus we are now putting in from both[the fiscal and monetary] sides. As everybody knows, the deficitspending of the government really didn't explode until the second halfof the last fiscal year. That is, through the spring we were runninga deficit about the same as the previous year at about a $60 billionannual rate. It was in the last six months ending with September thaton a seasonally adjusted basis it went from around the $60 billionannual rate up to $110 billion. That means that fiscal policy hasonly recently become dramatically more expansive. We now apparentlyare running a deficit somewhere in the range of $120 to $130 billion[or as much as] $150 billion for this fiscal year. In other words,fiscal policy was made much more expansive in the last few months.Likewise, as Lyle mentioned last time, the question of whatis happening to the real money supply depends on what kind of monetarytheory one likes. If you look at what is happening to the real moneysupply--I'm sure you've all seen the little chart that shows that ithas only been since last summer that the nominal money supply, M1 andM2 both, has been growing. And with the drop in prices, the fact isthat what is happening right now is that the real money supply isexpanding very rapidly whether one measures it in terms of M2 or M1.That, too, is a quite recent phenomenon; it has only been occurringduring the last few months. Those two conclusions, together with thenormal lags in the impact of fiscal and monetary policy, lead me to-32-11/16/82the conclusion that the current set of policies on both the fiscal andmonetary sides are very expansive. In terms of the fiscal thrust, thedeficit is running at 5 to 6 percent of GNP; in terms of the fullemployment deficit, [the federal budget] is now in deficit at anyreasonable definition of full employment. Real monetary policy isjust expansive. And all that says to me is that we are sitting herereading each other the gloom and doom report, but unless we are at ahistorically discontinuous point in our economy, which a number ofspeakers have suggested in different ways [may be the case], we arerunning a high risk of throwing both of the throttles in our economicairplane fully to the wall and the plane has to take off. The greatdanger is that it will surge forward in the next few months after thenormal lags on both fiscal and monetary policy take hold and then wewill be in a position of having the worst of all worlds, namely,higher long-term interest rates--we may manipulate the short ones, butthe long ones will get to us--higher unemployment, and price inflationstarting to turn around against us, all without any significant dropin unemployment. And that's the scene that concerns me on the otherside of this judgment we are making.Given that we haven't allowed for the normal lags, I wouldsay we need to wait a little longer and risk keeping policy where itis--that may mean something more like "C," whose average interest rateis right about where we are now--and see after another quarter if theeconomy does or does not respond to this tremendous stimulus we'regiving it now. If at the end of that time, by late in the winter, westill see everybody pushing their forecasts of recovery forward, Iwould be more inclined to share the judgment a number of you aremaking, which is that we are already at a historical discontinuity.Then I would say we should go into our mode of being preventors of thegreat depression. If the problem is that we have had not just four orfive quarters of unusual velocity behavior but that we are looking atsix or seven quarters of it and the number is getting bigger andbigger in the wrong direction, at that point we should push this kindof stimulus. But until then I want to emphasize the risk on the otherside, as noted in the comments of Mr. Wallich. All the business folksare saying they will give us a period of grace of, say, seven months;they will watch this and after that the indicators of expectationsturning against us should probably start to break. I look at fourthings in terms of those indicators: the price of gold, which isturning against us; the exchange value of the dollar, which iscurrently all right or more than all right as a number of you noted;long-term interest rates, which are still declining, and as you saidthe market hasn't turned on us yet; and sensitive commodity prices,which are still reasonably okay. But if we go for "A" or anythinglike "A" to "B," I think we will start to see these things turnagainst us, and with the economy surging we really will be in the soupsix or nine months from now. So, while I'm worried about what theCongress is going to do to us and I'm also very worried about the factthat most of you may be right and we may be [witnessing] a historicaldiscontinuity, I still think we should lean on the side of notoverdoing the monetary stimulus to complement the excessive fiscalstimulus that everybody agrees we now have. I'd go for "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm pretty sympathetic to what Bill Fordhad to say. I don't think we have allowed enough time to see the11/16/82effects of what is obviously a considerably more expansive monetarypolicy that was developing increasing momentum as we went through thesummer and into the fall. It is very much like 1980 as a matter offact. And the fiscal policy setting is certainly on the expansiveside. I don't know that I would characterize it as expansive as youdo, Bill, because I think we do need to look at the 6-1/2 percent fullemployment setting. It is negative but it's not so terribly negativeat this point, though probably it will drift up rather than downbecause I think all the Congressional sentiment will be to raise thedeficit rather than reduce it, in pursuit of particular job creatingpolicies.On the business situation, I agree most with Lyle. I thinkit is quite poor. And I'm very worried about the marginal indicators.Jerry Corrigan mentioned that employment may not do at all well, and Ithink that's quite right. I know of a plant that has reduced itsoffice force from 1300 to 500. They are not doing much out in theyard, but they are going to have to do a lot more in the yard beforethey add back to that 500 they have in the office. That plant happensto be in a deeply depressed industry, but its [action to reduce officestaff] is a mark of what a lot of business people are thinking aboutbecause they are very squeezed on cash flows and very scared abouttheir financial condition. So, I don't think business is very goodand it isn't going to get very good in the immediate future, but I dothink we need to have some time to see what the effect of thesepolicies may prove to be.Over the years the Committee frequently has made seriouserrors by not allowing for the lag in [policy] effects because wealways expect to see instantaneous results and we never get them ineconomics. I think we ought to wait a little while. I don't knowwhether interest rates are too high or not. I agree that onesympathetically thinks they ought to be lower because the real ratesare so high; on the other hand, we have this structural problem inthat they have to be disproportionately higher because of thegovernment's financing needs. That is, the government is interest-insensitive in its demand for funds and it is going to take asubstantial share off the top, so real rates have to be higher than inpast settings in order to have a balanced economy with that kind ofdeficit. So, Paul, I come out for "B;" I think "C" is perhaps alittle draconian. And I feel rather strongly that we shouldn't beposting in the directive expectations for the aggregates that are asfar out of our expectational range of just 6 weeks ago as those in "A"would be. Even if we shade the funds rate range in "B," I think weought to keep the specifications for the aggregates that are in "B"and wait until we see this staff paper and have a little moreexperience in order to see whether we have to shift our focus entirelyin terms of aggregates. The 1930s do suggest that we might have somekind of change in the function here and that we might be back to thatbecause we certainly are going to have many more failures in thiseconomy and many more failures abroad in the year to come. Maybe thatmeans that we have to have more liquidity relative to economicactivity. But I don't feel prepared to commit myself to that at thispoint. So, I would go for "B," and I feel pretty strongly that Iwouldn't want to see aggregate growth ranges above those specified in"B" by the staff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.-34-11/16/82MR. MARTIN. I think the case for saying that we are in aperiod of discontinuity is a mixed one. I don't think any of us cansit here and say that indeed the liquidity preference schedule hasshifted--that the employment of liquidity and debt by the corporatesector or the private sector has really changed. But certainly thereare a number of indications that indeed this may have taken place. Tothe extent there is credibility in the argument, one can look at thepast two or three years and see two recessions back-to-back, withreally no recovery. My colleague, Governor Teeters, occasionallyasks: If one discounts the pseudo-recovery, isn't this the longestperiod ever of depressed growth? It's an intriguing idea. Obviously,there are many things to go by. That's the trouble. We know so manythings that aren't [typical]: this very recent experience in theholding of liquidity; the recent experience of business firmsrestructuring themselves in terms of employment and outlook onmarkets; and the apparent significant change in the internationalsituation. Those are facts that can be considered cumulative and theymake the discontinuity argument.I am not impressed by the current jargon on how narrow theopening of the window is--that it's only seven months or 19-1/2 daysor whatever--because there is an awareness in the markets, as distinctfrom the flow of articles, Larry. I read all those articles andnewsletters and whatnot, too. That is a cottage industry. I'm gladwe have nearly full employment there! But I do believe there is asignificant difference between what traders and portfolio managers doin the markets and what some very interesting people write in thenewsletters and in the financial press. I'm relatively unimpressed bythe flow of articles, although I'm vastly entertained by them.Looking at the recent experience of nonrecovery over more than a2-year period, looking at the benign effect of lower interest rates,if you will, what has been the effect of the decline of 150 or 200basis points in short and long rates in terms of the internationalsituation, in terms of the amelioration of the fragility of our owneconomy? People are still failing there. I have major mortgagelenders who come in here and tell me that "they are still putting ourfriends out of business," a [reference] I take it to adhering tosupervisory pressures to clean up the loan portfolio. The down sideis still a specter that must be contended with and, therefore, I am an"A" to "B" person. I am bothered by a target of borrowing of $150million; it seems to me too low. I can live with $200 million. Icertainly can accept $250 million in the short run. I am greatlybothered by the alternative B notion that we might behave in such away as to produce a 10-1/2 percent federal funds rate.MR. PARTEE. Take about 1/2 point off.MR. MARTIN. I think a 10-1/2 percent federal funds ratewould be a significant negative in the markets. They would understandthat. They might not pay attention to 19 articles in that direction,but get that funds rate to 10-1/2 percent and I think we will continueto do damage to the economy. We have done damage to it. We, fiscaland monetary [policy] both, had to do damage. But there comes a pointwhere the battering must stop. And 10-1/2 percent to me is cruel andunusual punishment. So, I'm an "A" to "B" person. I would hope tosee $200 to $250 million as the borrowing target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.-35-11/16/82MR. BALLES. I come back, Mr. Chairman, to your excellentstatement on the balance of risks, and that has me in a coin-flippingstage, I guess. I join everybody around the table in wanting to getinterest rates down as fast and as much as possible, but hopefullykeeping them down. And that's the hang-up. In a day or so, I assume,Murray [Altmann], the directive from our October 5th meeting will bepublished and at that time the public will know of just one more keything that they don't already know, and that is that we set a range of8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 and M3 [growth] at that time. Theywon't be too scared because the October M2 that has just beenpublished shows 8 percent and that's so far so good. What they don'tknow and what we do know is that in October M2 was considerably higherthan the path plotted by the staff. I'm afraid, given the lowassumption on M2 that the staff made for October, that if we get acontinuation of accelerating M2 growth in November, which clearlyseems possible--I think I heard Steve say that--we could be in[danger] of letting things get out of hand on the up side.Personally, I'm glad that we did in fact have the rapid M1growth of August, September, and October, and that we got [interest]rates down in a rather dramatic way. But I'm a little afraid that wemay begin to get some perverse reaction in the long-term bond market.This is always a judgment call, and judgment will differ around thetable, but I begin to worry a bit--not that one swallow makes spring--about the articles I see such as the one on the front page of today'sWall Street Journal in the "What's New" column. The article said thatofficials of OMB and Treasury are beginning to worry now that we willsee higher interest rates, higher inflation, and higher unemploymentif the current monetary and fiscal policies continue. There are fearsthat the Fed's monetary policy has become too expansionary, [asreflected by] the fact that the money supply announcement yesterdaywas received poorly in the bond markets and bond prices went down. Sofar I think we've been lucky--not lucky in one sense because we havedeserved what we have gotten, which is very good treatment--in thesense that our [monetary] expansion over the last three months hasbeen accompanied by a downward drift in long-term interest rates inparticular. I wouldn't want to overdo it; I wouldn't want tooverplay our hand and carry that too far. As you said. Mr. Chairman,we just can't throw caution to the winds. And it's difficult to judgewhen you're overplaying your hand. I would join several of those whohave already spoken in favor of tugging on the reins a little and,therefore, going with alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think you expressed very well thedilemma that we face in trying to decide what to do today. I don'tthink there's any real difference among any of us around the table asto the objective we want, but we have some obvious differences aboutthe means. At the last meeting I understood full well why we decidedto deemphasize M1, given the international situation, the precariousdomestic situation, and the noise in the M1 statistics. I thought wemade a bad mistake when we did that but in retrospect I think it had apretty salutary effect upon expectations, and it accounts to a largeextent for this improvement we've seen in attitudes. But I do think acaveat is in order. Despite its having been maligned a great deal, itseems to me, from what I can understand in the literature, that M1over the long run is still the best predictor of inflation and nominalGNP. Money thrown out to satisfy these high demands for liquidity in-36-11/16/82a period of recession like this remains around; and when the demandfor money shifts in the other direction, it can come back to haunt us.So I'm very much concerned about the [money] growth we've had in thelast several months and I fear that this may go on into November.Bill Ford and Chuck Partee after him expressed much better than I myfeelings on this. I believe the battle today--if there is a battle orif one can call it that--is going to be fought over the question ofwhether we move the federal funds rate down deliberately or whether weare going to stick with a steady money market directive somewhat likewe did the last time. My choke point is right at that point. If wedecide to keep the federal funds rate about where it is now, I can buythat. If we decide to deliberately push it down in the absence of aweakening in the aggregates, I choke over that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. In trying to balance the risks, the down side isvery frightening. There is a possibility, though, that there is alittle [risk] on the up side. Obviously I'm influenced somewhat by aslightly more optimistic view of where the economy is heading. Withregard to the lag effect, the argument has been made that we reallyhave not had time to see the full effect of recent policy actions. Ifind that to be a fairly persuasive argument [so] the cautionaryapproach also has appeal to me. I think we can remain cautious andnot take a very overt action at this point to deliberately try tobring rates down. So, if I were voting today, I would vote for "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a couple of additionalcomments. I gave you a finely balanced statement of pros and consbefore, I suppose. I have no doubt in my mind that we've had a changein liquidity preference. The argument is over how long that willlast, but it has lasted for five quarters. Well, I don't know if onecan say it has lasted for five quarters; the numbers always have bumpsup and down in a quarterly series. But when velocity has declined forfive [successive] quarters for the first time in the postwar period,something is different.MR. PARTEE. Four quarters.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod told me it was five.MR. PARTEE. Including the fourth quarter?MR. AXILROD. Including the fourth quarter of last year.MR. PARTEE. And the fourth quarter this year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He's projecting this quarter.MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. It seems a fairly good guess, Chuck.MR. FORD. Is that what he said, or did he say since 1960?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He went backwards only with quarterlyfigures. I used to watch velocity figures in the '50s and I will tellyou they were rising, because I used to write stories about the belief-37-11/16/82that they had risen so much they had to stop rising. And they'verisen every year since then!MR. GRAMLEY. You were sort of premature on your forecast!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That shows you how great an expert I am onvelocity! I remind you of Milton Friedman who, looking at a hundredyears, wrote his book and said that velocity will always fall. Moneyis a luxury good and the most certain thing about monetary policy isthat velocity is going to fall. Like all scholars he has caught up.I used to write internal memoranda; he had to get a book published.By the time the book came out velocity was already rising and it hasrisen every year since then, until last year. I think something isgoing on there; that is the only point I'm making. I have no doubtsabout that, but that doesn't tell you how long it will last.In terms of the business situation, and putting theinternational dimension into it--I'm not thinking just of thefinancial strains, though they are very real--we have a world inrecession the way we have never had it before. And now we haveadditional deflationary pressures rising in a developing world thatare very strong and certain. There's no escaping them. In talking tomy foreign central banking colleagues, which I have done a bitrecently, they are approaching the stage of being--if I wasn't goingto be recorded, I would say frantic. Discomfited, maybe, is thebetter word. There is virtually a unanimous feeling that some effortsought to be marshaled to push--if that's not too strong a word--interest rates 2 percentage points lower. I don't share that feeling,but I cite it as a symptom of the atmosphere in the rest of theindustrialized world based upon their observations and their appraisalof the prospects in their own economies. They may all be wrong. Thepicture is very sluggish and I think the risks are on both sides, butpredominantly on the down side.For better or worse, we're faced with an indefinite periodthat we are not going to be able to figure out M1 just purely forinstitutional reasons. I think there is a case to be made that it wasthe most reliable variable in the past, but I don't think that casecan be made looking into the future simply because of theinstitutional changes, even abstracting from the issue of whetherthere has been any basic change in velocity on an unchanged concept ofM1. We are not going to have an unchanged concept of M1. I think wehave to hedge the risks a bit; it's a question of to what degree.That brings us to the specifics. I think we have a choice,given where the weight of opinion lies. Mr. Solomon long agosuggested that we stick with the 9-1/2 percent [for M2 growth], whichis within the range that we had last time. We could eliminate the8-1/2 percent side of it, if I followed him correctly. There's quitea lot of feeling that we ought to reduce the borrowing level, startingoff anyway. That is a feeling I share and it is the principal hedgethat I would recommend.MR. FORD. From what to what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where it is now, frankly, butwe have had various proposals: $150 million is the lowest one I seein my notes; more people mentioned $200 or $250 million; and the-38-11/16/82highest was $300 million among those who in general wanted to make ita little lower. Some people may not want to make it lower.MR. PARTEE. Could we ask where it is? What is the case?MR. STERNLIGHT. The borrowing level now?MR. PARTEE. Yes, abstracting from that--MR. STERNLIGHT. This current week [we expect] $550 millionbecause we started out with $3 billion in borrowing on last Thursday.MR. AXILROD. The last weekly number that we had that wasindependent of this problem Peter mentioned was something like $366 or$367 million. We never quite obtained that. Borrowing for the lastfive weeks has run, in millions, $248, $405, $273, $263, and then $530million last week, which was also influenced by that high Wednesday.MR. PARTEE. Well, $200 million or $150 million wouldcertainly be lower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question about that. To put anumber on the table--it is around the midpoint of what a number ofpeople suggested and leans [in the direction favored by] those whowanted to hedge the bets this way--I'll say $250 million.MR. FORD. You're taking the alternative C growth [for M2] of9-1/2 percent? Do you mean for October to December?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I assumed the 9-1/2 percent meantSeptember to December.SPEAKER(?). Right.MR. FORD. So you're on "B" for the growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the lower--MR. GRAMLEY. Were you thinking of retaining that statementabout precautionary demands for money? That would be a critical partof the directive, I think, saying that expected growth in Septemberthrough December is at levels which might well imply the need tochange the nonborrowed reserve path fairly soon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't find [my copy of] the directive.MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, we're virtually unaffectedanyway by overshoots.SPEAKER(?). Why not?MR. PARTEE. The 2 percent rule.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is not true. We increased it--in amuted way, I think it's fair to say--but we increased it from the waywe [started out].MR. PARTEE. You say muted and I say virtually unaffected.11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, virtually unaffected pushed thefunds rate up and stopped the interest rate decline and reversed thestock market.MR. GRAMLEY. The market went down again today, I understand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The stock market is way down today.SPEAKER(?). It was against inflated expectations. But therecertainly has been a trend in recent weeks toward a firmer tone ratherthan the reverse. It is quite noticeable in the market.MS. TEETERS. What federal funds range do you get with the$250 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, all those federal funds rangesencompass anything I could see happening, so I don't feel terriblysensitive to it. I'd say it's at least time to knock the 1/2 off the10-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I thought so, too.MR. GRAMLEY. And why not make 6 to 10?MS. TEETERS. Yes, 6 to 10.MR. GRAMLEY. So we're not narrowing the range still further.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I personally don't have any big problemwith that, but with the present situation we aren't going to get downto 6 percent, given anything I see developing. Maybe we should, butwe aren't.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we don't want to go up to 10percent either.MS. TEETERS. We don't want 10-1/2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we don't want to go up to 10percent either. I don't think we're going to hit either of them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're considerably closer to 10 percentthan we are [to 6 percent].MR. PARTEE. Yes, I could imagine 10 percent, but 10-1/2percent would be a shock to the market.MR. FORD. 10-1/2 percent is where it is now, right?SEVERAL. No, 9-1/2 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. I know he means the [upper end of the] range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where the range is now.MR. FORD. The present range is "B," right? So if we drop itto 10 percent, that indicates a further loosening of policy in thesense of where the band is.-40-11/16/82MR. PARTEE. Very little.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way we're operating now, we arenot going to hit either end of these ranges. So it's partiallypsychological. I would assume that if the economy stays thisdepressed and we saw the rate going up to the 10 percent area, theChairman would either feel he had enough leeway to make an adjustmentor he'd schedule a conference call.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume more specifically that thefunds rate is going to be within range of wherever the discount rateis. What is going to happen--MR. FORD. May we ask what your feeling is on the discountrate? Should it be dropped another notch or left where it is?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Going back to what I said earlier, if Iwere picking interest rates out of the air, I'd make them lower. So,I have some predisposition in that direction. Whether we have thestage set for it properly against all these other considerations, Idon't know. But I wouldn't let a good opportunity pass.MR. GUFFEY. In that connection, I think the question iswhether we continue to do what we say we have done, which is to followthe [market] rate down, or whether this is an appropriate time to[lead] by moving the discount rate down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Personally--I can't defend this verystrongly, but just as a matter of tactics--I'd rather have thediscount rate down and the borrowings higher, for any givenconstellation of forces. I feel a little more comfortable when thebanks have to borrow a little.MR. GUFFEY. If we had some assurance that there will be adiscount rate decrease, I would agree to a little higher borrowinglevel for the intermeeting period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with that is that it gets toofancy and is hard to explain. We'd have to face the fact that wewould reduce the discount rate [without] a clear signal from themarket. But I wouldn't be unhappy to end up in that position somehow.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think what you're suggestingis okay. I don't think the funds rate range makes much difference.If we want to make the top side 10 percent, we could make it 7 to 10percent or 6 to 10 percent. It's strictly psychological; it has nooperating significance at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the crucial point is where westart the borrowing. Frankly, I wouldn't put it above $250 million.I wouldn't be unhappy to go lower than that, the way I see things.MS. TEETERS. How much seasonal borrowing do we get on this,Steve--about $50 million?-41-11/16/82MR. AXILROD. It's running fairly low, Governor Teeters. Wehave had $50, $77 and $90 million recently. It has been below $100million for the last five or six weeks.MS. TEETERS. And the extended borrowing isn't in that numberat all?MR. AXILROD. No. That has risen a little; it's about $190million.MS. TEETERS. But that's not in the--MR. AXILROD. It's not in this number, but the seasonal is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose I am affected by believing thatin the short run the economy is still declining and industrialproduction is going to be down in November. Maybe I'm all wet there.MR. KICHLINE. The way it looks now, yes. We have someinformation on raw steel output, and auto assemblies are down. Itlooks as if it's going to be a negative number.MR. GRAMLEY. The other thing is, looking at the structure ofindustrial output in October, there isn't any evidence that it isconsistent with an immediate turnaround. That is, one normally wouldexpect in an economy that is about to pull out of recession andflatten out that production of materials will not go down as much asfinal product. In this case what we saw was a flattening out ofmaterials production in the early summer and then it resumed [itsdecline] again and is still going down rapidly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really cannot over-emphasize the extentto which my foreign brethren feel strongly about this. I don't carehow conservative the central banks are, they are all in that directionand very strongly. I also do think that the current level of thedollar is catastrophic. As surely as we are sitting here, it's notonly depressing the economy today but it is going to turn. We talkabout the kind of current account deficits that are projected. I findthem almost unbelievable because I don't know how we would financethem. We are going to be in Mexico's situation. The implication isthat we are going to have a declining dollar and expect to raise $50billion in capital abroad. Well, who is going to put money into thedollar when they sense it is on a down trend?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Carter bonds. We made a lot of moneythat way!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do the Carter bonds once thedollar has dropped by 30 percent. That atmosphere is going to beawful if it develops.MR. CORRIGAN. What about the exchange rate situation?Doesn't that situation give us a little more leeway in terms of beingable to do something directly with the discount rate, without havingto worry about finessing the market?-42-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the discount rate were reduced, I thinkwe would have to explain it as a straightforward concern about theeconomy and, in part, the dollar.MR. GRAMLEY. Put more generally, the level of the exchangerate gives us more freedom to do something with money supply, interestrates, and so on without worrying that somehow it is going to have animmediate inflationary or expansive impact. We are not getting asymmetrical response to changes in interest rates. The movementupward in interest rates carried with it a very substantial increasein the exchange rate, so we had a lot of negative effects on exportsfrom that. The decline in interest rates, it seems to me, has not hadthat effect. It's a lot less than the opposing effect on the up side.MR. PARTEE. I think Paul is probably right that when itstarts to run, it's going to run pretty fast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not going to be left alone in anyinterest rate decline that develops here. And, of course, that's oneof the reasons the exchange rate stays so high. I guess Ted orsomebody mentioned that there is--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They are going to match it point forpoint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And maybe more than that.MR. MARTIN. They are holding their breath.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm repeating myself, but there is a deepdegree of depression and feeling of disturbance in every otherindustrialized country.MR. RICE. Do you think this proposal of $250 million onborrowing and, say, a 7 to 10 percent funds rate band is consistentwith a decline in interest rates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it would take the edge off the federalfunds rate, presumably. It may not right away; we're going to publisha high borrowing figure this week, but I presume the funds rate--MR. MORRIS. It would take a cut in the discount rate,wouldn't it, to do something?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and I think this might be consistentwith the funds rate going slightly below the discount rate. It hasbeen below it for months. It does not imply a change from whereinterest rates have been for the last month, in my opinion. That initself [would require] a reduction in the discount rate. Even thenI'm not sure it's a lot.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Short-term rates now generally areworking on the assumption of an 8-3/4 to 9 percent funds rate. Theydid not align even with a slight upward movement. As I understand it,at least from some of my banker friends, short-term rates are lowerthan would be indicated by a 9-1/2 percent fed funds rate.-43-11/16/82MR. RICE. Well, we would have to wait a while to reduce thediscount rate in this current market environment. Interest rates aregoing the wrong way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we would tell them that wedon't like to see them going that way.MR. RICE. That's why I think we have to do something here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a more difficult decision.MR. RICE. We have to do something to nudge market rates downand then we can reduce the discount rate.MR. KEEHN. How about using the fed funds range ofalternative A the way it is written [in the Bluebook]?MR. FORD. That puts me on the other side of the river.MR. MARTIN. 6 to 9-1/2 percent?MS. TEETERS. We could put it at 6 to 10 percent, which wouldgive us a 4-point range.MR. CORRIGAN. There you are.MR. GRAMLEY. That doesn't have any meaning.MS. TEETERS. I know it doesn't.MR. PARTEE. Well, it does have some demonstrable meaning; Ithink 6 to 10 percent is okay.MR. GRAMLEY. You mean when it's published.MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me sum up my own view another way. Ithink this general pattern is acceptable. It is playing it very closeto the vest, considering what I see going on. The risks areunbalanced but they are on both sides. The risk is that this is notenough.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or [the Board] could drop thediscount rate a whole point. I'm not recommending it; I'll be sendingin a 1/2 point recommendation this week. But there is just no moreroom in this nonborrowed reserve path. There isn't any room to domuch more than what we are doing. If we go significantly below $250million, that runs some serious risks that we could have a very screwymarket situation. We are better off with a move on the discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One way of looking at it, I think, is thatwhat we have been doing for some time is letting these aggregates runa little high because we recognize that there are liquidity pressuresand we haven't wanted to move strongly against that. We haven't beenvery forward in pushing them higher. If we really felt that liquiditywas changing and the market was terribly sour and it was going to lastfor a while, we would take that additional step and push them higher.-4411/16/82We haven't done that and I don't think what we're proposing does that;one might argue that "A" verges on that. If it turns out thatvelocity keeps declining, we should have done that.MR. PARTEE. And we may need to do that, but it's premature.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then we would really have a problemcommunicating that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's easier to communicate the sourer theeconomy, I can tell you that.MR. GRAMLEY. I think the case for waiting was a saleable oneat midyear. But too much time has elapsed since then. I no longerthink it's saleable to say that we will wait to see whether or notthis velocity trend continues. It has been going on too long. So, Ithink we've got to err on the side of setting specs that give us ahigh probability that we will not see any upward movement of interestrates and that the greater likelihood is that they are going to movedown. It's not guaranteed; one can't guarantee anything in thisworld. But I'm afraid if we have another recurrence of thedisappointment that we have had with an economy not recovering, we'regoing to see a souring of attitudes, and this economy is going to getaway from us. We then are going to have to take some very, verystrenuous action on both the fiscal and monetary sides to rescue it.The international complications make this a profoundly different kindof recession than we ever have had before in the postwar period.MR. ROOS. If you count four or five months into the future,I'll be fishing and you all will still be wrestling with this. Butlet's assume that by forcing rates down a little you do achieve animprovement in the economy and this stimulus starts causing interestrates to rise next spring as this long-sought recovery is reachingmeaningful proportions. Yet money has grown so quickly that theprospect of inflation is heightened. Are you all going to be willingto apply the brakes at the time? If you don't apply the brakes atthat time, we're going to be right back into double-digit inflationrates in a few years.MR. MORRIS. Somehow, Larry, that scenario doesn't fly withme. I don't think that's the situation we're in.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd sure be a lot happier about applying thebrakes if the car were rolling rapidly down the hill than to roll itbackward down the hill.MR. PARTEE. We'll think of you though, Larry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't discount that [scenario] entirely.It is complicated by the budgetary situation. I don't know that itwould happen as soon as this spring, but I think it is possible. As Isaid before, we will not find this particular monetary growth[pattern] again. I don't know what M1 is going to look like then.I'm not sure we're going to find M2 all that rapid in thosecircumstances, but we'll have to wait and see.MR. CORRIGAN. But if we do something like setting borrowingsat $250 million and do whatever you want with the federal funds rate,-45-11/16/82it seems to me that we have some reasonably high degree of assurancethat we're not going to see interest rates higher than they are now;and depending upon finessing the market or [the Board's] willingnessto do something with the discount rate in any event, there is theclear potential for lower rates. In the worst of conditions, [theBoard could] reduce the discount rate even if the fed funds rate is at9-1/2 percent; [you would] just bite the bullet and do it. Mypersonal view is that the markets and everybody else would acceptthat.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The markets would love it.MR. CORRIGAN. But I don't see that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not so sure what would happen withreducing the discount rate by 1/2 point. They have all been expectingit and for that reason it may have very little impact.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, I'm not saying it will have muchimpact, but if you don't do it--if you wait too long--there willclearly be a backup in rates. If we actually wanted to move the bondmarket and the stock market up--I'm not saying we should--then we'dhave to consider a one-point move. But I'm not recommending that. Ithink, though, that you have to move 1/2 point.MS. TEETERS. But 1/2 point doesn't have to be the end.However it develops, we can move the discount rate down to 8-1/2percent after a 2- or 3-week delay and it's still--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This is true. Judgments can be madeas we go along.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's just see where we stand.Looking back at the directive, if I can find it, what I suggested andothers have suggested is to put in 9-1/2 percent [for M2], which iswithin the range that we had but it looks a little easier. We can putthe funds range at 6 to 10 percent if that's where the--MR. PARTEE. We aren't using a range, though, [for M2]?MS. TEETERS. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could say "around."MR. PARTEE. [This draft] doesn't have "about" or "around"9-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about that phrase, just interms of its internal consistency, "taking account of the desirabilityof somewhat reduced pressures in private credit markets." I'm notsure we're saying that this is going to produce in and of itself lowerinterest rates. We might just leave that phrase out.MR. PARTEE. I would be inclined to take it out because wemoved to the 9-1/2 percent on the M2 from 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. Wehave already taken account of it.-46-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the private credit markets, asdistinct from the public credit markets, have improved during thisperiod. This great tiering and backing up tendency we had in thosemarkets is not evident today.MR. WALLICH. I would like to see that phrase removed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does this suit, as well as anythingis going to suit?MR. BLACK. Could we ask Peter and Steve to tell us what theythink would happen to the fed funds rate with this kind of directive,in the absence of a change in the discount rate?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think $250 million on borrowing would tendto produce a funds rate right around, or a shade below, the discountrate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A shade below the present discountrate.MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, if [the Board] doesn't move thediscount rate, it won't go down to 9 percent; it will stay at around9-1/4 to 9-3/8 percent.MR. BLACK. You are saying we really have a money marketdirective--a very tight money market directive, probably--if there isno move on the discount rate.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think we'd have much scope for adownward movement in the funds rate with a $250 million borrowinglevel without a discount rate change.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have one other point to make onthis directive. I'm a little concerned about the phrase in theopening paragraph that reads "the reinvestment of funds from maturingall savers certificates and the public's response to the new accountdirectly competitive with the money market funds mandated by recentlegislation." The latter half of that statement really flies in theface, I think, of what is said on page 7, paragraph 9 in the Bluebook.It is made pretty clear in the next to the last sentence of thatparagraph--and I agree with what is said there--that the new moneymarket account will only have a small [quarterly] effect on M2 when itbecomes available in mid-December for the simple reason that it is notgoing to be around long enough in the fourth quarter. I tried my handat writing a slightly different version of a directive. I don't knowwhether this will help or hurt the cause. The bottom line is to takeout that phrase in the current proposed directive which reads "thepublic's response to the new money market account competitive withmoney market funds mandated by recent legislation." I agree it isgoing to be a big problem when we get into the first quarter; I don'tthink it's a problem for this quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise a question. Why do weneed this paragraph at all now? We needed it the last time to explain-47-11/16/82what we were doing. Would we lose anything by just dropping the wholeparagraph?MR. AXILROD. No. The last sentence of paragraph 9 is ourfeeling about it. We're not certain when we--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably we will say somethingabout this in the [policy record] discussion. But is there anyoperative need to put it in the directive at this point?MR. AXILROD. No, but I do think there is some uncertaintyrelated to both the all savers certificate and the new instrumentabout what is going to happen in the interim, [which should be in therecord] for discussion purposes. I don't know where people are goingto store their money in anticipation of those things. But you don'tneed it for operational purposes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only significance of taking it out--maybe it is too much--is that it says "much less weight." The fact isthat it has some weight. If M1 had happened to be dropping off thetable in the last couple of weeks, we would have behaved somewhatdifferently. If we leave it out completely, we lose any flavor ofthat.MR. BALLES. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we would have to explain why wehaven't specified it. That is, the earlier paragraph [on theCommittee's long-run objectives], which isn't here in the Bluebook,talks about the Committee's expectations for M1 and M2 and so forth.So we have to continue to say why it is that M1 is not figuring inthis instruction to the Manager.MR. WALLICH. That's very important, because otherwise we arein fact implicitly still giving weight to M1.MS. TEETERS. It also has the advantage of showing that wewere right for a change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure what your particularsuggestion is, John.MR. PARTEE. This talks about M1, John. It seems to me thatyou were talking about M2.MR. BALLES. Well, I was talking about both. I happen tohave some copies of this here for distribution. Maybe the easiestway, if it could be helpful, is to distribute them. The main burdenof the message is that it backs away a little from what we said lasttime. There is still uncertainty about M1, but not as much as lasttime. The opening sentence is that the specification and behavior ofM1 over the balance of the year are subject to fewer uncertainties nowthan at the last meeting in October. You may not agree with that, butthat happens to be my view.SEVERAL. No way!-48-11/16/82MR. GRAMLEY. I don't want to give any kind of[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we leave it the way it is now andjust say the difficulties of interpretation of M1 continue to suggestthat less weight--I don't care whether we say "much less" or "lessthan usual"--is being placed on movements in that aggregate during thecurrent quarter. And we can forget about that M2 sentence, if that'stroublesome.MR. BALLES. I ended up the first paragraph by saying:"Nevertheless, the difficulty of interpretation of M1 still suggeststhat less than usual weight be placed on movements in that aggregateand more than usual weight be placed on M2 during the currentquarter." In order not to scare the heck out of everybody, I waswondering what we would really tolerate in M1. In the secondparagraph, after noting whatever range we decide would be appropriatefor M2 and M3, I'm toying with the idea of a proviso clause for M1--"provided that M1 does not exceed x percent over the same period."MR. PARTEE. 20 percent!MR. BALLES. Well, you name it.MR. GRAMLEY. That's just not the way to go now. Later,maybe. We just have not had the uncertainties clarified [enough todetermine] that figure.MR. FORD. Paul, this really raises the question I wanted toask, which is based on your perception of the usefulness of M1. Ihave the feeling that in your mind M1 is permanently [distorted],especially in light of what the DIDC is doing [and] the all saverscertificates. If the consensus of the Committee is that M1 will neverbe used again, or at least not in the foreseeable future, then I thinkwe ought to come out and say it and see what happens.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a bit of an overstatement ofmy feelings at the moment. I'm not saying never; never is much toolong a period. The question is how soon we are going to be able tomake some sense out of it, which is really the subject of this paperwe are going to get next time. I wouldn't be too sweeping about anyjudgment until we have had a chance to consider that explicitly.MR. PARTEE. Well, of course in January we have to specifyaggregates ranges, and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know. What I'm concerned about iswhat we specify next year, because I anticipate that probably by sometime next year we will have full interest payments on transactionaccounts at least of individuals. I think we are hanging by a thread,frankly, in terms of having reserve requirements on individualtransaction accounts at this point. The new account is so close to itthat I can see the lobbyists saying we have this account, which ispractically a transaction account without reserve requirements, andyou can't go back and put reserve requirements on something that isonly marginally different from what Congress just told you to give uswithout a reserve requirement.-49-11/16/82MR. FORD. Why don't you change the reserve requirements from1 percent on transactions to one that they allow? When you get to 12percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This new account, depending on how it'sdeveloped, is going to be so close to a transaction account that maybewe ought to put it in M1.MR. PARTEE. We'd get some phenomenal annual growth rates--athousand percent!MR. CORRIGAN. That will occur with reserves declining.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would be quite impressive,though, wouldn't it--having a component in M1 that doesn't have anyreserve requirements?MR. MORRIS. When it reaches maturity in 7-1/2 years then wecould do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be inclined, in the interest ofcompleting this [discussion], to modify this language to a moreminimal degree. I'd say "considerable" or something like that insteadof "unusually great". The second comment is not a sentence is it?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The dash is left in.MR. PARTEE. After circumstances.MR. GRAMLEY. Two dashes.MR. FORD. Are we looking at John's [version]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at the present one.MR. AXILROD. I guess there are special circumstances inconnection with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have done a great sample of two peoplewho had all savers certificates. I was not making the survey, butmuch to my surprise in my sample of two both put the funds in demanddeposits and still have it there. One of them is my wife. The otheris a distinguished ex-member of the Federal Reserve Board.MR. BLACK. Not even in NOW accounts, Mr. Chairman?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't want to nit-pick, but I don'tsee the point of deleting the words "much less than usual weight," assuggested because the Fed watchers are going to wonder what thatmeans. They will wonder if that means we're giving it somewhat moreemphasis now. Why don't we just leave it alone the way it was?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have it left alone in my presentversion. All I have is "Specification of the behavior of M1 over thebalance of the year remains subject to considerable uncertainty." Ithink that's singular--["uncertainty" rather than "uncertainties"]."Substantial uncertainty," I think.-50-MR. PARTEE.11/16/82MR. WALLICH. I think we should say "continues to be" torefer back to what we said earlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says "remains." "Subject tosubstantial" is it?MR. PARTEE. "Considerable" seems rather [unintelligible]compared with "unusual."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...substantial uncertainty because ofspecial circumstances in connection with the reinvestment of fundsfrom maturing all savers certificates and the public's response to newaccounts directly competitive with money market funds mandated byrecent legislation. The probable difficulties in interpretation of M1continue to suggest that much less than usual weight be placed...."MR. PARTEE. And then drop the last sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. ALTMANN. Are you leaving "probable" in?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I meant to leave out "probable."Well, unless there are some other proposals on main points, we aretalking about 9-1/2 percent, 6 to 10 percent, and $250 million. Anycomments? If not, we will vote.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Ford NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesEleven for, one against.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I have a few things I have to do.We have to discuss a couple of things.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, may I just ask one question? Do weaccept that the ground rules for this meeting are that we don'tdiscuss even with our senior economists what we have done?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we better discuss that while weare in this limited session. It occurs to me that I have a speech togive tonight, unfortunately. Let me just read what I have here; Idon't know whether I have to alter anything. Frankly, I think weought to say something; I don't know if we have to, but this is how Istarted it:-51-11/16/82As you know, most of the monetary and creditaggregates that the markets watch so closely arerunning somewhat above the targets we set forourselves at the start of the year. So far as M1is concerned, the data plainly came to be distortedby institutional change--particularly in October bythe flow of funds into checking accounts....Prospectively, the introduction of new forms oftransaction or quasi-transaction accounts is likelyto distort the figures further, although thedirection of impact is less evident. In thecircumstances we have had little alternative but toattach much less weight to that aggregate inguiding the provision of reserves until theinstitutional changes settle down.More generally, current developments with respectto the growth of money and credit have had to beinterpreted in the light of all the evidence we cangather with respect to the economy, pricedevelopments, interest rates, and financialpressures. Taken together the evidence is strongthat the desire for liquidity has strengthenedappreciably this year, as sometimes happens inperiods of exceptional economic uncertainty. Theturnover or velocity of M1, for instance, hasdeclined appreciably this year instead of trendingupward, as has been the pattern throughout thepostwar period. M2 velocity--generally stable inmost recent years--has declined even more sharply.In all these circumstances, the Federal Open MarketCommittee remains willing for a time--as weindicated at midyear--to tolerate monetaryexpansion at a somewhat higher rate than thetargeted annual rate. That approach, in the lightof the evidence of exceptionally strong liquiditydemands, should in no way be interpreted as a lackof continuing concern about inflation--and happilyI don't believe it has been so interpreted by themarkets. The fact is that, with velocity patternsobviously shifting at least for a time, rigidpursuit of the targets would have the practicaleffect of a more restrictive policy than intendedwhen those targets were set out. It's not withoutrelevance, in that connection, to note that growthin bank credit, or private credit generally, hasbeen relatively limited this year, tending toconfirm that the greater liquidity provided has notspilled over into inflationary private creditexpansion.-52-11/16/82What recent developments do emphasize is that, in atime of rapid institutional economic change, wemust be wary of highly simplified rules in theconduct of policy. That is why we have alwayslooked to a variety of monetary and credit"targets" and retained elements of flexibility andjudgment in pursuing those targets.What we do not have the flexibility to do is toabandon broad guidelines for monetary and creditgrowth as the means of judging policy over a periodof time. The danger of creating excess liquidityis not so much immediate when there is so muchsurplus capacity and unemployment, but rather whenthe economy begins to regain forward momentum.That is why we must continuously balance the needto meet liquidity needs today against the risks ofbuilding in fresh impetus to inflation tomorrow.Then the speech goes on to talk about the budget imbalance.MR. PARTEE. That's fine.MR. ROOS. I don't mean to be a broken record, but I thinkit's important that we have uniformity in what we say or do not say toour own immediate, fairly eminent, associates such as researchdirectors. Are we all going to talk about the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me talk about the public sidefirst. What is distressing about this to me is that it obviouslyaffected the markets and affected policy. Maybe we came out of it allright and maybe we didn't; I don't know. But it certainly gave riseto more dangers about misinterpretation of our intentions than I hadbargained for. I might also say that we had a leak--and maybe morethan one--about the Greenbook, as you know. I don't know whether itwas from the Administration or the Federal Reserve. I have heard allsorts of allegations from the market--they may be without substance,but it worries me every time I hear this--that there has been anoccasional leak of an M2 figure or an M1 figure, or whatever. I hopethat is wrong, but it makes me uneasy when I hear about it. Whatworries me, just looking ahead, is this lack of discipline--if I canput it that way. It's like the vultures going after carrion. Everyreporter in the world is challenged to make his own story, and thereporters who may have been involved the first time are all the morechallenged to keep it up. I think there is a tendency on the part ofany organization, for people to say "Damn it! If somebody else isleaking, I'm going to talk to a reporter, too, and get my story out."Unless this is stopped, it's just going to cut us up.I am convinced that in a way it enormously complicates thepolicy problem because so much of policy is what people think it is orthink our attitude is over a period of time as opposed to what we do.-53-11/16/82This whole situation is intolerable to me. This organization, aboveall others in Washington--I used to think the Treasury was this way,but certainly do not now--does not leak. And I think it has been toour advantage to have that be both the impression and the reality. Ithas enormously increased our credibility, the credibility of officialstatements over the years, and the credibility of policy. I don't seeany way we can operate other than on that presumption. We are dealingwith a Committee; we are dealing with a lot of people. We can't havea lie detector at the door coming in or out of the office. Weultimately have to do what is right because there is a consensus thatthat is right and an understanding of what the rules are--anunderstanding of the people around the table and our associates.Frankly, I think we perhaps should tighten up the distribution of someof the materials--to go to your point--partly as a reminder of thesensitivity of this business. And we will be proposing some changesin that connection. Joe Coyne might just talk a minute about hisunderstanding of the rules and then we'll have a more generaldiscussion of this or of any ideas anybody else might have.MR. COYNE. To be brief, my understanding is that the policyrecord, of course, comes out the Friday after the following meeting,and what that means is that we do not talk about what happened at that[earlier] meeting until that time. There are very, very, fewexceptions to that. We can say we had a meeting; we can give thestarting time and the closing time, and the attendance. And that'sit. That has been my understanding since the Committee adopted therules.MR. WALLICH. That includes telephone meetings?MR. COYNE. No, we do not mention telephone meetings untilthey are reported in the policy record. That is only for our face-to-face meetings.MS. TEETERS. This is to reporters, Joe? This doesn't apply,say, if we are talking to the chief economist at a Reserve Bank?MR. COYNE. This is to the outside world.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are now talking I think about theoutside world.MR. COYNE. Yes, anybody in the outside world.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I think I am bound to suggest at themoment is that we just don't talk to reporters for some interval afterthe meeting, however innocuously. The Washington Post this morninghad a comment attributed to a Federal Reserve source. It was not thewildest thing in the world, obviously.MS. TEETERS. It was just "a source"? It didn't say---54-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, no. There was one comment that said"a Federal Reserve source." And it was the kind of comment somebodycould make. The article is a little odd because it makes it sound asif the Federal Open Market Committee sets the discount rate. It saidsome Federal Reserve source said the option was between blank andblank or something. In the present environment even that kind ofcomment just feeds this atmosphere. I think it's fairly simple forus, let's say in the first week, not to talk to reporters. Peopletalk to reporters once in a while, and it has to be done, I suppose.But it doesn't have to be done that first week. We typically meet ona Tuesday; it doesn't have to be done during the course of that week.MR. COYNE. If I might, Mr. Chairman--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to repeat the obvious: You couldmake a comment that seems pretty innocuous to you, and the reporterfinds three more people to make a comment that is pretty innocuous tothem. And then if he is any good and knows what the issues are, hebegins putting together a story which may be partly right, as that onein The Washington Post was; but the total essence of the article Ithink was substantially misleading. And that's where we are going toget torn apart even with the most innocent of motives.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I presume we'll talk about thisafter lunch, but we could finesse the whole issue by releasing [thedirective] right after the meeting, [as I proposed in a recentmemorandum to you, which I also sent to all Committee members andother Reserve Bank Presidents].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is something I want to talk aboutduring lunch or whatever, but let's assume that is not going tohappen.MR. PARTEE. It may be time to do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't mean that. Does anybodyelse have any [comments]?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did Joe finish?MR. PARTEE. A blackout of the press is a little difficult.MR. COYNE. About the points the Chairman made, a lot ofreporters will do a round robin and call as many people as they canand compare answers.MR. FORD. May I ask this? My feeling about this has beenthat we don't discuss it with outsiders, as you suggested, but that[is] the role of a Federal Reserve official, a senior Federal Reserveofficial especially, giving you the first shot at talking. Forinstance, the last time you should have had the first shot at that-55-11/16/82meeting down at the Greenbrier. Now you are telling us you are goingto do it tonight. But after that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are very vague comments as youheard.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We should be guided, no matter how wefeel individually, by the line that you are expressing. Basically, ina polar case there are two choices: Either we refer all calls to youor we make a best faith effort to state what the official line is,based on the way you interpreted it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we are talking about a specificdecision at a specific meeting. Obviously you have to talk about thegeneral policy line, so to speak. That's quite a different category.But you have to be careful about it. There is a real distinctionbetween that general policy line and this--what the argument was atthe Committee meeting, with views attached to individuals. The mostdamaging thing is to say "This is what we really meant or somebodyreally meant..." and getting into that kind of thing.MR. ROOS. I think we have a potential problem, though, withour economists, some of whom are rather like prima donnas who havetheir noses out of joint by being expelled--correctly, I agree withyou--from this meeting. And unless there is some agreed upon way ofhandling that, one of those fellows will go and tell somebody that thegag rule is on. I'm not disagreeing, Paul, with anything you havesaid, but I'd just like to get some agreement on this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's certainly a relevant question.You obviously have to talk to your senior people. I guess we have toleave it to you to talk with discretion and convey to them certainlythe essence of the message that is more or less the common groundhere. I would talk with each of those people specifically about thisproblem. Make sure they understand it. And if you are satisfied theyunderstand it, you obviously have to talk about the policy decisions.I think you could use a certain amount of discretion in [notproviding] blow-by-blow accounts, which are inevitably distorted.Everybody goes out of the meeting with a different impression of whatwas said or even what was decided in some sense except to the extentthat it is written down. And people interpret every comment in thelight of what they think; in some instances it may be quite differentfrom what the fellow talking thought he was saying. And it might getdangerous when this kind of stuff gets talked about. I hope that wecan get away from [attendance at] these sessions being as narrow as itwas [today]. But maybe we can have it someplace in between for awhile.MR. FORD. If one is on the [morning] call and can't share[the policy decision] with our [appropriate senior staff], whoeverthat is, I don't see how we can have a meaningful thing to say otherthan to listen to the bell ring on the call. My people go to a lot of-56-11/16/82trouble to keep track of your procedures. As I understand it, if weare on the call, we are supposed to be a representative of the group;we do not reflect our own views but whether we think the policy isbeing instituted in accordance with whatever the decision was. To dothat we need somebody to try to track at least roughly how thecalculations and decisions are made.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think your senior people have to knowabout the mechanics of the decision and the essence of the decision.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what about next time? Are yougoing to settle that now, or are you going to [wait]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would welcome any suggestions that youhave. Let's not deal with them at the moment, but you can contact melater. We'll pick up this other issue later. Let's go eat.[Lunch recess]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] tell it to me withenthusiasm and let me just give you one point that may or may not bein this memorandum. [Secretary's note: A copy of the memorandum,"Immediate Release of FOMC Decisions: Pros and Cons," from Messrs.Axilrod and Sternlight and dated November 12, 1982 has been placed inthe Committtee's files.] I can understand an argument that the waythe directives have been written it would be much less of a problemthan in other instances. But once that precedent is set, whateveroperating technique we use, whatever kind of directive we use, we'restuck with it, I think, forever. If we really were operating as weused to on an interest rate target and we announced a differentinterest rate every month--in effect came out of the meeting andannounced an interest rate--we would then be stuck with it and wecouldn't change it without a subsequent public announcement. Then Ithink we would be in great trouble. That's just one other extremeform. When we are giving a directive of the sort that we've beenusing, it doesn't have quite the immediate interest rate implications;it doesn't freeze us in quite the same way. But it does require thatevery time we have a special meeting in which a decision is made--however much of an emergency the situation is--we would have to putsomething out right away. And it might be exceedingly inconvenient.MS. TEETERS. I don't think that's necessarily so. I'd saytwo things, Paul. If we have to have telephone conference meetings oremergency meetings, I don't think we have to announce them. The[dates of] FOMC meetings are public knowledge. And when we wereoperating under an interest rate target, the market usually found itout by noon the next day. What we had done was not a secret at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they found out; they obviouslygroped for it. But those [directives] were not worded in such a wayas to [suggest that we would] stay there until the next meeting.There were certain criteria under which we could change. It wasn't11/16/82that the interest rates changed; they changed very little typically.But there were changes during the period which the market always wassearching out.MS. TEETERS. Well, I already have a call from The New YorkTimes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's great! Everybody just has tostay in this room and go three days without any [unintelligible].We have a bathroom facility right across the hall!MR. BALLES. And meanwhile all the telephones in the buildingare tapped!MR. BLACK. Get me another sandwich, please!MS. TEETERS. I honestly don't think that [immediate releaseof our decisions] will do any harm. It would solve the problem ofleaks. And with a group even as large as this one--and the group wascut down from what it was--the idea that we can keep something asecret for seven or six-and-a-half weeks is really a big presumption,it seems to me. The way it's working now, if we do have these leaks--and there will be speculation, considering all the attention that hasbeen given to it--the speculation may finally come down to a consensusof speculation as to what we did or didn't do. In effect, we'regiving an advantage to the people who have a little inside knowledgeinstead of making it available to the public generally. And I thinkwe're better off, even if we want to change the way we write thedirective, if we make it publicly available. That doesn't mean thatwe are frozen into it. We can change our mind. We don't necessarilyhave to announce those changes in our mind. I think basically thepublic has a right to as much information as they can [receive] atthis point. I don't think the leaks are really going to disappear,Paul. I think that you're going to get caught as I once did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they don't, I'll disappear soon!MS. TEETERS. Well, one gets cornered in an odd way. I oncegot caught--not here--but something got partially leaked and areporter called me up and said "X happened." And I said "No, it wasX+1," and I immediately realized that I'd done the wrong thing. If wehave this speculation out there, we're going to get these wrongstories. And the temptation then becomes very great on people tocorrect those wrong stories.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.MS. TEETERS. We announce discount rate changes; we announcechanges in reserve requirements because we have to. I don't see thatthis is greatly different from that. Under interest rate targetingthey found out pretty well where we were. I think they have correctlyinterpreted what we've changed to this time around, with some help.-58-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is noleaks.MS. TEETERS. I have heardoutside the System.MR. BOEHNE. I have an open mind on the issue of releasingthe directive. If it were up to me, I'm not sure how I would comedown. But I do have a question. Suppose the directive that theCommittee just approved were released this afternoon. What would thatreally tell the market? It says that the M2 [growth consistent withour objectives] is around 9-1/2 percent; there may be a little messagethere. It says that the funds rate range is 6 to 10 percent. Andthen it has a lot of other gobbledygook that could mean a lot ofdifferent things. Maybe somebody could just answer my question.Suppose the directive were released this afternoon. What kind ofinformation would that really convey? Or would there just beincreased speculation on what that directive really means in anoperational sense? How much would we have bought in terms ofsatisfying the public's and the press's appetite for knowledge aboutwhat we're doing?MR. CORRIGAN. I think one thing we would buy is inquiriesfor more information.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think you have [a point]--a lot more.MR. CORRIGAN. If they see the directive, they are going tosay: "Well, I want to see the forecast that it is based on and allthe rest of it."MR. MORRIS. What if we were in a situation where the economyhad picked up for a while? If we had announced a 6 to 10 percentfunds rate range after one meeting and we announced immediately afterthe next one that our range was now 8 to 13 percent, what sort ofmarket reaction would you expect in that kind of situation?MR. PARTEE. Very little trading below 8 percent.MR. FORD. You're positing that the band would be widened atboth ends.-59-11/16/82MR. PARTEE. He said 8 to 13 percent.MR. BOEHNE. I suspect what the Committee would do is that itwould gravitate toward even more vague directives.MR. MORRIS. Precisely.MR. BOEHNE. And then there would be a hidden meaning, whichwe'd all understand but the directive that we'd publish would give usso much flexibility that we could drive a truck through it a couple oftimes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Again, I think it would invite a lot ofprobing at the bottom [to determine] what the real decision was.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, that's the question I'm asking.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I share your instinct.MR. RICE. Won't they do that now?MR. BOYKIN. In fairness to Nancy, her argument, though, isthat publication might tend to cause something that we were trying tomake happen anyway happen just a little sooner.MR. GRAMLEY. If it happened in a nice smooth fashion, thatwould be all right. I would not worry much about immediate release ifI were quite sure we were going to stay with the operating procedureswe now have. But we were talking earlier today about what will happenif [banks] begin to [pay] interest on all types of money. And I thinkthe answer to that is that we would have the same kind of problemtargeting on M2 that we now have on M1. It would make it very, verydifficult to do. And we may end up deciding that, in fact, what wehave to do is target on interest rates. And if we start targeting oninterest rates and say that this month, by golly, our interest ratetarget is 1 percentage point lower, the markets are going to goabsolutely bananas. And I'm not sure that's what we want.MR. PARTEE. I didn't think you'd ever say that, Lyle.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the whole problem would be that we wouldcome up with a bunch of mush that could mean anything.MR. MORRIS. And we'd get to the point where we were back inthe Martin years.MR. PARTEE. If we got back to an interest rate target and wecouldn't put the target in the directive, we wouldn't be saying much.But that's a big if. It seems to me very likely that we'll alwayshave some proviso on interest rate movements. I certainly am totallydisenchanted about interest rate forecasting and I don't think I'llever return to it. But I think we'd have some proviso. And it would-60-11/16/82be measured relative to some objective performance indicator--maybenot money or maybe not even credit, Frank, but some objectiveindicator.MR. MORRIS. If you eliminate both of those, you don't havean awful lot left!MR. PARTEE. You have the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Congress would just tell us to targetinterest rates also.MS. TEETERS. I can't foresee that we're going to make anyradical change, even as much as 2 or 3 percentage points, at any givenmeeting. Even when we targeted interest rates, I think the most weever moved [the funds rate] was 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point. [Undercurrent procedures] we've been moving it a percentage point in a 400basis point range. We gradually move them up and down; I don't seethat we're going to get major market shocks or anything of that sort.We did have one major market shock and that occurred when we changedto reserve targeting and a [wide] band on the interest rate target.And the market survived; it was shocked but it did survive. And thenit settled down within the space of about a week. So, I don't seethat we would be giving away that much information.MR. MORRIS. But the kind of problem I'm concerned about isthis: Let's say that we're in a period of uncertainty.MS. TEETERS. We always are.MR. MORRIS. Well, suppose we think that whatever we aretargeting on is going to strengthen greatly between meetings, butwe're not sure. So, we give the Manager a wide funds range in whichto operate and he is supposed to use that range if the target showsgreat strength and not use it if it doesn't. In that case we would bepublishing a much higher upper limit, and the market would be likelyto move quickly toward that limit. Then if the events did not occurto justify the move, the Manager would not move the funds rate. Thenthe market would be stuck up here, and it would have to come downagain. This would produce increased instability in the money market.MS. TEETERS. There couldn't be much more instability than wehave right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I tend to agree with that, but I retainthis great hope that it is going to settle down some day.MR. BLACK. If we ever get into contemporaneous accountingand we really are targeting total reserves and controlling totalreserves--11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we have any reserves left at thatpoint!MR. BLACK. That's an "if." If we have a very wide federalfunds rate range, I wouldn't worry about telling the market except forone thing, and I think that's the first argument against it. I'm verysympathetic to what Nancy says, but [I don't like] the idea ofpolitical pressure being exerted upon the Committee to change beforethe policy is fully implemented. And asking anyone who has dissentedto justify his dissent when there's [as yet] no [written] explanationas to why he or she dissented in that directive, I think would be verydivisive. That is what bothers me, although all my predilections, ofcourse, are for releasing it because I hope we do get to that kind oftotal reserve targeting some day.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me point out that we live in a world,a Washington world anyway, in which somebody has to trot up andtestify about last month's consumer price index, which has no policycontent at all. If we are going to announce our decisions after aFederal Open Market Committee meeting, I don't think it would be verylong before we had a congressional hearing scheduled that afternoon.MR. BLACK. That's what really worries me. That's the verypoint that tips me against releasing it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles.MR. BALLES. If I could respond first to Bob's concern: If Idissent or somebody else dissents, that would come out immediatelybefore the explanation came out as to why others had voted the otherway. The way our minutes of action come out now--if we can keep themin that abbreviated form, not citing individual views--I could see thedirective plus those minutes of actions being published on very shortnotice. And in my view--you might not agree--that would take care ofthe particular problem you were mentioning.MR. BLACK. Yes, that would be a lot better.MR. BALLES. To return to the various points that Nancy ismaking: I sent around a memo generally supporting her proposal, asyou may remember. It has occurred to me that there is another reasonfor supporting immediate release, but originally I was reluctant toput it in writing. I'm even reluctant to mention it now, but I'mgoing to nevertheless. It is bad enough to have leaks of the type wehad, say, in The Washington Post on October 8, but even worse in myopinion is the risk of a leak we may never hear about. And that issomebody with access to our policy record feeding it to a trader, aninvestor, or whatever. If anything like that ever happened and wasdisclosed, that would be such a major black eye to us that it wouldmake the leaks recently pale by comparison.-62-11/16/82MR. GRAMLEY. When that sort of thing has happened withgovernment statistics, though, the word gets around. The word getsaround because it has a market effect and other people in the marketsbegin to learn about it and they call in. I agree with you that itwould be a terrible black eye. But as far as I know, there is noreason to think that that would ever happen.MR. BALLES. I hope you're right, Lyle. I'm not all thatpositive myself. For example, though I don't have all the numberswith me--I wish I'd brought them--and I'm not sure how much they wouldprove implicitly what happened, my recollection is that the very dayafter our last FOMC meeting, Wednesday, October 6th, there was a majorrise in bond prices and stock prices.MR. PARTEE. Starting at 3 p.m. in the afternoon.MR. BALLES. Yes, exactly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MR. BALLES. And I'm adding 2 and 2 and getting 4.MR. MORRIS. There was a statement by the Secretary of theTreasury on Wednesday.MR. PARTEE. No, that was Thursday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're talking about Wednesday?MR. BALLES. Yes, sir.MR. PARTEE. The very next day, we had an afternoon rally.In fact, I went around to Joe Coyne and said "What's up?"MR. COYNE. The Secretary of the Treasury's comments were onWednesday morning.SPEAKER(?). Yes, they were.MR. MORRIS. Wednesday morning they were on the telerate.MR. RICE. Peter, isn't it true that you get calls frompeople in the market saying that they know that other people havegotten privileged information?MR. STERNLIGHT. We sometimes get calls that some statisticalrelease from Commerce or somewhere is out early, yes.MR. GRAMLEY. That is the sort of thing I was referring to.When we have heard that, we've typically heard back from the market asto what the information is all about and where it probably came from.-63-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these are the suspicions that I'vehad reported to me recently, more or less casually, but they areworrisome. They are statistical, such as what the money figures aregoing to be tomorrow. The last one was what the M2 figure was goingto be. Just to clarify what I know about this last episode: I hadbreakfast with the Secretary of the Treasury the morning after themeeting, as I do every week. The only thing I told him concerningwhat we had discussed was that we were going to put a lot less weighton M1 because of all the problems he knew about. We had a very short,two-minute or so discussion; he knew what the problem was. I alsosaid I was going to explain this to the public on Friday because Iwould be going to the Business Council and it would be a goodopportunity to put it in the right perspective. Two hours later, it'son the tape, because he literally walked out of that breakfast andwent to a meeting of the dealer bank association--of all things, apublic meeting--and said something about it. He said something vagueabout it when he was asked a question. What he said was accurate.But there it was. And then he didn't say anything else. Then KenBacon was snooping around. I don't know, but Joe Coyne's story isthat Ken Bacon was speculating on this privately, as many of thesethings go, and assumed that we might have to come to that decision.It got confirmed by what the Secretary of the Treasury said and he ranwith the story. He may not have had any other leak. The article waspretty accurate except for the headline, which said the FederalReserve was easing or something. That wasn't the point. That isobviously not what I wanted to say. But except for that firstsentence, it was a pretty accurate story. My speculation is that onereporter got something in the paper, which wasn't itself all thatdamaging, and it sent the other bloodhounds on the scent. They thengot more substantive comments directly, obviously, out of the FederalReserve. And that was the damaging thing, really. I was upset enoughabout the Secretary of the Treasury's performance and that story, butthe really damaging policy story was the one the next day, whichobviously did come from the Federal Reserve. I think it's a perfectexample of how one leak generates another.MR. CORRIGAN. That's the problem. In terms of the argumentthat releasing the directive would take care of the leak problem, I'mconcerned that it will work the other way. If we put out thedirective on the day of the meeting, in the form in which it is nowwritten, we inevitably are going to get reporters snooping aroundasking "What does this really mean?" and trying to getinterpretations. And we will end up with more confusion and not less.MR. BALLES. Not if we don't talk to them.MS. TEETERS. That's right. We don't have to take theircalls.MR. CORRIGAN. That's easy to say. But over a period oftime--say we've put an absolute restriction on talking to the pressfor a week or something like that--that doesn't solve the problem.11/16/82MS. TEETERS. It would solve the problem though, Jerry,because by Friday it's a non-story.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know.MR. MARTIN. No, anything about the Fed is a continuingstory. This is a continuing saga of the mysterious--MR. FORD. Wait a minute. I have to defend Nancy on this.The logic of it has to be that at the end of a month--with our nextmeeting only being a month away--they will have it. But somewherebetween releasing it the same day and after one month, it becomes anon-story. That is witnessed by the fact that we usually don't getstories about the minutes when we release them.MR. MARTIN. Yes, but by that time we've had another meeting.MR. PARTEE. Our theory on the [release date], though, Bill,is that the directive is no longer current. We don't release it untilafter the next meeting has occurred and there is another directive.MR. CORRIGAN. Until we've had another meeting.MR. PARTEE. So that's an old directive.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the fact that somebody got someinformation and put it in the press did not reduce interest in thequestion of what was going on. It intensified it enormously. I thinkif we release the directive, which has in it some rather mysteriouslanguage about M2 and the fed funds rate ranges, and the language ischanged a little--if instead of "is" it says "remains" and "unusuallygreat" becomes "substantial"--then the phones will begin to ring offthe wall. People will ask: "What does this mean? Did you guys cavein or not?" It just isn't going to change that problem at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a growth rate figure there of x,so they will look at every figure. They will see if we are above orbelow X and ask if we are going to tighten up next week or three daysfrom now or, if not, why not? That's what the directive says.MS. TEETERS. They do it anyway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They do it less, surely, now.MR. GUFFEY. I don't agree with those who say that releasingthe directive will avoid the leaks. I agree with those who say thatit might even increase speculation. But I'm a bit troubled with theproposal that we release the directive early, based upon the fact thatwe think we had a leak after the last meeting. I don't think that wecould control leaks by releasing the directive immediately after ameeting. I think the issue that has given rise to the discussiontoday can't be cured by an early release. I'd also add a detail:-65-11/16/82That we don't know how we are going to operate in the future and howthat directive might look and how we might have to move one way or theother in the intermeeting period. As a result of that, it seems to meto be paramount that we maintain that kind of flexibility. If wecan't control the leak problem by early release, then I would adopt amotto that has been used by others in the past and that is "If itain't broke, don't fix it." I would continue to do what we are doing,since we can't control the leak problem in my view, and I would notopt for early release.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope we can control the leak problem.We may not control it by that device, and it may aggravate it, butthis institution has had a very good record on not leaking.MR. GUFFEY. I'm just making the point that I don't think wewould cure it by early release--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I just wanted to clarify that.MR. GUFFEY. --so why try to cure something we can't cure?MS. TEETERS. But this is the second one this year. Therewas a leak between the end of June and the 20th of July on theHumphrey-Hawkins report. This is the second time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right.MR. FORD. I hear rumors--I don't know because I wasn't here--that we've had sporadic leaks over the years. You may be right thatwe have fewer leaks than, say, Treasury, but haven't we had problemswith leaks of this type for many years?MR. PARTEE. Very occasionally. It has been very rare.MR. FORD. Are you saying there has never been a leak untilthe last two times?MR. PARTEE. No, there have been--MR. GUFFEY. There have been a lot of other instances. Iremember when Dr. Burns was Chairman that we did have a leak or asuspected leak, and certain members of the staff were excluded for, Ithink, two meetings.MR. ROOS. If you do this, you'll deprive a lot of retiredFederal Reserve people of a very important source of income, Mr.Chairman, trying to figure out what you folks are doing!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're wrong. I think it wouldincrease the market. There would be text-analysis as well; we'd getall the English majors as well as the---6611/16/82SPEAKER(?). They couldn't use English majors, Paul!MR. WALLICH. I have been sympathetic to this proposal in thepast. It has a lot of merit. What gives me pause is the argument inthis memorandum about the impact on the policy process. We have someexperience with open meetings. The public sits right there. Theyscribble, but they're not allowed to speak and, as far as I can see,have no real impact on our deliberations. It certainly doesn'tembarrass me to say what I say. I have a sense that if I knew thenext day there might be a hearing or that there might be a great pressreaction, I would find it more difficult both to think and to decide,[particularly] to decide to do something drastic. Most of the timethere's nothing to it. It's the critical instances where one worries.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me put this in extreme form. Youreferred to these quiet little meetings we have in public. I'm notsure it has no effect at all, but those involve relativelynoncontroversial issues by and large. We discuss consumer credit andsome arcane regulations. Let me go on the other side of the spectrumwhere I've had a certain amount of experience. Those DIDC meetingsare a zoo. Anybody who does not think the substantive result iscontrolled by the fact that those meetings are held in public doesn'thave his head screwed on right. Now, we are not talking here abouthaving a public meeting, but I'm afraid it's a step in that direction.In a public meeting one cannot make effective arguments or explorealternatives. And you cannot get anybody to change his or her mindonce they have made a statement. And you end up with miserabledecisions, in my humble judgment. And that is [true of the DIDCmeetings] obviously because they are filled with enormous lobbyinginterests. You can imagine what interest monetary policy would have--not quite interest groups, and maybe that would diffuse them, butpolitical groups. If we ever got to that point, we could forget abouthaving any coherent policy except by subterfuge. Somebody would talkbeforehand and would announce that this is what the policy is going tobe and everybody has agreed to say yes or no. In my opinion, that'sthe way those things have to work, if [the group] is going to make anintelligent decision at all.MR. MARTIN. I don't believe that the extreme public scrutinyof our every word and our every action and the pseudo-actions that areattributed to us has made us a better functioning organization. Iagree with those of you who say that immediate publication of thismysterious [document] would heighten the tension. The staff's memoindicates that the actual individual votes would be recited, and thatwould focus attention on individual differences. These are operatingstatements; they attempt to be helpful operationally. The public'sright to know, I think, extends to our objectives, our performance,our structure, our composition as individuals here, and ourbackgrounds. The public interest is not endowed in the operationalaspects of the organization. That's a different category. Theapproaches that we are taking to reduce leaks of information are11/16/82separate topics from this release [and putting us] in the spotlight.I would lean against the immediate release.MS. TEETERS. Well, Pres, we already have computer systemsthat ring a bell and turn on a red light every time we enter themarket in various--MR. MARTIN. Is that good?MS. TEETERS. Well, it exists. They are not going to get ridof it. My question to Peter is: Would it make any difference in theoperation of the Desk?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't really think so. There would betimes when an immediate release would have a market impact that wemight not want. At times it could help to bring about the desiredthrust in policy earlier. I may be out of order saying this, buthaving been associated with this for many years and having filed oneof the statements in that Merrill suit in which I took a position onthe ill effects of immediate release, I would say, after thinkingabout it long and hard for many years, that I don't think I could makethat same kind of statement today because of the different nature ofthe directive.MR. PARTEE. I did the same thing for the Board, Peter, and Ihave the same feeling. I couldn't support it now.MR. AXILROD. I did the same thing, but I haven't changed myview.MR. BLACK. Two flexible people and one inflexible one!SPEAKER(?). You people with conscience!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it's worthwhilecarrying this on any further. I don't detect a strong consensus topublish.MR. FORD. I want to call facetiously for a vote, so I couldbe recorded as voting with Nancy on this.MR. RICE. I would like to propose facetiously that we put itout for comment.SPEAKER(?). For a year!MR. WALLICH. It's very desirable to discuss this. Maybe weshould take it up again at a future time when things are not quite sotense. I think we are doing something that we shouldn't be doing ifthere weren't strong reasons. We owe the public. That is the keymore than the leak issue is the key. But I think the reasons againstit are persuasive at this time.-68-11/16/82MS. TEETERS. Henry, may I say that, given the center stagethat monetary policy has moved into in the past 15 years, I doubt thatwe will ever find the time when pressures are not on us again--when wewill be operating in a relatively quiet back-water sort of way.MR. RICE. I was just going to ask if the Bundesbank does nothold a news conference after each meeting in which the result was somechange in policy. If they change policy, they have a news conferenceimmediately after the meeting. Is that not true?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I feel as if I'm an expert on this,having consulted with my counterpart on this precise point. I'm notsure I know every detail. They do often have a news conference. Buttypically they are announcing a Lombard rate change or a discount ratechange or something like that. Of course, we announce that, too, ifwe make a change. That is the typical reason for their having a newsconference. If I remember correctly, they don't always have one evenfor those purposes. They specifically do not discuss open marketoperations, or their equivalent of open market operations, except in arare instance, which is the issue here. That is what I asked themabout. In fact, it has never occurred to them, according to him, tomake a public announcement--except on the rare occasion when they wantto--that they are going to provide more of less liquidity to thebanking system. Sometimes they do that, but they don't do it as amatter of course.MR. BOEHNE. I was going to add on to Henry's statement. Ithink the reasons are convincing to a lot of people around the tablefor not releasing it. I suspect that we would have a hard timeconvincing outsiders of the validity of those reasons. I think we alldid hide behind the ideal that somehow [the release of the directive]would help rich people and give succor to the speculators, and I thinkthat served the purpose for us. If we stood up in public and tried togive a convincing speech on why we ought to do it [the way we do], Ithink it would be difficult. That doesn't mean that I'm notsympathetic to not releasing it; I'm saying that if we tried toconvince somebody from the outside, it would be pretty much an up-hillproposition.MR. WALLICH. The not helping speculators is a better publicposture. It is a less good argument.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. Look, this memorandum,Mr. Altmann is reminding me, has no indication of confidentiality. Iwouldn't like to see it spread around simply because the argumentsthat seem to us persuasive may seem, precisely for your reasons, lesspersuasive to others.MR. FORD. That says a lot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think it simply says that ourinterests may not entirely coincide with theirs. I would even go so-69-11/16/82far as to say that we presumably have the public interest closer atheart than all those people who have reasons for wanting to see adifferent answer.MR. BOEHNE. It says that central bankers have a wisdom thatexceeds those of the more normal few.MR. CORRIGAN. Is there any question of that?MR. BOEHNE. No, not at all. I said it as a statement offact!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know as we can carry thisany further. I suspect we may want to return to it someday. Maybesomebody can come up with a more effective argument on one side or theother and dispose of the issue definitively; I doubt it. I'm[pressed] for time myself. I have a legislative update, if you wantto hear it. [Our FOMC agenda is completed.]END OF MEETING-70-