Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 29-30, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., beginning on Monday, March 29, 1982, at 4:00 p.m. andcontinuing on Tuesday, March 30, 1982, at 9:45 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, 1/ Vice ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMr. Martin, 2/ Vice Chairman designate, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Mannion, 3/ Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, Economist1/ Entered the meeting following the approval of the minutes of actions takenat the meeting on February 1-2, 1982.2/ Entered the meeting on Tuesday prior to the action to adopt the domesticpolicy directive.3/ Attended Tuesday session only.3/29-30/82Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin, Keran, Koch,Parthemos, Prell, Siegman, Truman, and Ziesel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof ClevelandMessrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Mullineaux,Scheld, and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, Kansas City,Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMessrs. Sandberg, and Soss, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Bank of New York- 2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 29-30, 1982March 29, 1982--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have some items to take care of at thebeginning of this meeting. First, the election of officers. We needto nominate a Chairman and a Vice Chairman in case you--MR. WALLICH. Well, I shall undertake this heavyresponsibility. I propose and nominate Paul A. Volcker.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there a second?MR. PARTEE. I'll second that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other nominations? If not,we assume we have a Chairman and I'm the Chairman. We need a ViceChairman.MR. WALLICH. Well, I propose and nominate in his absenceAnthony M. Solomon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apparently, Anthony M. Solomon missed theshuttle. I don't know whether that's appropriate for a Vice Chairman!Do we have a second?MR. PARTEE. I'll second that.MR. BOEHNE. Is this a rigged election?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I hear no objection, we will proceed.I have a list of a good many staff members as proposed officers that Iwould ask the Secretary to read, including Mr. Altmann as Secretary.MR. ALTMANN.Staff Director, Stephen AxilrodSecretary, Murray AltmannAssistant Secretary, Normand BernardDeputy Assistant Secretary, Nancy SteeleGeneral Counsel, Michael BradfieldDeputy General Counsel, James OltmanAssistant General Counsel, Robert MannionEconomist, James KichlineAssociate Economists from the Board's staff:Edward Ettin;Michael Prell;Charles Sigmann;Edwin Truman; andJoseph Zeisel.Associate Economists from the Reserve Banks:John Davis, Cleveland;Richard Davis, New York;Michael Keran, San Francisco;Donald Koch, Atlanta; andJames Parthemos, Richmond.3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would someone like to move those?MR. PARTEE. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no objections, we will havethe officers duly installed as of this moment. We need a Reserve Bankto operate the System Account.MR. WALLICH. I propose the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a second?MR. PARTEE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With no objection. We need a Manager forDomestic Operations and a Manager for Foreign Operations; perhapssomeone would like to nominate both at the same time.MR. WALLICH. I nominate Peter Sternlight and Sam Cross.MR. PARTEE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Objections? In the absence of anyobjections, it's unanimous. I'm skipping now to the end of the agendayou have--we might as well get this all out of the way--to the reviewof the domestic authorization and the foreign currency instruments.Nobody has proposed any changes in those. Does anybody have anyobjections or questions on that second, or third part? If not,hearing no objections, they are approved. As for the authority forlending securities from the System Open Market Account, we've beenrenewing this for some years. Any comments? I take it there was somesuggestion earlier to make this permanent. Does anybody want to talkto that point?MR. PARTEE. To make what permanent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The lending [authorization] that now hasto be approved every [year].MR. PARTEE. I thought we had to make a determination onthis, Mr. Chairman, as to whether it is necessary [for the effectivefunctioning of] the market. Isn't that right, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right. I think the judgment could bemade [that it's necessary] on a continuing basis. I don't know thatthere is anything in the legal basis on which it was set up thatrequired an annual determination of that kind and, therefore, I havesuggested in my memorandum to the Committee, which Mr. Bradfieldsupported, that it could be incorporated in the continuingauthorization for operations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we approve that every year anyway,don't we?MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right, yes.3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As nearly as I can see, no major policyissue is involved. It gets approved every year anyway. I guess it'sjust a question of which document we put it in.MR. BLACK. We might have to bring up only one agenda itemnext year!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the net difference involvedhere. I have no strong conviction on this point. Does anybody haveany conviction?MR. BLACK. I don't see any reason for not doing it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to propose it?MR. BLACK. I so propose.MR. MORRIS. Second it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we have no objection,--MR. PARTEE. I take it anyone who wanted to question it couldput it on the agenda?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My understanding is that it would beapproved every year anyway. It's just a question of what documentwe're putting it in.MR. STERNLIGHT. It's also the question of whether it islooked at separately by the Committee or considered as part of thisentire authorization for domestic operations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Henceforth it will be part of theauthorization. And we look at it separately anyway. That isapproved. The final item is a review of the agreement with Treasuryto warehouse foreign currencies. I have had no comments on thatreported to me. I hear no objections to the warehousing agreement.That will be approved. I guess I skipped over the foreign currencyauthorization, the foreign currency directive, and the proceduralinstructions. On the review of those, again, I have heard nocomments. If there is no objection at this time, they will beapproved. So, all this is unanimously approved. We can now be very,very approving of the minutes, I guess. Do I have a motion on theminutes?MR. PARTEE. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, the minutes areapproved. With that out of the way, we will have a report on foreigncurrency operations. Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions?MR. WINN. What is the status of the Polish financing?Doesn't that come up at the end of this month again?3/29-30/82MR. CROSS. I must confess I've been away for a few days, butI believe the Polish financing was to be signed as it affected the1981 maturities. And I assume that it has been signed.MR. TRUMAN. No, next week.MR. CROSS. Oh, is it next week?MR. TRUMAN. They were supposed to have paid it off as ofFriday but there's a newspaper report, which I think is correct, thatthere never has been complete agreement among the banks about exactlywhat has to be paid. The reports I have seen suggested that there wassome scope for double-counting, which seems to have been reduced.Interestingly enough, most of the reports of leaders of the bankingconsortium on the other side of the Atlantic have suggested that itwould be signed on April 6, which is next Tuesday. And then thequestion is: What happens next?MS. TEETERS. That concerns only the interest payments for1981?MR. TRUMAN. That just completes the rescheduling of theprivate debt for 1981. The problem had been to bring the 1981interest payments current. Now, of course, we are 3 months into 1982,so it might lead to some questions as to whether this is an artificialgain.MR. CROSS. As of about a week ago they still were notcurrent as far as we could tell from the banks. They had paid offlarge amounts of it, but most of the banks indicated that they hadn'tquite settled everything. The assumption seems to be that they willmeet those payments and be ready for the April 6 payment to cover1981.MR. WALLICH. Sam, could you expand a little on yourstatement that other countries felt that when they sold the dollar ithad little effect, but that if the United States engaged in the sameoperation, it would have a major effect on market psychology?MR. CROSS. Well, they seem to feel that if there is acoordinated effort, it will have considerably more effect in modifyingthe market psychology and in indicating that there will be a sustainedeffort to keep the rates from moving too strongly in the directionthey're now moving. One certainly gets the impression that among themajor European countries, Germany does not seem to be intervening verymuch at present and Switzerland has intervened relatively modestly.Japan, as I say, has done dollars of intervention;still, that's not massive. And they do indicate to us in theirdiscussions a feeling that if there is to be any sustained andsuccessful effort to affect these rates, it does require U.S.participation as well.MR. WALLICH. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I follow your explanation asto why the yen is so weak. Would you--3/29-30/82MR. CROSS. The yen is weak. I'm not sure I have anextremely compelling explanation. One factor has been that, whilewe're all expecting the Japanese to have a very large current accountsurplus this year, the recent figures have not been that rosy. Theyhave not shown a very strong current account position in the pastcouple of months. Another factor, I think, is that people areconcerned that the rest of the world is going to take steps to reduceaccess to Japanese goods. The EC has talked about bringing thismatter up under GATT and they have brought it up under GATT. Thereis, of course, legislation in our Congress which would apply abilateral reciprocity rule to it. Now, whether these are the factorsthat have resulted in this effect, I can't say. The yen has beenvery, very weak and I'm not sure those explanations would becompletely convincing. But they are factors in it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a lot of things to worry about andthat's one that I worry about a bit.MR. WINN. Could I raise one more question, Mr. Chairman?What's the status of Mexico, with the devaluation?MR. CROSS. Well, the devaluation by Mexico was certainlyregarded initially as very useful--a successful move in that therewere reflows of capital back into Mexico and a reversal of thedollarization that Mexico experienced. So, during the first few weeksthere was a very rosy and successful view about it. But there hasbeen a notable lack of a supporting program and increasing concernabout the lack of such a program. At the present time there has beena decree to increase wages by really very, very large amounts--amounts which almost nobody thinks can be justified by thedevaluation. Mexico had a very large increase in the minimum wage inJanuary of 33 percent. Another 30 percent has been proposed; theemployers haven't yet agreed to all of this. So, that adds up to a[cumulative] 73 percent wage increase in the first 2 or 3 months ofthe year. And everybody is beginning to wonder how long the peso canremain at the level it now is with these kinds of wage increases andthe expectation that inflation will run at 50 percent or so this yearat a time when U.S. inflation is 7-1/2 percent or so. So, it appearsthat the initial reaction, which was so favorable, is now giving wayto second thoughts. The reflows are perhaps tailing off and there issome concern about what is going to happen in the months ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What has the recent inflation rate been inMexico?MR. CROSS. In Mexico? The numbers that I received were 5percent for the month of January, 4 percent for the month of February,and an expectation of 8 percent for the month of March. That's [over]17 percent in the first 3 months, so most of the people who are makingestimates have estimates for the year of between 45 and 65 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was it last year?MR. TRUMAN. The first 2 months of the year were before thedevaluation.MR. CROSS. Yes. The 8 percent reflected the devaluation.Last year it was about 30 percent.3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions or comments? If not,we'll go to the domestic open market operations.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is so much talk in the market aboutthis April [M1] issue, why don't you tell us what you know aboutApril, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. Well, I was going to include a bit of it in mystatement, Mr. Chairman, but our underlying estimate for April issomewhere between 8 and 10 percent, as you can see from the Bluebook.In our seasonal adjustment methodology, we have followed stricturesgiven to us by the various academic groups who looked at our seasonalmethodology--the last one being a group headed by Jeffrey Moore andincluding such people as the former Presidents of the AmericanStatistical Association, and the august Mr. Box of Box-Jenkins. Andthey say avoid judgment. They also asked that it be reproducibleoutside and that we take into account a technique called an Arimamethod, which projects the unadjusted data for the year ahead on thebasis of the past performance of the data to eliminate the revisionsin the seasonal factor by getting a better sense of '82. So, thisyear we adopted the X-11 Arima method.MR. ROOS. Wait 'til that gets out! [Laughter]MR. AXILROD. If we had not adopted that method but hadcontinued with our old X-11 without the Arima method, we would beallowing for about 7 percentage points more growth in April than weare now. If we had instead used the present method but unleashed ourjudgmental man, Mr. Fry, we would have allowed for 2 percentage pointsmore growth. So, that presents a range perhaps of where we might beerring on predicting too low a growth. There are some odds, Mr.Chairman, that what we have done is correct, however.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're infinitesimal!MR. AXILROD. I would point out that in that case one wouldlook more at what we have judged to be the intrinsic error in theseasonal adjustment process. And at the 95 percent level, that's plusor minus 6 percentage points in any month, at an annual rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod can only talk in annual rates,I'm beginning to think.MR. AXILROD. So, in assessing the forthcoming situation forthe Committee, we have tilted toward thinking that the seasonal mightbe understating the actual seasonal increase because of thedifficulties of '80 and '81, and thus we are projecting 8 to 10percent growth rates. If you think that we have understated by 5percentage points, that would mean we're projecting 3 to 5 percentgrowth in some real sense. Now, if we are understating, it's probablythe case that May and June will be a lot lower. It looks as if Mayand June would be mostly the times when, whatever error in theseasonal in this period, the curves would be taken out. April is aparticularly difficult time.3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why would it be May and June? Whywouldn't it be March and February?MR. AXILROD. Just looking at the data judgmentally, itlooked as if that's when it would be. April is a difficult monthbecause we had the credit control program in 1980 and we had a verysharp decrease; and in 1981 we had a very sharp increase, part ofwhich probably can be attributed to the preceding easing of monetarypolicy when interest rates went down some. The machines have a verydifficult time with these extreme variations and we have done some[judgmental] intervention to smooth it in 1980, and these resultsreflect those interventions. Also, the machine throws out 1981, bythe way.MR. MORRIS. Very good machine!MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] markets seem to be right.MR. AXILROD. Well, I feel rather agnostic about it. I amnot all that certain. If we follow the advice of a group of academicexperts, at times we may be right. And we don't want to discount that[possibility].MR. PARTEE. It's interesting. Are they aware of the factthat we've made these adjustments to our procedure? It seems theseadjustments to procedure would lead one to expect a larger rise inApril because of what has happened [in the] seasonal.MR. AXILROD. Well, we have indicated how we make ourseasonal adjustments to this. We explained the X-11 Arima. But, ofcourse, the market has the same suspicions most of you and many on thestaff have: That this still isn't sufficient allowance for the Aprilseasonal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it makes us a little suspicious. IfI remember what you told me correctly, April in every year since 1975has been higher, seasonally adjusted.MR. AXILROD. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Except for 1980, which we threw out. Andthen 1981 gets thrown out by the machines.MR. AXILROD. Well, we didn't throw 1980 out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The last two years aren't in there. Andit looks as if--MR. AXILROD. We didn't throw out 1980, Mr. Chairman. Andthere is really a technical problem. We intervened through a model tosmooth through and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] at the moment now.MR. AXILROD. No, it lowered it. In effect, it put in amodest growth rate, which made the machine doubt the accelerated trendin '76 to '79.3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're worse off than if you hadn't. Itjust would have thrown it out if you had left it alone.MR. GRAMLEY. Is this specific seasonal for April in thepublic domain? Is that published?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. So the people in the market know what thatnumber is?MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes; that's right.MR. GRAMLEY. Are you not saying that, although we expectsomething in the 8 to 9 percent range, we should relax until it's 12to 14 percent or something like that?MR. AXILROD. Well, I would relax myself if it were between 8and 10 percent. I think you're getting on to strong policy judgmentsbeyond that. I would not really want to give any technical advice onthat particular point.MR. BLACK. What kind of figures would it take for the marketto relax?MR. AXILROD. Again, it's hard to psychoanalyze people. ButI would assume that they would understand that 8 to 10 percent mightbe the peculiarities of April and the difficulties of seasonallyadjusting in the face of tax payments, refunds, and all that.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know if it's so much a particularlevel. They might feel relaxed about 8 to 10 percent, but it's morewhether they get some sense of how we're reacting to it that wouldmake them feel easy or uneasy about it. I think even 8 to 10 percentcould bother them if they felt it was causing us to keep reservesupplies more restricted.MR. BLACK. Peter, what do you think the range of theirprojections is now?MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't be surprised if it were aroundthis 8 to 10 percent range, but I haven't really heard enough to givea good accurate answer.MR. BOEHNE. With the expectation so widespread that April isgoing to be a month with a bulge, wouldn't there be some discountingtaking place at this point?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, there is; it has been in the process oftaking place these last couple of weeks or maybe even earlier. Butit's partly this concern that there will be a big bulge that isleading some participants to have an expectation now of higher ratesin the next few weeks.MR. BOEHNE. Do you think the market is as M1 oriented as italways has been or are there increasing doubts, at least among somepeople, about M1? Are there doubts in the marketplace, too,[unintelligible]?3/29-30/82MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think they were impressed by theevidence of how the January situation was handled. They say thatthere was a bulge but that to some degree it was accommodated. Theyfeel it was reacted to in the sense that rates did rise, but theyfeel, too, that it wasn't such a strong reaction--that we were [not]just determined that virtually at all cost we had to push money growthback to path. And some of the comments that the Chairman made at thecongressional hearing, I think, supported that interpretation. Ithink they would expect a similar scenario if there were a bulge inApril. They would be looking to see whether we would accommodate thebulge to some degree in the expectation of having it unwind prettysoon afterward.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have to look alert but relaxed.When we get these bulges [unintelligible], affects the market reactionas to how they--MR. CORRIGAN. Steve, you mentioned this 8 to 10 percentfigure. What is the dollar increase in the not seasonally adjusted M1number in [unintelligible]?MR. AXILROD. Well, I don't think I have that with me. Ihave the seasonally unadjusted weekly pattern on another paper but Idon't have that with me.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's about 30 percent, isn't it,Steve?MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's 40 percent.MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, 40! I thought I saw 30 percent.MR. AXILROD. I don't have that; I can get it by tomorrow.MR. CORRIGAN. That's a very big number now.MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes.SPEAKER(?). Well, there's a huge social security thingcoming up again.MR. GUFFEY. If you were using the old method, Steve, whatwould April have come out to--17 18, 20 percent, or something largerthan that?MR. AXILROD. No, if we keep the same unadjusted increases wenow have and use the old X-11 method untampered by Arima, it would besomething like 7 percentage points less than this 8 to 10 at an annualrate.SPEAKER(?). If my understanding of that is right, it wouldbe 1 or 2 percent?MR. AXILROD. Well, that's a large number and we wouldn'thave used it. But that's what it would be if we didn't change ourunadjusted number. It allows for 7 percent at an annual rate moreincrease in money supply [for] the seasonal purposes alone. Insteadof the money supply increase unadjusted being 40 percent at an annual3/29-30/82rate in April it would have allowed for 47 percent. That's well abovewhat it has been.MR. GRAMLEY. The old method put that out? I thought I hadunderstood you to say the opposite at first.MR. AXILROD. No.MR. GRAMLEY. I thought you said the X-11 Arima methodassumes a larger seasonal bulge in April.MR. AXILROD. No, smaller.MR. PARTEE. That's the reason I asked if the market knew wewere doing all this. [If] not, they might conclude there's going tobe a large seasonally adjusted rise in April.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think the market knows it for thatreason. I think they believe it just [on the basis of] a moresimplistic assumption along the lines of: Well, it had gone up in 5or 6 of the last 7 years, so there's likely to be a big rise this yeartoo.MR. AXILROD. At present for demand deposits plus OCDs in1982 we're allowing for, in annual rates again, a 41.6 percentseasonal increase. In 1976 this was 35.9 percent; in 1977, it was39.8; in 1978, it was 43.0; in 1979, it was 43.7; we forget about1980; in 1981, it was 42.6; and in 1982, we have 41.6. Under thesevarious methods we could add to that 41.6 this 7 percentage points.As I say, our judgmental fellow would have added 2 points to that tomake it 43.6, or the same as in 1979, which is only 2 percent at anannual rate. If we took the extreme, it would be 7 percent.SPEAKER(?). And the one in the Bluebook forecast is whichnow?MR. AXILROD. Well, it's what we've been using--the publishedfigure.MR. CORRIGAN. So, roughly what you're saying here, in thecontext of the first two weeks in January, is that we have a situationwhere on a not seasonally adjusted basis we have 4 weeks out of the 52in the year that account for a multiple of what the money supply issupposed to grow in a year. Is that right?MR. AXILROD. Yes. Well, January took care of a good part ofthat.MR. CORRIGAN. That's absolutely crazy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Steve, does your Arima [seasonal] adjustment allowfor the change in the tax structure this year--that because of thechange in the tax laws we shouldn't have the borrowing that formerlyaccompanied the corporate tax bills and so forth?MR. AXILROD. I doubt it; it's really a time series analysis.-10-3/29-30/82MR. WINN. That is going to be a big change, I think, in theway it affects--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't allow for crediting of intereston NOW accounts either.MR. FORD. Yes, as I understand it, this Arima statisticaladaptation method makes no effort whatsoever to consider aninstitutional change, like a fundamental change in the tax law, thatimpacts during this particular period we're talking about. They'rejust attempting to take the knowledge from past cycles and apply thatbased on--MR. AXILROD. Well, if there were a very large fundamentalchange in the tax laws or tax structure that we could see would changethings, despite all our academic experts, we would do somethingjudgmentally [to adjust it]. But so far as we can tell from therefund estimates and the tax payment estimates, we're not confrontedwith that.MR. FORD. In that connection, Peter, we now have five monthsworth of data on the deficit and so far it is running about $2 billionbehind last year's deficit, is that right?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that's right.MR. FORD. And yet all of the revisions to the forecastsuggest that this fiscal year's deficits will be higher and higherwhile [actual results are] running behind. Obviously, with almosthalf the [fiscal] year gone, somebody is programming either a colossalexplosion of spending or a colossal reduction of tax receipts or somecombination of the two. What is your technique?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm sort of a victim of the expertswho give us those views, too. But, in fact, the fiscal expert at ourBank just went through an analysis of this and, even though thedeficit is running close to or slightly behind the previous year'sdeficit, he's still looking for a deficit of somewhat over $100billion for this year.SPEAKER(?). Over $100 billion?MR. STERNLIGHT. For this fiscal year it's about $108billion, I think. More of the tax reduction impact comes along latein the fiscal year--certainly in the after-July portion of it. Andthe defense build-up is a slow train to get moving, but once thatspending gets on its way--MR. FORD. If he says $108 billion and so far we're running$2 billion behind a $58 billion annual rate, that would mean a $50billion swing in the deficit in the last 7 months of the year. Itwould add approximately $7 to $8 billion per month of extra deficitfrom now on to average that, is that right?MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure of that.3/29-30/82MR. FORD. Well, if you go from $58 billion to $108 billion,that's $50 billion and there are only 7 months left to create theextra deficit, right?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I did just get his estimates of thequarterly financing needs of the Treasury, which include not only theunified budget deficit but the off-budget estimates. That was goingto be something like $13 billion in the April-June quarter and about$40 billion in the July-September quarter.MR. FORD. $40 billion? The end of [the year] is when itjust blows--SPEAKER(?). Well, it's partly seasonal, though.MR. PARTEE. What about that June 30th reduction? That'sworth about $35 billion, at an annual rate, which would be $9 billiona [quarter], or close to that. That would be a good deal of it rightthere.MR. AXILROD. Thus far in the first two quarters of thefiscal year, we have $70 billion out of our projected deficit of $111billion. That leaves a mere $41 billion to go and they're not goingto have a seasonal surplus. They're going to have a very smalldeficit in the second and third quarters of the year. And then in thefourth quarter of the fiscal year, the third quarter of the calendaryear, we get the tax decrease. It's not very difficult to get up over$100 billion.MR. KICHLINE. The second quarter is virtually zero. It's asmall negative in contrast to the usual surplus.MR. FORD. Surplus?MR. KICHLINE. And from a zero in the second quarter it goesto a $39 or $40 billion deficit in the final quarter of the fiscalyear, which is when the tax cut comes along. So it's a huge swinggoing from the spring into the summer months. I would note also thatthere's a bit of confusion among many analysts on why the deficitearly this year was not as large as anticipated. It is thought thatpart of it may be associated with the change in the tax law--namelythe increase in the [penalty] interest rate, inducing people to ponyup the money in January--because receipts in fact were running a gooddeal higher. So, apparently, it's in part associated with the changein the penalty rate for late [payments].SPEAKER(?). It's 20 percent.MR. KICHLINE. Right.MR. GRAMLEY. And part of the answer may lie in the trend ofthe deficit in the next two years. If you look at page I-8 in theGreenbook, [your projection of] the NIA account deficit started out at$74 billion, then $68 billion, then $46 billion, then $47 billion. Itwas on the way down. This time it's starting to go the other way.And that can make a big difference between where we are now relativeto where we were a year ago and how the annual totals add up.-12-3/29-30/82MR. FORD. I was just looking for something to be hopefulabout, but you're making me feel depressed.MR. STERNLIGHT. I have had the same hope, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Could I raise a question? Thinking about Peter'srecitation of the policy actions taken over the past months, and thenlooking back a bit over history, how do you answer the question: Hasthe policy caused or prevented short-run variability in monetarygrowth?MR. FORD. Yes, this question came up, not just from theusual monetarists but from a variety of sources when we had a hugegroup of people at our Atlanta conference. A number of them, likeLarry Klein, were very sympathetic to us. But it was remarkable howmany--not just the standard old line monetarists--had questions aboutthis. The way it came out from some of them was this: If you saythere will be wider variations in interest rates, should you try tocontrol the [monetary growth] path in some way to take some of thefluctuation out? Implicit in that statement is the hidden assumptionthat we're now successfully operating counter-cyclically in fine-tuning the economy, and they question whether that can be so. I guessthe question is: Do you really feel that you're working against theswings in rates so that if we somehow had smoothed the [monetarygrowth] path it would have produced more violent fluctuations ininterest rates than we've seen?MR. STERNLIGHT. That would be my expectation. If we triedto hold very rigidly to a path in weekly periods, let's say, we wouldget even more rate fluctuation. I find it very hard to answerPresident Winn's question about whether our actions contribute togreater or lesser variability in money growth. I think it probablydepends some on the time periods chosen. My feeling about it is thatlooking at periods of a couple of quarters at a time, let's say, whatwe're doing works in the direction of achieving the desired growthrates. Now, there could be things in our response mechanism itselfthat lead to some fluctuations of one or two months in character, justbecause we see a bulge and respond to it and that depresses growth amonth or two later. There could be that kind of cycling, but thatmight be a minor variation around the more underlying trend we'retrying to achieve.MR. AXILROD. We do have a number of people starting to work--they have been at it for about three weeks--on very detailedanalyses of the variability we've had since October '79. They aretrying to isolate what we can attribute to special credit controls andNOW accounts and are trying to relate the method of operations to anyelasticities in response to interest rate changes, with the aim ofseeing if the method involves greater fluctuations in both necessarilyor if it's an accidental product. I hope we will have some results toreport.MS. TEETERS. When do we expect to hit the debt limit now?MR. STERNLIGHT. In June or July maybe.-13-3/29-30/82SPEAKER(?). June.MR. STERNLIGHT. June. The expectation a month or two agohad been that we might hit it in May. But they were doing a littlebetter for a while, so I guess it has been pushed back to June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? Well, we willexpose you all to Mr. Kichline's forecast.MR. ALTMANN. We have to ratify the actions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we have to ratify the actions.SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's take a little time to discussthe forecast or raise any questions about it or put forward anydissenting or agreeing views.MR. MORRIS. I noted that the data available for March--commodity prices, initial claims for unemployment compensation, andthe stock market, all of which are leading indicators--showed anincreased weakness in March. That at least raises a question in mymind about whether the second quarter could be negative.MR. KICHLINE. Oh, I think it's possible. You're quitecorrect that those indicators--and we have really nothing else--pointto further weakness in the second quarter. The staff's forecast hasabout flat final sales, which is risky. All of the positive numberswe see result from a slower runoff of inventories, and forecastinginventories is currently messier than M1. So, I think there's a gooddeal of risk in the forecast and I would say it's primarily on thedown side. The one encouraging thing is that when you add up thevarious sectors, we're clearly not getting the major declines inspending that we saw earlier. But at this point it seems to me it'svery risky and we could have further to go before the economy, infact, turns up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, my question was going to bemuch the same as Frank's. Maybe I'll still ask it. Jim, in view ofthe concluding statement in your presentation about the rather grimoutlook for the federal deficit and what that implies for the level ofinterest rates, to what extent does your forecasting model--judgmentally adjusted or not--take into account how the high level ofreal interest rates, from which nobody can really see any near-termrelief, might inhibit or even abort the recovery that we wouldotherwise expect to have? That's my number one worry these days.MR. KICHLINE. Well, the one formal approach to this is usingthe econometric model, and for 1983 that model provides high levels of-14-3/29-30/82nominal and implied real rates as well. Actually, for 1983 the modelwould provide a bit more real growth than we have in the forecast. Ithink one of the real issues is the whole time pattern of this and themaintenance of what by 1983 would be implied real rates of interest inthe area of 10 percent or so, given our interest rate expectations.That situation is unlikely to persist; it will change at some point.The question is when. We don't have it changing in 1983, but I dothink you're quite correct in asking: How does [economic growth]continue on this particular course? It seems that in a short-runsense what we have is a classic crowding-out situation with a gooddeal of stimulus provided by the federal government in terms ofgenerating additional incomes in the private sector through the taxcuts as well as the federal purchases in the defense area. But wehave very sick housing markets and durable goods markets, which aresqueezed out in this process. So, it's a real structural problem.And, obviously, it's also true that forecasting interest rates is verydifficult. And one can see the change there.MR. BALLES. All right. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If I'm reading the numbers right, youare estimating a GNP implicit deflator for the first quarter of 5.0percent; but for the second quarter it jumps up to 6.6 percent andthen comes down again substantially in the third quarter and fourthquarter to about 5-1/2 percent. What explains such an abrupt shift inthe deflator from the first to the second quarter?MR. KICHLINE. Well, it has to do with changing weights onthese things and in part it reflects developments in energy prices.In part it's also the auto sector, where we had more auto sales in thefirst quarter when rebates were on and we have assumed, rightly orwrongly, that the rebates go off in the second quarter, so there's abit of a price kick from that. It's mainly the changing weights andthe break in world oil prices and gasoline prices and how that feedsin. I guess I'd try and cut through all of that and say that we nowvery clearly seem to be on a lower inflation path, too low in terms ofthe underlying rate. Nevertheless, a lot of things have come along ina very positive way recently, rather than these negative shocks thatwe had been getting before.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Jim, as I understand it, essentially what youhave in the forecast is a generalized shot of purchasing power comingfrom the tax cut being offset by continued very stringent conditionsin financial markets and, therefore, in credit-using sectors of theeconomy, such as housing and plant and equipment and, to a lesserextent, consumer durable goods. I can't fault the arithmetic of thatbecause it is a big shot that comes from the tax cut. But the effectof this is to extend, and maybe even further aggravate, the extremefrequency distribution of situations that industries find themselvesin. [We have] what is generally a flat economy, with housingremaining very low, with automobile sales really still quite low, andwith a considerable threat of a decline in capital spending and [thatwould have] an effect on those industries. It's awfully difficult tostate this, but I'm wondering what the psychological impact could be3/29-30/82of seeing these industries and these parts of the country continue todeteriorate or at least not improve, looking on through the year.Could it have a psychological effect or something like that on capitalspending or consumption that would make this forecast not work out?MR. KICHLINE. Well, these things, as you well know, are verydifficult to try to take into account. I think the inherentstructural problems in the economy grow over time as we live in aworld in which markets on average have been weak now since 1979. It'sreally a three-year sort of problem. And by the third year of highinterest rates, many firms obviously have been weakened in thatprocess. Should a surprise come along in the sense of the failure ofa firm--especially a firm not on the list generally talked about buttruly a surprise and a major firm--it could have severe consequences.And we have not allowed for that, obviously. There's also a questionof what it means in terms of fiscal policy. I think that's ratherimportant. There are lots of programs being talked about in terms ofhousing subsidies, which could alter this. But they also feed intothe budget problem, and I would think the more severe the impliedrecession in various parts of the country, the more difficult it wouldbe to follow through on spending cuts and tax increases. So, thefiscal side it seems to me is one that's at risk in terms of trying toget a larger deficit reduction program in place.MR. BOEHNE. I might just add to that, Chuck. As I talk topeople, I get the feeling that the mood has spread from pessimistic touncertain. And uncertain is kind of the best shape one could be in.People are very short-term oriented. If an order comes in, they'rehappy, but they're not at all sure they're going to see an order comealong in two or three months. And it seems to me that in this kind ofenvironment people are much more susceptible to bad news than they areto good news. There can be five pieces of good news and one piece ofbad news and they tend to zero in on that bad news. And with the highreal interest rates that we have and the pressures on the balancesheets, we almost inevitably are going to get some kind of a shock--some bad news--that is going to have a pretty bearish effect on theeconomy. I just sense that people are skating on very thin ice.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's along the lines of what I'mthinking. We have had a tremendous increase in business bankruptciesand they could go tremendously higher in the period to come. Thereare people in towns in the Midwest who have run through almost everyavenue of income maintenance available to them and they're about to bedropped off, with no income to speak of, in a situation where theystill have to maintain somehow those communities and families. Allthat gets reported very, very actively in the media, so that it canhave a psychological effect on the whole country even though it mightbe happening mainly in Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio, and a few placeslike that. And I am concerned about what the--MR. BOEHNE. If I were putting together a forecast, I'dprobably be about where Jim is. Although I think there is a bottomingout, I haven't seen a lot of evidence that a recovery is occurring.But it's this thing that one can't measure--the sense of vulnerabilityto the economy because of the psychology--that really gives me moreconcern than anything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.-16-3/29-30/82MR. BLACK. I think Chuck has raised an excellent point, Mr.Chairman, and this could change the whole situation around, but when Iget at the bottom line I believe it's a question more than anythingelse of whether or not we can sustain and extend this recent progressthat we've made on the inflation front. I think the staff is aboutright on the [cyclical] trough; I believe we're either there or verynear it and that we have in place some key elements of good recoveryin the form of the July tax cut and stepped up defense outlays. Butwe're going to have to have some kind of rebounding bond market andmore generally an increased optimism on the part of businesses tospend on capital outlays before we're going to have any real kind ofimprovement. And it would deliver a lethal blow if inflation doespick up. It would be bad news for the bond markets and for themortgage markets and in addition I think it would dilute some of thepickup that we would get from the impending tax cut. And if that'sthe case, then the recovery is not going to be as robust as theprojection. But if we succeed in getting the kind of inflation thatthe staff is projecting, then I believe the recovery may be even morerobust, particularly in the first part of 1983, than they areprojecting. And I believe they're about right on the inflationfigures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I note that we have had a relatively rareevent: namely, that the March projection seems to show an improvementboth in progress on inflation and in growth. Now, that by itself isalmost implausible. One would think that inflation is wound down bymore slack in the economy. And here it looks as though inflation iscoming down more than previously expected, while growth is a littlebetter than previously expected; it may be the effect of oil prices,which is an exogenous element.I would certainly agree that there's a great deal ofuncertainty about any estimate now. But other than that, it seems tome that there's a considerable degree of consensus about the mostlikely pattern: namely, a bottoming out in the second or thirdquarter and then a rise. There's some disagreement about the strengthof the rise, but our projection now is coming closer to that of theAdministration than it used to be. So, in terms of the most probablecourse of events, there is a high degree of consensus. The dispersionaround that consensus is something else. There is a high degree ofuncertainty, but that is part of the process of winding down theinflation. If everybody were completely sure of what he expected,there would not be a great deal of pressure on wages, prices, andfinancial behavior; and I think we have to accept this as part of thecost of the process and part of the cost of making progress [oninflation], which really has been quite remarkable to date.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly agree with thecomments that have been made suggesting that while the economy may bebottoming out, it's pretty hard to find any evidence that much morethan that is happening. Indeed, even that could be transitory.Several points have been made about financial strains or creditquality, call it what you will. My own sense of that phenomenon isthat the degree of uneasiness associated with that certainly has3/29-30/82increased and perhaps sharply so, even in the framework of the last 6or 8 weeks. For example, bankers in the Ninth Federal ReserveDistrict, who aren't used to those kinds of things, all of a suddenare speaking very openly and candidly and with some real concern interms of how they are now looking at the situation. At least in ourarea, the clear deterioration in the farm sector has something to dowith that. It's always hard to make a judgment as to the underlyingsituation in the farm sector because farmers tend to make it sound badeven when it's good. But, certainly, both the anecdotal and the hardinformation that one can pull together would suggest that we areperhaps on the threshold of a very troubling situation in theagricultural sector. I'm not sure what can be done about it, perhapsnothing. The thought crossed my mind that perhaps we should dust offthe seasonal borrowing program and talk about it a little as a way ofmaybe trying to provide a little help there. But it clearly istroublesome.On the inflation side, I think the evidence of a slowing ormoderation is getting more and more pervasive. About the only place Ican't see any hard evidence of it is in some of the white collarservice areas, including banking and finance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought for a moment you were going tosay in the Federal Reserve Bank experience.MR. CORRIGAN. I left that to you.SPEAKER(?). What is that smile on Steve's face?MR. CORRIGAN. The other thing that is taking on a slightlydifferent tone is what I guess I would call a level of frustrationthat is associated with the interest rate situation itself. Manypeople look at the obvious inflation [improvement] and they look atinterest rates and they see these enormous premiums. Regardless ofwhat those premiums precisely reflect, in a sense there seems to benothing that is going to get rid of that problem. I don't think it'ssomething that people--at least in a major way--are blaming theFederal Reserve for. Indeed, one gets some feeling that people dorecognize that at this point at least the Federal Reserve is locked into some extent, and I think that's right. At least as I would look atit, when you question what could be done by the Federal Reserve to tryto deal with that problem, the hard fact of the matter is that we havevery little room to maneuver. I personally can't see how we're goingto get much relief from that when we're looking at, in Mr. Kichline'scase, $160 billion deficits. Nor can I see, without taking exceptionwith your forecast, Jim, any real possibility for any kind ofsustainable growth in the economy with this fiscal situation the wayit is. I'd like to think that political and other forces would bebrought to bear to do something there, but I don't see that happeningeither. So, I come out with the sense that we are indeed between arock and a hard place at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, I ought to add to what Mr. Corrigan hasjust said and report that with regard to the Chicago District, thesituation continues to be very, very serious. There is the commonperception that the economy's decline may have ended, but I'd-18-3/29-30/82emphasize the words "may have." Every article one reads leads onetoward this consensus view that the economy is near the bottom andheading back up. But in our area there is absolutely no tangibleevidence that that has in fact occurred. Mr. Kichline has gone overthe major sectors, but I must say that the automotive area is veryweak, capital goods are just terrible, and in railroad equipment, forexample, there have been absolutely no orders for railroad equipmentin months. Virtually all of the plants are now closed and they areclosed indefinitely. The heavy castings orders are down almost 70percent in some areas.Conditions in the agricultural sector, just to add a bit tothat, are looking much more serious. There has been something of animprovement on the livestock front but on the grain side it's going tobe a very bleak year. Land values are continuing to decline.Although there are not very many sales, those that do occur are atvery significantly lower prices and, as a result, there is a growingproblem with regard to agricultural loans. Farm credit last year wentup about $20 billion or 11-1/2 percent, and it has almost doubled inthe last 5 years. Most of this increase has been taken by either thePCAs or other government agencies, who are now by far the largestlenders to the agricultural sector. And as these conditions in thearea continue to deteriorate, we think the collection problems aregoing to mount. And that is going to raise some very interestingquestions with regard to how the government is going to deal with thisproblem. There's likely to be very heavy pressure for a bail-out bythe agencies for these different credits.So, as we look at it, there really are no tangible signs atall that we have reached the turning point, and the mood of thegeneral population out our way could not be grimmer. It's gettingmuch more serious. The morale and the attitudes are at a very lowlevel and they are still going down; and there is a concern that anyrecovery that we might see in the country will leave the Midwestbehind. There is a growing fear that although the historical evidencewould lead one to believe we are approaching the turnaround point,this time it may be different in that we are in a fundamentallydifferent period and it is going to be much more difficult to get outof this particular recession.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much do you see those attitudesreflected in wage bargaining, let's say--whether it's union bargainingor otherwise?MR. KEEHN. I think pretty considerably. There has been asignificant change in attitude on the part of organized labor, notonly regarding terms and conditions, but in their whole approach tothe situation. I'm told, for example, with regard to the automotiveindustry, that Ford and GM renegotiations have been importantfinancially, but much more importantly the attitude of the UAW isdifferent now. They are much more realistic currently than they were;even 4 or 5 months ago they took a very hard attitude on plantclosings. Now they come in and say: Gee, isn't there a way that wecan work something out so that you don't have to close that plant?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you hear any gossip about the Harvesternegotiation? That's in process now, isn't it?-19-3/29-30/82MR. KEEHN. I hear a lot of gossip. Harvester, frankly can't[mirror] the GM and Ford settlements. They've got to get more[concessions].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Quite a lot more, I would think.MR. KEEHN. They have to get a lot more. Whether they can ornot I don't know, because the attitude between management and the UAW,as you know, is very poor there. I don't know of any tangibleinformation about those discussions.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Talking about wage increases, I metlast week with representatives of about 20 leading universities in thecountry and I was struck by the fact that every single one of them isgoing to be paying salary increases this year of 10 to 12 percent.And when I asked them why, they said it was catch-up--that theuniversity faculties and staff had suffered over the last few years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They finally can get by with great bigincreases.MR. PARTEE. Yes, they're going to have volume declines insize, I would think.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Their portfolios are doing so well inmany cases--at least those who didn't make the wrong decisions--and Iguess they're able to play a bit of catch-up.MR. KEEHN. Well, most schools are now in the process ofapproving their tuition for next year and a lot are going to be up 10,12, 14 percent. I think most schools also recognize that this is thelast shot at this particular process and that because of the change inthe demographics and changing inflation, they won't get away with itagain.MR. CORRIGAN. There's an element of perversity. Someschools want to raise their tuition by a whole bunch just because theythink it makes them an attractive school. It's perverse but true.That is literally true.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to quit in a minute, but in yoursurvey of land prices in Chicago, you survey prices of actualtransactions, don't you?MR. KEEHN. Yes. But what I'm commenting on is franklypretty anecdotal. At our board meetings, two or three of the peoplewho are directly involved suggest that there aren't very many salesbut when there are, the prices are down very, very, substantially.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I was wondering how itshowed up in your statistics.MR. KEEHN. We don't know what price people are referring toin terms of the base from which it has come down--whether it's arecent price or if it happens to be an individual transaction at avery high level. But I don't think there's any question that when the-20-3/29-30/82transactions do occur they are at lower levels; a figure of 10 to 25percent is one that is commonly tossed out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hear those stories. I just wondered whyit didn't show up in your figures.MR. KEEHN. Well, I think it may be going on now and it's toosoon for it to be showing up.MS. TEETERS. Do you have an increase of the number offoreclosures on farm land?MR. KEEHN. Yes. There are increases in delinquencies,foreclosures, and bankruptcies. But, honestly, the increases are froma very low base. So, it's not yet a broad, pervasive problem. Butthe actual numbers are beginning to increase.MR. GUFFEY. Just one other comment in that respect: Whilethere are foreclosures and there are work-out situations, there arevery few sales. There are offers of land sales in our area but veryfew sales actually have taken place. That means that the lendinginstitution is taking over the land or their alternative is workingwith the borrower one more year. So, it's very difficult for us toget a handle on how much land prices have actually dropped becausethere are no sales to verify it.MR. KEEHN. There are a lot of auctions, but then [theproperty] is pulled back when the price comes in at a lower level thanis acceptable. Therefore, the banks are beginning to back into theagricultural business.MR. PARTEE. The banks have the bottom bid in the auction--the take-out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is that if the land price goesdown 10 or 20 percent, that means it's going back all the way to whereprices were 3 years ago, I guess. That's the problem you have here?MR. KEEHN. That's an important consideration. But havingsaid that, the banks--rightly or wrongly--lent money at 80 percent ofa higher level and, therefore, they have a problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well. Mr. Winn. Mr. Roos, and Mr. Ford,are you going to be relatively brief?MR. ROOS. I'll be glad to wait until tomorrow if you want.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you are relatively brief, we canjust dispose of this tonight; otherwise we'll wait until the morning.Are you going to be relatively brief, Mr. Winn?MR. WINN. I'll be brief. One, I think there's too much doomand gloom here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may quit after that!MR. WINN. If you look at the cyclical figures, they don'tlook as bad to me as the early '70s cycle. While unemployment is3/29-30/82high, it started from a much higher level, so the decline [inemployment] is really not that great. And if you look at thepossibility for inventory adjustment and an inventory cycle and thenfactor in the tax cut at midyear, it seems to me that we have somevery positive forces there.The second comment I'd make is that [I wonder if] we reallyhave adjusted our thinking for the changes taking place in fiscalpolicy. I must confess that [a deficit of] $160 billion blows my mindas does the [potential for] crowding out. But I think we have torecognize that it's a quite different kind of deficit in the sensethat previously we had the tax rebate or whatever that was called andthen [the financial system] had to turn around and lend tocorporations to supply the goods to take care of the [unintelligible],so there really was a double whammy in the finance market. Today wehave the problem that--what was the tax savings for IBM, $100 million?And while that shows up in the deficit, IBM is out of the market bythat amount. If you look at the savings certificates and IRAs andother accounts, again there is a different impact on the market fromthis deficit in terms of financial demands than we had previously.It's not in the sense of $160 billion to zero by any manner of means,but I wonder if we don't overplay the size of the problem just a bit.I'm not saying that I'm happy with the $160 billion deficit, but interms of its impact on markets we may not get the crowding out becausewe may get a change in demand. And the deficit is really financing alot of the savings and corporate needs that otherwise would show up inthe open market.MR. FORD. I pass.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's perhaps appropriate thatWillis Winn close this evening's affair. He's more reassuring aboutthe economy, even more reassuring about the deficit, and then he plansto go off and leave us!MR. BOEHNE. He has changed now that he's retiring. When hewas in Philadelphia, he was the most pessimistic director we had in aquarter of a century!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will be saying goodbye to Willistomorrow. I'd like to have an executive meeting at 9:15 a.m.tomorrow, if that's okay.[Meeting recessed]-22-3/29-30/82March 30, 1996--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I recall correctly, and I'm sure I do,we were discussing the business picture. Mr. Kichline had given uswhat by some lights is a fairly optimistic picture suggesting that therisk may be on the down side, and a number of people had commented onthat. And Mr. Ford and Mr. Roos were about to say something. Igather for purposes of secretarial summaries that there wasn't a lotof disagreement with the staff outlook but a lot of worry. That's theway I would summarize what I learned yesterday, anyway.MR. FORD. Well, in terms of our view of the staff outlook,we always compare the staff's forecast to a variety of externalforecasts, including DRI, Townsend Greenspan, Chase Econometrics,Citibank, and so forth. I am impressed by the fact that the staffforecast for the next 2 or 3 quarters is by far the most pessimisticof any of the forecasting services. That doesn't necessarily say ourstaff is wrong, since the record of the forecasting services isn'tthat great either in terms of the ability to project where the economyis going or what inflation is going to do. But looking at ourDistrict, given work we've done with local groups, we do share some ofthe pessimism that has been voiced, particularly with regard to theagricultural sector. We're having a large problem in our agriculturalareas as well as in our forest-related industries; and in the carpetarea, we're having a near economic disaster since we produce a thirdof the world's carpets and they are laying off people by the thousandsin that [industry] in northern Georgia. So, we now have four of oursix states with more unemployment than the national average, eventhough we're supposed to be the Sun Belt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You produce a third of the world'scarpets?MR. FORD. Yes, that's what they say, in northern Georgia.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that mean there's a big exportbusiness?MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. FORD. And it's very depressed, just as a reflection ofthe trends in housing. And then we have the heavy industry over inAlabama and in Tennessee, which we're discovering is moreindustrialized than the rest of America. I always thought of it as arural state until I started traveling around it. We have numerouscounties throughout the States of Tennessee, Alabama, and Mississippithat have unemployment rates of around 20 percent, which you don'tread about in the newspapers. So, there is a lot of pessimism inrural areas and in those specific industries, and certain aspects ofagriculture and the housing-related industries are in deep trouble.On the other hand, our service industries and our high-tech industriesare doing very well in Florida in an emerging Technology Belt that wehave down there.Overall, my view is that there's not a feeling of depressionin our area as some of you seem to be reporting. We tend still tohave some guarded [optimism]. Or rather, I like the way Ed Boehne putit. In a range from uncertainty to pessimism, our business people are-23-3/29-30/82more on the uncertainty end of it. And except in the industries thatreally are getting clobbered, including the thrifts, the homebuilders, the forest industry, and farming, people are stillreasonably persuaded that the economy will turn around and pick up inthe next few months as this staff forecast has it. People aren'tlining up to jump off buildings or bridges in our District. Thatwould be my summary of it.MR. ROOS. We had two very interesting experiences last week.On Wednesday, we had the chief executive officers of about fifteen ofour largest St. Louis-based firms in for lunch. These are largecompanies which in many instances are multinational in scope. Thefollowing day we had eight of the chief labor leaders in our area infor lunch. There was an interesting similarity in their attitudes.There's no question that the industries and, of course labor in termsof unemployment, are feeling very severe recessionary pressures. Onthe other hand--and I was especially interested in this reactioncoming from the labor side--these people recognize that this was partof the process of bringing down inflation. They felt that whoevermade the monetary policy and fiscal policy decisions of a year or twoago must have known that this downtrend would occur. They see it as atemporary phenomenon. As Bill said, they anticipate a recovery. Andeven from the labor group there was a strong recognition, and hopereally, that we will continue to look to solving the long-termfundamental problems rather than reacting to the pain of the moment.Even though these people were very outspoken in their expression ofmomentary pain, they were optimistic for the future. And they werevery strong in their support of monetary policy as in their view beingmuch more assured of hanging in there, if you will, than fiscal[policy]. Well, I didn't come away from those two experiences nearlyas depressed as some of the others of you were yesterday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What kind of wage settlements did you feelthe labor union leaders were looking toward?MR. ROOS. I think reasonable, in terms of less-than-might-be-expected settlements. They realize that they have to be flexibleunder these circumstances and I think this will bode well for theeffort to continue to hold down inflation. These guys at least werenot bitter in their reactions, and they said that even though theirrank and file membership are experiencing things that they haven'texperienced for some years, they're not reacting as they might have inthe '30s. They're not just saying the world is going to the dogs. Ifelt more of an upbeat reaction in terms of the long pull than some ofthe others of you who expressed yourselves yesterday. And in my ownshort experience on this Committee, I think we've tended to getcarried away emotionally on the down side when things are gloomy.Si mentioned yesterday, when you questioned him, what ishappening to farm prices in Illinois. I remember just a few years agowe were all extremely appalled at the inflationary upward movement infarm prices. So, I think it's important that we not get carried awayand over-react to what hopefully will be a temporary situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, you expressed my feelings almostexactly when you said there was general support of and agreement with-24-3/29-30/82the staff forecast and some worry, all the same. I'd like first toelaborate on something that President Ford said about the staffforecast in relation to outside forecasts. What he said is correctwith respect to the outside forecasts we look at here, but only somedistance out. The Board forecast for the second and third quarters isby and large more optimistic than the outside forecasts.MR. FORD. Yes, it's in the fourth quarter.MR. RICE. From the point of real growth in the thirdquarter, it is the most optimistic, as compared with Data Resources,Wharton, and Chase. In the third quarter only Merrill Lynch is moreoptimistic than the Board's forecast.MR. FORD. Yes, I'd agree with that. It's farther out, inthe fourth quarter, that they have the lowest GNP, fairly highunemployment, and low inflation. For the year they are a little morepessimistic.MR. RICE. That's right. I'm encouraged, of course, by thataspect of our staff's forecast, which projects the recovery to beginin the second quarter with GNP increasing at a 2 percent annual ratein real terms. But I'm worried and concerned that this recoverydepends pretty much on what happens to inventories. Without theanticipated reduced rate of inventory liquidation, the recovery I takeit will be delayed until the third quarter. In the meantime, there'sa good deal of stress and distress out there in the economy with manysectors in the economy feeling a good deal of financial pressure;pessimism was widely reported yesterday. As President Winn says,there really may be too much doom and gloom out there, but it isnevertheless there. Financial conditions have deteriorated markedlyfor nonfinancial corporations. As you know, the interest coverageratios for these firms have fallen to record low levels, downgradingsof debt ratings have been occurring in large numbers, the businessfailure rate is running at a record postwar pace, mortgagedelinquencies are up, and the housing sales situation didn't look asgood in February as we thought it did up until yesterday. We heardyesterday about the farming sector and the problems it was having. Inthese circumstances, it seems to me that it is important that therecovery not be delayed until the third quarter. While there is everyreason for hoping that it will occur as projected in the staffforecast, I think everything should be done to try to encourage anearly recovery. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have to add my name tothe list of the worriers today. I don't know that I would develop aforecast, if I had to make one, that looked any different insignificant ways than the staff's. But it seems to me that as theinformation comes in, increasingly it's calling into question whetheror not we're at the end of recession and about to see a rathersignificant recovery. Obviously, the staff's forecast is not arecovery of the dimensions that we've seen typically in the postwarperiod after a recession; but it indicates pretty good growth in thelast three quarters of the year, a 3-3/4 percent annual rate. And asFrank Morris mentioned yesterday, the price figures have been quiteweak. Maybe we're looking at something different now but-25-3/29-30/82historically, at least, prices of industrial raw materials turn upbefore the rest of the economy. Initial claims are still very high.Yesterday we learned that consumer confidence in March, on the basisof the Conference Board survey, was down again. The machine toolorders figures continue to be very weak. There's just no sign ofabatement at all in that area, but it's a very small part of the totaleconomy. I would say that there's at least a 60-40 chance that wewon't see growth of more than, say, one percent in the last threequarters of the year; that we'll get a bump because of a turnaround ininventory investment from deep negative to small negative or zero orsmall positive; that final sales will continue to erode, at least inareas like business fixed investment and maybe housing; and that wewill see very, very little upturn at all.I think we have seen a very, very substantial weakening ofattitudes around the country. I just sense a different kind ofattitude than I can ever recall during my period as a professionaleconomist. Part of the reason is the concern about the budget but Ithink to a larger extent it is a consequence of the fact thatcontinued monetary restraint over a very prolonged period has put theeconomy into a very, very weakened state. I don't think we shouldlook at what we're seeing now as an unexpected development. We've hadas much growth in nominal GNP as we had any reason to expect, givenwhat we had provided by way of increases in the stock of money--indeed, more so because we've had downward shifts in money demand. Ithink we're making more progress on inflation than we had any right toexpect. We're making more progress than the traditional Phillipscurve type of analysis would have led us to expect. So, we're lookingat a situation now which is essentially of our own making, though notentirely. And now the question is what we do about it. I think wehave a very narrow line to walk. I don't think we can afford to giveup the progress we've made or to endanger it. But if there is adanger now, it is that we have more restraint than we want rather thanless restraint than we want. I'm very much worried about what isgoing to happen in these next few months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When do the leading indicators come out?MR. KICHLINE. Today, this afternoon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They'll be a little on the down side. Mr.Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to ask Steve and Jim aquestion. How do you reconcile this relatively reasonable increase inreal growth in the next three quarters compared with the previousprojections with the argument that the financial markets are going tobe under pressure, given such a large public sector borrowingrequirement? How do you reconcile that with your interest rateprojections for the rest of the year in Appendix 2 in which you showthe fed funds rate declining?MR. AXILROD. Well, some of that will be implicit in mycomments. In a sense, it assumes that the buildup in liquidity in thefirst quarter and late last year, reflected in first-quarter averagegrowth in M1 of around 10 percent and also a large increase in M2, isdivested; it is used willingly by the public to finance an expansionin spending. If it is not and if the public really wants to hold that-26-3/29-30/82liquidity--it wasn't just a temporary reaction to uncertainty which isgoing to be unwound--then our interest rate forecast of a very slightdecline might even seem a bit optimistic, which would make the GNPforecast a bit optimistic. That's how I would respond to it. MaybeJim--MR. KICHLINE. No, I wouldn't [disagree].MS. TEETERS. But, Steve, doesn't that prove that thecongestion that we're anticipating is not in this calendar year butnext year?MR. AXILROD. Well, as I mentioned to the Board yesterday, Irefused to put the 1983 interest rate forecast in the Bluebook thistime because that's such a long way off. Attitudes might change andwe could have a wholly different outlook. But our basic interest rateforecast is for high interest rates in '83 of about this dimension.And with the deficit being even larger, one might want to questionagain the possibility of that being associated with the type of realGNP growth we have. But the quarterly model, which is of course oftenwrong, would suggest growth at these interest rates also. This issomewhat different from President Solomon's question of how can wereconcile this and not have interest rates higher. But even at thishigher level, the quarterly model would suggest that real growth willindeed appear to be something like what we have projected.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what are you assuming about thebudgetary deficit?MR. AXILROD. Well, Jim may--MR. KICHLINE. For 1983?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I assume all these, yes.MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's an environment in which we havetremendous government borrowing, and the amount of funds raised in thefirst half of this year is fairly low. That picks up in the secondhalf and, given this forecast, would be substantially higher in '83.Much of that is government-related. The private sector borrowing, interms of the consumer sector and mortgage borrowing, is very low; itcontinues to be constrained. Durable goods expenditures are not doingvery well either and that's a reflection of the high interest rateenvironment. So, we get all of this financing but in a fairly tensesituation. Steve didn't put the interest rates in the Bluebook but weactually have a sheet with the numbers written down that I look at onoccasion, and we have short-term rates drifting up in 1983. So theydo rise in this forecast.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not in Appendix 2, though.MR. KICHLINE. No, in 1983.MR. FORD. The Bluebook only shows it through the fourthquarter of 1982.MR. KICHLINE. Right. But this forecast we think would beconsistent with some further rise--an upward drift in short-term3/29-30/82rates--throughout the year 1983. In long rates, who knows what wouldhappen? We do think that persistence of lower rates of inflation suchas in this forecast over an extended period of time ought to bringlong rates down somewhat. So, we have a small downward tilt in longrates, but higher short rates. I wouldn't want to be questioned on aspecific number for rates, but it seems to me that this is a mix thatproduces very high nominal short-term rates of interest. And we wouldhave that in there, with rates rising from the levels in the Bluebook.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The bottom line, then, is that youbelieve, even with real GNP rising close to 5 percent in the secondhalf of the year on average and with this very large budgetarydeficit, that we still can have a slightly declining fed funds ratefor the second half of this year.MR. AXILROD. But that assumes, with this strength in demand,that the amount of money created in November, December, January, andto a degree in February, which was just a minor drop, is used by thepublic--just to use a word that comes easily to mind--willingly. Thatis, they don't want to borrow additionally to hold that money; theydon't have to be cadged out of it by even higher interest rates. Thatmoney is used by the public willingly to finance spending. And if itisn't, then I don't think this forecast is consistent with declininginterest rates. I don't think this forecast is consistent with yourmonetary targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it isn't, we probably have the targetstoo low.MR. AXILROD. Exactly. That's going to be the burden of thisimplicitly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, my thoughts are very muchalong the lines of Lyle's. I'm more pessimistic short-term than thestaff is, certainly. I think the second quarter is going to benegative. I have not seen any basis yet for expecting an upturn.Certainly, the numbers we have in March so far don't support theproposition that the second quarter is going to show an upturn. Andit seems to me that we're going to have financial conditions that aregoing to mean a sluggish recovery--perhaps more sluggish than even thestaff has estimated. But there is one cushioning factor in theeconomy that no one has talked about thus far, and that is thetremendous upsurge in defense procurement, which is really beginningto develop a momentum. That will impact the economy very unevenly.Fortunately, in New England we get about three times our proportionateshare of defense contracts, so it is cushioning most of our majorcorporations--like Raytheon and United Technologies and so on--thatare in both the defense industry and domestic industry. I asked themhow they're doing and they said that their domestic business is lousy;their export business, which tends to be quite large, has been hithard by the rise in the dollar. But the defense business is boomingand their only problem in defense is getting the production out. So,that will cushion New England, California, Texas, the leading [defensecontractors are in those areas]. It's not going to do much for Si'sMiddle West, though.-28-3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Returning to this question of credit flows,which goes a little with your question, Tony: I was interested inthat, too, because here we have rising interest rates and we'retalking about crowding out. So, I wondered what the figures wouldshow on credit raised by the economy. I find that in the last threequarters--that is, since [the start of] the period of downturn--thetotal funds raised in the third quarter, fourth quarter, and the firstquarter this year as estimated amount to only 11.8 percent of the GNP.To give you an idea, that's almost exactly the same as in the 1974-75recession in relation to the GNP. And that compares with 16 percentin 1979, 18-1/2 percent in 1978, and 17-1/2 percent in 1977. So, it'sa very much smaller flow of funds to credit users than is typical.It's typical of a deep recession and continues to be typical of a deeprecession in the first quarter even though interest rates turned up.And by the way, those figures include the government. If it weren'tfor the government, indeed, the figures would be close to recenthistorical lows of only 7 percent of GNP being now represented bycredit to private sectors. If you look ahead, the interesting thingis that the staff's flow of funds forecast--they have a flow of fundsforecast that's consistent with their Greenbook forecast--doesn't showany improvement at all in private credit flows compared with the GNP.What happens is that the government credit flows go up because of thedeficit, but the private credit flows stay around the very low 7percent area in relation to GNP. That says to me, really, that whatis being forecast is whatever interest rate is necessary to keepprivate credit from getting going again. And that's the crowding outhypothesis, I think. But we should not say that there's a tremendousflow of credit in these markets. As a matter of fact the flow ofcredit is unusually small and it will remain unusually small relativeto recent years even with these large government deficits.MR. WINN. Interesting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that concludes the comments people wantto make--. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Given the conditions in the Eleventh District, Iguess it'd be fair to say that the level of concern is considerablygreater. In a way, one has to take this in perspective given where wewere and where it looks as if we might be going. The pessimism seemsto be centered primarily in the energy business where the decrease inoil prices has produced quite a bit of concern. Drilling activity hasslowed. I mean by that a slowdown in the rate of increase as opposedto an absolute slowdown. Part of it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it actually had turned down.MR. BOYKIN. Not from the information we have. Part of thisis attributable to what those in the industry call seasonal factors.They look for a little pickup in a couple of months, but not anythinglike we have had. The closing of refineries is causing quite a bit ofconcern. As one person in the industry said, most of those are the"tea kettle" type of operations that probably should have been closedanyway. But even some of the major refineries are cutting back ontheir production. There is growing concern in the commercial realestate development area. It now appears that some projects that were-29-3/29-30/82announced are going to be deferred. The petrochemical industry seemsto be under some pressure. The media, of course, are picking this upin our area with headlines saying that the recession has come to theSun Belt. Layoffs that are occurring, while not significant, arereceiving quite a bit of publicity and obviously are affectingopinions and attitudes. In the electronics and the semi-conductorbusiness there have been some layoffs. Of course, we have the Braniffproblem that stays in the headlines down our way. And I might alsomention that with the decrease in the price of oil, the bank stocks,particularly those of our larger bank holding companies, have incurredabout a one-third decrease in their price over the last six weeks,which concerns them. They think the concern of the analysts who arelooking at the [exposure in] energy loans is unjustified.On the other side, though, we've had just a littleimprovement in the housing area, but nothing really significant, and alittle improvement in autos. I was talking on Thursday to theindividual who oversees andhe said the economy turned ten days ago and that the recession--MR. BLACK. What time?SPEAKER(?). What day of the week was that, Bob?MR. BOYKIN. The recession ended ten days ago. He said thatup until then the markets were very poor. But the markets haveimproved substantially and there's a lot of buying activity and lot oforders being written in the markets now. Again, I don't know whetherpeople down our way are over-reacting in one sense because we are nowfinally seeing some of the effects of the slowdown. And we are moreor less seeing that for the first time, which might cause a bit of anover-reaction. I think the fundamentals down our way really don'tlook that bad. Agriculture has already been mentioned, and we havebasically the same situation in agriculture.MS. TEETERS. Are you getting a lot of in-migration?MR. BOYKIN. Yes, we've had a lot. We're also now beginningto get stories--the press are making a lot of it, or at least arewriting about it a lot--about people who have come down to the land ofmilk and honey and are unable to find jobs and they are living incampers, are out of money, and don't have enough money to go backhome. That's pretty isolated. But yes, we've had a lot of in-migration.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Basically, in the Twelfth District, withoutgoing into a lot of detail and more doom and gloom, we figure theeconomy slipped further into a recession this month. It's not justthe forest products industry. Unfortunately, it's almost all theother major industries we have, including aerospace, where commercialorders are down more than defense orders are up, electronics,nonferrous metals, etc. But, really, what I'd like to do is to comeback to a question I raised with the staff yesterday and ask it oncemore, hoping that they are wiser than I am. I raise this in view ofthe fact that I have a couple of speeches scheduled this week up inthe Pacific Northwest for audiences likely not to be terribly friendly-30-3/29-30/82given that the unemployment rates are as high as 25 percent in somecounties in Washington and Oregon mostly, but not entirely, because ofthe forest products industry. The $64 dollar question, of course, is:What in the heck is keeping those interest rates up in spite of thefact that we've had great success in bringing the inflation rate down?For a couple of years now I have been more or less promising thesesame people that if we got the inflation rate down--bit the bullet andpersisted in tight money policy--the interest rates would come downsooner or later. Well, they certainly haven't come down as yet. So,while I have my own explanation, I don't consider it terriblyconvincing even to myself. I'd like to hear how the staff wouldanswer that question. What is keeping those real interest rates upthere despite the fact that we've had very marked success, with moresuccess on the horizon, in getting the inflation rate down? If youcan help me, I'd be grateful.MR. AXILROD. Well, on short-term interest rates, I think itis simply that the Committee's targets are low relative to the demandfor money in the current situation. I think short-term interestrates, except for minor variations, are pretty much determined by thedemand and supply for money in the very short run. On the longer-termrates, I would say that probably the world isn't yet convinced thatthe rate of inflation isn't going to get worse when we get out of thisrather deep recession. It may not be as bad as it has been, but itmay become worse certainly than it is now. Secondly, the policy ofattempting to control the money supply month-by-month, which can't bedone, has led to fluctuations in short-term rates because of the waythe money supply behaves. [It is] out of sync with fluctuations inthe business cycle and people are not convinced when rates go downthat they're not going to go back up. And, therefore, there is not agreat incentive, once short rates go down, to move immediately intothe long-term market and capture a higher yield because one could stayshort--and who knows?--the short-term rate may be back up later andone doesn't have to worry immediately about getting into long-termsecurities. So, I think that's another factor, which is sometimescalled the liquidity premium, or risk premium. Those are my essentialexplanations. The thought that the rate of inflation will continue todecelerate over the long run is not firmly in the minds of investors.And they believe there's no real penalty for staying short becausethey're not convinced that when short rates come down they won't goback up, as has been happening cyclically, because we've been tryingto control the money supply independently, in a sense, of the businesscycle. And I believe the short-term rates are determined by moneydemand and supply under the current conditions.MR. ROOS. Explain that to those lumberjacks!MR. BALLES. It's like a hit over the head with a 2x4 orsomething!MR. PARTEE. I think he said that you were responsible!MS. TEETERS. What I interpret Steve as saying in a verypolite way is that monetary policy is too tight for the degree ofliquidity that the public demands at the present time.MR. BALLES. And that budget policy is too loose.3/29-30/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But it's highly possible that if weease the monetary targets, we would bring down short rates but therewould be a perverse reaction in the long end of the market.MR. AXILROD. Yes, I should have mentioned that the way Ithink the budget outlook enters into this is that it keeps the publicconvinced that inflation is not going to get better. That's how Ithink the budget enters into people's thinking. It's not just merelythat there will be more securities to absorb, although that's a factorin the government securities market as such, but that the odds arethat when we get on the up side of the cycle inflation will get worse.So, it is a strong factor.MR. BALLES. Well, I'm sure you realize that this is one partof the country where they're just really screaming, pleading, andbegging for relief on the interest rates before they have all gonedown the tubes, with 40 percent of Oregon's lumber mills being closedand probably closed permanently. It's the kind of thing that ledAuCoin, the Democratic congressman from Oregon on the bankingcommittee, who is not always hostile and is sometimes friendly towardsthe Fed, to get behind one of the resolutions to force the Fed to dosomething. He is getting tremendous pressure from his constituents,and it's that kind of thing, Paul, that may lie behind--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It undoubtedly is.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to ask Henry Wallich thisquestion, too, as well as Steve and anyone else who wants to answer:If a perfectly indexed Treasury bond were put out today, what level ofreal interest would it have to bear in a competitive auction in themarket?MR. WALLICH. I would say it would be a good deal higher thanI would have said a year or two ago. I would have said a year or twoago, 1 or 2 percent. Conceivably on a small issue it might even benegative because some portfolio managers would like it to diversify.But today I think there is a realization that real rates, before taxesanyway, are pretty high. So, I would say 3, 4, 5 percent, maybe.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But real rates are technicallythe difference between nominal rates and inflation expectations, notthe actual rate of inflation. So, if the problem that we're runninginto, as Steve answered John Balles--and it's something we all know--is that long-run inflationary expectations have not come down, then inthe technical sense of the term real interest rates aren't as high asthey look. Yes, it may very well be that a perfectly indexed bond,which automatically takes care of inflationary expectations, stillwould carry only a 2 to 3 percent real interest rate because, ifinflationary expectations are taken care of automatically, then whywould one assume that a higher interest rate is needed today than ayear ago?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you suggest they sell one to find out?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No.MR. BOEHNE. Well, one reason is that there's a rather largetransfer of resources from the private sector to the public sector via-32-3/29-30/82the credit markets instead of through taxation. And I think it takesa higher real interest rate to bring about that transfer.MS. TEETERS. There also may be built into the so-called realrate now a risk premium to compensate for the extreme volatility ofinterest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we're going to resolvethis question, so we will go to Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if the Committee will bear withme, I have a a body of anti-climatic comments, I'm afraid. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know where that all [leavesus]. The big question is with respect to M1 and we live in a kind ofmorass that leads one to put a certain amount of weight on M2. Inlooking at what has been happening in the first quarter, you said M2is running a little high. Well, it is, I guess, compared to the baseof the whole [fourth] quarter, but if you look at the last threemonths its behavior has been pretty orderly from what we know now.And I don't think it would require a slowdown in the growth--I haven'tdone the arithmetic--in its nontransactions component if you look atthe last three months as compared to the quarter-to-quarter [growth].I don't see how it could. So, we have had a big M1 growth and themonthly figures have been more or less in line for M2. If M2 wereweak and M1 were high, which has not particularly, if ever, been thecase, I'd say we might have an argument for looking at the long-rangetarget at this meeting. But I don't think we have that argument and Iwould not propose to do so. Anybody can have their own opinion. Butif things grow a certain way, it's going to have to continue to be onour agenda for the next meeting in May or the following meeting Isuspect. We do have a situation, to put it bluntly, where NOWaccounts are way up and the rest of demand deposits are at least beingslightly squeezed. They're fairly level or down depending upon whatweek one looks at. And I continue to have a very large suspicion thatthere is some liquidity preference shift, at least temporarily, thathas been going on. The whole question, when you look at the M1 figureis how long [its rapid growth] will last, as Steve suggested. Who hasa comment?MR. ROOS. I have a question, and I apologize because I willconfess to an inability, Steve, to understand every word in yourpresentation and the significance of it. But let me just ask a coupleof fundamental questions that I think have a bearing on which of thesealternatives we choose. Let's assume that our primary long-runconcern is inflation and our primary shorter-run concern is the effectof whatever we do on the economy. How would alternative A,alternative B, or alternative C impact output over the remainder ofthis year and how would they impact the longer-range inflationarysituation? How would you describe the three alternatives in terms oftheir impact on these two results? Could you express that?MR. AXILROD. Well, I'll try. [A policy stance] somewherebetween alternative A and alternative B is consistent in the shortrun, we believe, with the staff economic projection. One can't bevery specific there, but if the choice is somewhere betweenalternatives A and B, that essentially says that interest rates ought-33-3/29-30/82to track down a little in the very short run. Over the long run, asyou know, a recovery is projected, fueled by defense spending and theimpact on consumer spending of the tax cut at midyear. At the moment,we think that could be done without any further rise in interest ratesinto late next year because of people having accumulated liquidity.Alternative C says that interest rates might go up, andprobably will go up, substantially; and even "B" says some rates mayhave a little back-tracking in them. I believe "C" is quiteinconsistent with anything like the pattern of recovery [forecast]because whatever initiative might be coming in terms of housing beingvaguely sustained and inventories not being a drag, I think the risein interest rates entailed by alternative C would turn those factorsless positive if not absolutely negative. Thus, we would not get anenvironment consistent with economic recovery not to mention thepsychological impact of the greater doubts cast upon the safety andsoundness of thrift institutions under the circumstances. That wouldbe my answer. In a long-run sense, one might argue then thatalternative C is most consistent with getting inflation under control.MR. ROOS. Would "A" or "B" imply that we're going to seek toget back within our [M1] range? Would that imply relatively slow M1growth for the last 6 months [of the year]? Let me put itdifferently: Would that imply M1 growth that could be so slow as tohave a recessionary effect in the latter part of this year or anabortive effect on the recovery early next year? Or do you notbelieve that there is a relationship between--?.MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. It depends on where [in the range]the Committee wants to hit for the year. As we tried to show in thetable toward the back of the Bluebook, adoption of alternative B, forexample, would be consistent with [M1] growth in the second half ofthe year, on a June-to-December basis, of 3-1/2 to 5 percent,depending on whether the Committee aims at the middle or the upperpart of the present range, letting alone any base shifting that mightbe considered. Alternative A would be consistent with growth in the2-3/4 to 4 percent range. Our assumption is that inflation rates willbe down and that there will be some cyclical expansion in velocity andthose growth rates might be generally consistent with a reasonablerebound. It may not be as large as we have there, but somewhere inthat magnitude.MR. ROOS. I guess I view this somewhat differently than someof you. What disturbs me, Mr. Chairman, is that it is apparent frompast experience that when we have had a significant reduction in therate of money growth--let's say, growth for 6 months below the trendrate prior to that 6-month period--inevitably it almost alwaysresulted in a negative growth situation. That is true if you lookback at [the trends in money growth that] preceded previousrecessions. When we consider whether or not we would act quickly--touse the expression we've used--to "pinch off" another bulge, I thinkwe have to look ahead and recognize that if any accommodation inpolicy today were to necessitate an abrupt reduction in the rate ofmoney growth over the last half of this year in order to achieve ourtargets, the probability is that this would bring us back into asomewhat recessionary situation in the last quarter of this year orthe first quarter of next year. And I think that is an issue that3/29-30/82should be considered in whatever policy decisions this Committee makestoday.MR. BLACK. Larry, are you suggesting that we pinch the Aprilbulge off so we can let it grow faster after that?MR. ROOS. Well, if I had to opt for something, I would saythat if there is an April bulge, it should be brought down almost asquickly as possible in order to permit money to grow gradually overthe last part of the year. On the other hand, that could cause a2- or 3-week--if one can define it [that closely]--upward movement ofthe fed funds rate and other short-term interest rates and that doesfrighten some people. It's a matter, though, of whether we bite thebullet now in order to position ourselves for growth in the aggregatesin the second half of the year or if we tolerate that, as we sometimeshave in the past, and then are forced to keep money growing at a verylow rate, as occurred for six months last year. In our analysis, thatis what we did from May to October of last year, and it was acontributing factor to our present weak economy. Now, this may beseeing it from a monetarist point of view; I assume it is. And someof you may not share that view. But it worries us, looking into thefuture, that we may be setting the stage for problems at the end ofthis year and going into next year.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I just might clarify onecomment you made. The nontransactions component of M2 was growingvery moderately in December, January, and February, after having grownrapidly in November. The latest data we have for the weeks of Marchsuggest a very rapid growth--something like 12 percent at an annualrate in that month--and that is what brings the growth in the firstthree months of this year up to around 9-1/2 percent. And we believeyou have to get it lower than that--not a lot lower, but maybe down tothe high 8 or low 9 percent area. But it's really [due to] thebehavior in March.MR. PARTEE. That's not M2 but its nontransactions component?MR. AXILROD. Yes, but I was just clarifying the point.MR. BLACK. Steve, do you feel pretty comfortable about yourprojection of the aggregates for March at this point?MR. AXILROD. No. We have the preliminary data [only]. Thathas a sharp drop of almost $3 billion in the week of March 24, as youknow. And we have assumed a rise of $1 billion in the next week,which is a very reasonable assumption. So, in that sense, I wouldn'texpect a large variation, but there will be some. I think we're inthe right order of magnitude.MR. BLACK. You think you're as close as you usually are?MR. AXILROD. Well, I think fairly close. It could vary 2 or3 percentage points at an annual rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm somewhat uncomfortable with tooprecise projections of what any of these numbers may mean and of theinterest rates that really may come up. The difference between "A"and "C" is $3 billion on M1 in June. That's one week's fluctuation.3/29-30/82MR. AXILROD. Well, the fluctuations average out, we hope.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm still having a littletrouble reconciling the assumption that the adjustment to nationwideNOW accounts was completed in December with the fact that NOW accountshave been growing at about a 50 percent annual rate in the firstquarter. Somehow, those two things don't come together very well forme. And the fact that most of this money bulge was in NOW accountsraised a question in my mind about whether this bulge means the samething that a bulge in the old M1 would have meant. This leads me to aquestion for Steve. It's a hypothetical question, but I'll ask itanyway. If you assume that we did not move to nationwide NOW accountslast year and that the NOW accounts were still confined to New Englandand New York, would you have expected, on the basis of what hashappened, a 10 percent rate of growth in old M1 in the first quarter?Or is that too hypothetical to even--?MR. AXILROD. First, we don't think the shift has beencompleted; we think it has come down to modest proportions. Second, Iassume--I guess contrary to your view, President Morris--that theincrease in NOW accounts that we had is part of or the same as therelated increase in savings accounts that occurred at the same time.MR. MORRIS. But in the absence of nationwide NOW accounts,these deposits would have been in M2 but not in M1.MR. AXILROD. That's right. And that makes the problem forthe interpretation of M1. I'm not interpreting that growth of 50percent as representing a shift from demand accounts to NOWs or ashift from old savings to NOWs but an aspect of allocating more ofone's savings and possibly more of one's income to highly liquidinstruments, some of which are now in M1 where they didn't used to beand others of which are in M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could have shifted into M1 if we didn'thave NOW accounts. We never will know that it wouldn't have. Itwouldn't have been a nice figure.MR. AXILROD. There might have been some more in demanddeposits, that is for sure.MS. TEETERS. Didn't a survey of the banks indicate thatthere was no major increase in the number of accounts?MR. AXILROD. Well, the increase in accounts--I don't havethe number here--has been at the same rate since the beginning of theyear as it was from August to November, or something like that. Andthat probably is a more rapid rate of the birth of accounts. It'smuch less than it was at the beginning of [last] year, but possiblymore rapid than you would expect if there had been no shifts. I thinkthere has probably been a residual shifting. But there would havebeen no acceleration in this recent period, [based on] the figures weget from the commercial banks on births of accounts.-36-3/29-30/82MR. MORRIS. But it does raise a fundamental question as towhether transactions balances as we used to think of them actuallybulged in the first quarter or not.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. As the Chairman says,transactions accounts as we used to think of them probably would havebulged somewhat because if you get an increase in liquiditypreference, some of it would have fallen into demand deposits. Also,to the extent that reflects the fact that interest rates were goingdown and one is going to wait until they go back up--the conventionalKeynesian sort of speculative motive--that would have fallen intodemand deposits. So, I think demand deposits would have been a littlehigher. But of course we have the old savings account vehicle inthere as well, which is probably distorted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what all this demonstrates is thatthese movements preoccupy us and they preoccupy the market. But weknow very little about them except that we generally accept it as achange in liquidity preference. But we certainly can't identify thatvery closely. I hope some work is going on that.MR. AXILROD. Oh, it is. Absolutely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may be in better shape--I hope we are--by the time of the next meeting from various directions whetherthrough surveys or otherwise to maybe find out nothing. But if wehave satisfied ourselves that we tried a little harder to find out,maybe we will find out something. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My view of what weshould do in the period ahead is influenced in some measure by a pointthat Larry Roos made with respect to what we do in the second half of1982. Let me start my comments by saying that from my perspective allthe doom and gloom that was presented around the table shouldn't beunexpected. A year and a half or two years ago, we set upon a coursethrough monetary policy that would bring economic growth to zero or anegative rate for some period of time and then to a very slow rate ofgrowth thereafter. And I think we've achieved that. In a sense, weought to be pleased with what has been accomplished up to now.The question then arises, for me at least: What do we do inthe period ahead in view of economic activity that is zero or maybeeven negative for another quarter? In looking ahead, there seems tobe a lot of potential for stimulus beyond what we would do at thistable, with the deficit and the government spending that is in trainfor the third quarter of the calendar year, the last quarter of thefiscal year. That's somewhere between $40 and $50 billion that has tobe raised in the market and will be spent. Together with the tax cutthat comes on July 1, it would seem to me that there is a good deal ofstimulus that will hit the economy starting in July or thereabouts andcontinuing on through the last of the year. So, I'm not so concernedabout getting money growth at some higher level to be sure that wedon't kill the goose that has laid the golden egg. Therefore, I wouldlike to propose that we look at alternative B or something a bit lessthan alternative B, which is designed primarily to ensure that as weget into the last half when we get the stimulus that we will have somegrowth, in the 4 to 5 percent range. And with the projection for thedeficit and the amount of money that must be raised by the government-37-3/29-30/82in the markets, if we don't have some latitude for growth in the 4 or5 or 6 percent range, we're going to have interest rates at very highlevels. And I would hope that that would not occur. Thus, someplacebetween "B" and "C" for the second-quarter period would seem to be anappropriate policy response.With regard to all the talk about the April bulge, I don'tknow what all that means, Steve, other than that it means uncertainty.And as a result, I am attracted by your proposal--I believe it was aproposal--that we use M2 as a direct informational variable to guidepolicy during the upcoming period. So, I would take a policy stancesomeplace between "B" and "C" for the second quarter, but give someweight to M2 as an informational guide as to what is happening in M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I want to come back to NOW accounts. Ihave basically the same concern that you expressed, Paul. If you lookat the behavior of the narrow aggregate as it used to be defined, itlooks as if there's some squeeze on it. If you look at it with NOWaccounts in it, it looks rather substantial. As a matter of fact, toput an exact point on it, if you use the old definition of M1--currency and demand deposits--you will find that in the seven monthssince the cyclical peak it has increased at an annual rate of only1-1/2 percent, which is the lowest growth rate of the last fourrecessions.On the other hand, if you include NOW accounts, you will findthat it has increased 7 percent at an annual rate in the seven monthssince the cyclical peak, which is the fastest rate of the last fourrecessions. So the way one looks at this NOW account surge makes allthe difference in the world. It may be that Frank is right. I thinkwe probably don't have a very good handle on how many NOW accounts arebeing opened. And I rather despair, this far into the exercise, offinding out much really useful information on the number of newaccounts. If he is right, it's not going to come out again becausethose are new accounts and the funds won't come out. Or it may bethat Steve is right that [the bulge reflects] precautionary balancesbut we don't know whether those precautionary balances are going tocome out or not. But the fact of the matter is that over the lastseveral months we've had very large growth rates in the NOW accountcomponent. What they call OCDs now was still 20 percent orthereabouts in March, Steve. I think that ought to affect the waythat we look at this target rate simply because we don't know what isgoing to happen to that component. We can't continue to squeeze whatamounts to corporate balances in order to accommodate the rise of NOWaccounts if they continue to rise at a very rapid rate in the periodahead.As I look at those paths, there's nothing at all exceptionalabout "A." It has 4-1/2 percent growth [in M1] in the 3 months fromMarch to June. That 4-1/2 percent growth doesn't sound like a largegrowth rate to me for M1 and that includes whatever disproportionateincrease was occurring in NOW accounts over that time. It didn't seemlarge in March; it was about 2 percent. February was, of course,minus but that was an unwinding of the demand deposit explosion inJanuary which did in fact, as you expected, totally unwind in themonth of February. Therefore, my view is that we ought to be prepared-38-3/29-30/82to accept modest continuing growth in M1, and 4-1/2 percent in my viewis modest. And if, in fact, these NOW accounts don't come out--thatis, if we don't get some correction of this very large increase thatwe had over the fall and winter--I don't think that will impact on thesecond half of the year because my view of the matter is that we oughtto change our targets. We ought to accept a higher growth rate forthe year as a whole, which would have been entirely because of theincrease early in the year associated with this explosion in NOWaccounts. That's if those balances don't come out. If they do comeout, then we can make room for it. I must say I see no reason tosqueeze the economy harder and harder at this point in time, given theconditions that we've been talking about and given the fact that weare looking at something that has the cosmetic oddity of an explosionin NOW accounts accounting for virtually all of the strength that wehave seen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would favor something very close to"B." It seems to me that it positions us reasonably well, givenuncertainties about the reversal of velocity in circulation. I wouldrecommend a slightly lower initial borrowing target. Instead of$1-1/4 billion, I'd opt for something like $1.1 billion, first of allbecause that's more likely to prevent the funds rate from going beyond14 percent. And secondly, if there is a bulge in April--if M1 growthis somewhat larger than the 9 percent--we can accommodate it moreeasily. That would demonstrate a consistency in policy but at thesame time I think it's really better to try to keep rates fromexceeding 14 percent in the next couple of months if possible. So, Iwould not think the answer should be between "B" and "C," but prettymuch "B" or in that area, with a slightly easier initial borrowingobjective.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I'm starting from the premise that we're notgoing to get inflation down much more unless we can sustain somedegree of pressure. So, I think some degree of pressure is consistentwith a moderate rate of growth. I doubt that it's consistent with the4.5 percent rate of growth of the GNP, not money supply, that thestaff has forecast for the second half. That is really quite a goodgrowth rate, and in that environment I think concerns about excessivewage payments will yield very quickly to a feeling that now is thetime to catch up--that people have made sacrifices and they need to berewarded by compensatory higher increases. Now, a policy of about 3percent [real GNP growth] should allow for possibly some reduction in[un]employment. It depends on productivity. I think it carries somerisks that a financial crisis might hit. But as we look at theinterest rate projections of the staff, they don't seem to indicatethat the problem of the thrifts will be greatly alleviated no matterwhat we do. There's the danger also that the dollar may go higher.If we do damage to our exports, we may do damage to other countriesthat reflects back on us. I think that danger is less because theyare now beginning to realize that a high dollar is not so much of arisk for them and that they can afford to reduce their interest rates.Now if one accepts, as I do, aiming at something like 3 percent realgrowth, then I think alternative A really lacks credibility. It lackscredibility, anyway, in terms of our [long-run] targets because it3/29-30/82means that we're going to be above our targets for the rest of theyear. And we're going to have that held against us continually.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Targets? It doesn't say [that] about M2.MR. WALLICH. Target. [M1] would nevertheless be the keytarget that people will look at. We will look at the M2 increasingly;I agree that we want to put greater weight on M2 partly because of theuncertainty surrounding M1. If one thinks that the growth of M1 isvery low, one might conceptually add some of the money market mutualfunds to it--10 percent or 20 percent of which surely are transactionsbalances--and that would produce a much better growth rate in M1.Now, there is a danger of making the same mistake Mrs. Thatcher did:that is, chasing an aggregate that is actually positively interestrate sensitive. The harder you lean, the harder it blows; as sterlingM3 grows, the more they tighten. There is some danger, I think, inour situation of falling for that with M1. So, I would put somewhatless emphasis on M1, but I wouldn't ignore it.MR. PARTEE. Do you mean M1 or M2?MR. WALLICH. M1, because M1 contains a saving component.MR. PARTEE. But M2 contains all these things.MR. WALLICH. Well, it may have the same defect. Either way,it would lead me to somewhere between "B" and "C." And I would notlike to see interest rates go up at this point, so I would hesitate togo with a rise in borrowing. But something like the present level ofborrowing would seem to me appropriate and would move us towardgetting back into our target ranges over the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. My concern is the reported understatement of M1 interms of our money funds, the sweep accounts, and all these otherphenomena. If that were constant, I wouldn't be so concerned; but Ithink it's a growing proportion, so we may be getting more growththere than we recognize. With that in mind, I'm a little sympatheticto the problem of getting beyond April and what we do from there. Iwould associate myself with the comments being made with respect to"B" leaning a little toward "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have Mr. Ford, and then we'llhave breakfast.MR. FORD. I come out for the "B" solution that a number ofpeople have expressed. We also have gone through this exercise thatwas just mentioned of making some allowance for a small fraction ofthe money market funds being transaction oriented and otheradjustments like that. And it seems to indicate, if you give anycredence at all to that, that we are pumping in enough money to keepthe economy going. I hope the staff is right with all the Arima stuffthat if and when we see this pop in the numbers early in April it willbe corrected before we get back here at the end of May. Well, I don'tknow if you said May and June. Did I hear you right that you wouldanticipate if we did get a big problem in early April that it would be[unwound]?-40-3/29-30/82MR. AXILROD. It looks as if under all the alternatives that6/10ths of it comes out in May and, depending on which of thealternatives you pick, either all [the rest] comes out in June ortakes a little longer.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unfortunately, when we get back here inMay, I think we'll just have the April figures, basically.MR. FORD. That's right; so we won't know. The timing isbad. I certainly hope you guys are right about that coming down. Inthe meantime, I would be willing to take the risk of going as high as"B" or just a little below "B" in the hope that you're right eventhough we are going to be in a very uneasy position the next time wemeet since we may have seen the high numbers you are worried aboutwithout having time to have seen whether or not it tails off. I thinksome caution is in order and, therefore, I'd avoid going toward "A" sothat, with this neat little table you've cooked up on the bottom ofpage 10 [of the Bluebook], we leave ourselves some room to breathe incase you're wrong about that. That's why I'd say "B" would be a goodplace to be, with a borrowing assumption somewhere near where we arenow, around $1.4 or maybe $1.3 billion; you suggested $1-1/4 billion.In sum, I believe alternative B and somewhere in the $1-1/4 to $1.4billion area [on the borrowing assumption] would be reasonable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that last comment you made?MR. FORD. I'd go with the borrowing assumption associatedwith "B" rather than lightening up on it as Tony suggested. The staffsuggested $1-1/4 billion, as I read the Bluebook, and currently I'mtold it is at $1.4 billion. Is that right?MR. STERNLIGHT. Borrowing of $1.4 billion is implicit inthis week's objective.MR. FORD. The objective, yes. So, I'd stay somewhere aroundwhat is in alternative B rather than lightening up on the borrowing.That's because, if we're worried about a big explosion in early Apriland if that were accompanied by an explosion of borrowing, I'd say weought to hustle back toward the path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't have a coffee break. PrestonMartin has been confirmed by the Senate this morning, and may evenhave a signed commission. We'll go out and see where he is.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We're in] a delicate stage here. PrestonMartin, whom I introduced to all of you who have not known him--youcan talk to him after the meeting--has been confirmed by the Senate.He has a commission signed. He is not sworn in, so he doesn't have tovote but we thought he could observe this strange [unintelligible].I told him we are in midstream. I guess we will swear him intomorrow. We are halfway through people expressing their opinions invarying degrees of precision about what we should do in a veryimprecise art. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, given the market fears that thedeficit and the recession might push us off the target paths, I think3/29-30/82it would be a mistake to let M1 stay above the upper limit for anyextended period of time. If such a result were to occur, I think itwould reignite inflationary expectations and maybe even moreimportantly it would weaken long-term markets, which I believe wouldbe a pretty disastrous thing to have happen at this particular point.So, I think it's very important that we react promptly to any out-sized bulge in the money supply in April. January's bulge hasn'twashed out completely, and if we are not perceived as reacting prettypromptly to a bulge in April, then doubts about our anti-inflationaryresolve will increase. So, I would prefer "C;" I could go somewhattoward "B" if there's an understanding that we're going to reactpretty promptly against any large sized bulge in April that is greaterthan the short-term figures that we're looking at. And I think itwould be desirable to widen the federal funds range; I would suggest12 to 18 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I expressed earlier, in mycomments about where the economy is going, the doubts that I have inmind as to the prospect for a recovery of the dimensions the staff isforecasting. I would say again that I think the state of the economyis principally the consequence of monetary restraint--principally ourresponsibility, not that of anybody else--although I would acknowledgethat fears of the deficit are contributing to the mood around thecountry. It's also our responsibility in the sense that we permitteda rather substantial increase in interest rates right in the middle ofa very deep and deepening recession. I'm very much impressed with theline of argument that Chuck has developed. We really have somethingvery, very unusual going on in the growth of M1 as it's currentlymeasured. To put his point a different way: It is true that onecould explain small or even moderate sized differences in growth ratesof the various elements of M1 on the basis of differences in incomeand interest rate elasticities. But there's no way in the world thatone can explain the kind of divergences that we have seen between coinand currency, demand deposits, and OCDs except by reference tosomething very, very unusual happening to the demand for OCDs. And wedon't know what it is. It may be a continuing shift into OCDs becausethe process that began last year has not yet been completed. It maybe a liquidity preference kind of development. We just don't knowwhat it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may interject. There's just onefactor here that hasn't been mentioned, which I want to mention forthe sake of completeness. I think it's probably largely liquiditypreference. Part of it may just be a plain bad seasonal. We may notknow how to seasonally adjust the OCDs. And maybe the distribution isreally different than we think it is.MR. GRAMLEY. I think the growth of M1 since last Octobergreatly overstated the extent to which monetary policy has beenstimulating the economy. Another factor that convinces me that thisis the case is looking at the prospective growth rates, fourthquarter-to-first quarter, of the various monetary aggregates.Although less disparate and less unusual than the fourth quarter-to-February numbers, they still show a progressive decline in the growthrate as you get to the broader aggregates: 10.3 percent for M1, 9.6percent for M2, and 8.6 percent for M3.-42-3/29-30/82I don't think any alternative more restrictive than "A" is atall suitable. I think we ought to permit the economy to have the kindof growth in narrow money balances and broader money balances that isneeded for some recovery in economic activity. I'd remind you, inlooking at alternatives B and C, that the M2 figures in B and C are7-1/2 and 6-3/4 percent, [respectively]. And our experience in thepast several years suggests as a first rough approximation that we aregoing to get an increase in nominal GNP that is approximately inproportion to the growth of M2. The velocity of M2 has not been veryvariable recently. And over the last three quarters of this year whatour staff is projecting is not a 7-1/2 or 6-3/4 percent increase innominal GNP, but a 9.4 percent increase, or somewhere around 9-1/2percent. So, I think alternative A is where we ought to go. And Ithink we ought to be very, very careful about trying to run too fastto offset a bulge in April which may reflect nothing more than thefact that we've changed our process of seasonal adjustment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What nominal GNP growth do you have forthe year?MR. GRAMLEY. Now, I was speaking of the last three quarters.MR. KICHLINE. Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter is about7-1/4 percent. The first quarter is zero.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is it on an annual average basis?MR. KICHLINE. 6-1/4 percent.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I'd just ask one question, becauseI'm lost on this argument concerning the effect of NOW accounts. NOWaccounts are a part of M1, are they not? And if they are, that moneyis usable by the banks. It's a different name for a different type oftransaction balance. But why does that distort M1 growth if a certainamount of M1 growth is a reflection of growing NOW accounts? I lostthat. If we are trying to figure total M1 as it is and are trying toquantify it in terms of the effect of its growth on the economy, andpart of that M1 is reflective of NOW account growth, why does thatdistort the usefulness of M1 as an aggregate?MR. PARTEE. It's a mixed account, Larry. It has elements ofa savings account in it, too.MR. ROOS. Yes, but that money is there in the bank and--MR. PARTEE. Well, the money would have been there before butit would have been in savings accounts.MR. MORRIS. Another answer to Larry's question is that thepresent growth ranges for M1 are fundamentally based on the old M1.That is, we wanted to show a progressively shrinking number. Now thefact is that this new M1 is a different animal from the old M1. Weare applying the old M1 yardstick to something that is different fromthe old M1. And that's the source of the problem.MR. ROOS. So, you are saying that our original targets wereset differently than they would have been had we known that M1 was-43-3/29-30/82going to be expanded by the advent of these NOW accounts? I thinkthat's a--MR. MORRIS. Yes.MR. WALLICH. M1 could also be influenced by other thingsthat change velocity. We've been more often deceived byunderestimating velocity gains than overestimating them. And rightnow we see ahead of us two sources of velocity gain. One is thecontinued money fund expansion; the other is sweeps. We can't be surewe'll get that velocity, but I think it's less dangerous to bet onthat than to bet on the opposite.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, as to the comments thathave been made, ranging from chasing aggregates to the NOW accountanalysis, and did we have a bulge or didn't we: What does it mean?The comments about leaving some room in the second half of the year Ithink are all relevant. And in the context of this potential Aprilbulge problem, they take on a special significance. But I think theyalso relate in a fundamental way to an analytic problem that I don'tthink we have quite dealt with yet. The manifestation of thatanalytic problem is the simultaneous phenomenon of a lot of interestrate variability and a lot of money supply variability. We sit here,of course, and make judgments about reserve paths and we makejudgments about changing those reserve paths. But implicit in bothsetting the paths and changing the paths is this notion that it isultimately changes in interest rates that are the trigger variablethat sets in place the adjustments in portfolios that in turnultimately reflect themselves in altered rates of growth of the moneysupply. Now, that's all well and good. But I think we have to keepsome perspective on that. The perspective that I think is importantis the recognition that those interest rate changes are only one ofthe factors that determine the nature and pace of the portfolioadjustments that ultimately do reflect themselves in the rate ofgrowth of the money supply. In the context that we are operating now,it seems to me almost self-evident that the nature of thoseadjustments in response to any pattern of interest rate change has initself changed. Indeed to take the extreme--and this is relevant inthe context of this April bulge--if we are going to smooth out allthose bulges and all those short-run blips in the money supply, wemust be prepared to get to the point where the interest rate impactthat we can create by changing reserve paths is large enough tooutweigh all those other factors, ranging from seasonal adjustmentfactors on up. Now, as it may impact on the observed behavior of themoney supply in the short run, we must be prepared at the extreme todo that in a context in which, at least in my mind, the jury is out asto what the nature of the interest elasticity of money demand is.Indeed, I still find myself, at times at least, attracted to theargument that in some sense we may be creating some of the variabilitythat we have seen in both money and interest rates by the nature ofour own activities. I'm not persuaded of that, but at least I have toleave my mind open to it.In that analytical setting, I must say I would be a littletroubled with the prospect of aggressively chasing a bulge in themoney supply in April, even though that would prolong the amount of-44-3/29-30/82time that we might be over the stated targets for the behavior of M1for this year. Again, from an analytical point of view, I think Mr.Axilrod's earlier comments are relevant here. If that were to happen,it does in some sense aggravate the problem. But at the same time, ifsome of the speculation around the table about this NOW accountphenomenon is accurate, one could still reasonably expect that the NOWaccount build-up would wind down later in the year and still wouldleave plenty of room for the kind of expansion in the economy that isimplicit in the staff's forecast. The long and the short of it frommy point of view would be at this time to go slow indeed in terms ofthis April bulge, should it materialize. I hope it doesn't because ifit doesn't, we're obviously in pretty good shape in any event. As tospecifics, I would come out somewhere between "A" and "B." And if wegot a bulge, and the net result were that we ended up with a quarterthat looked like "A," that wouldn't bother me all that much either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I'm basically impressed by the fact that all ofour worst fears have been realized. We have nearly 9 percentunemployment. For every Federal Reserve District, the openingsentence in the Redbook was about depression or not functioning wellor no sign of recovery. We have the thrifts going down. We have aliquidity crisis in the thrift industry in at least half of theDistricts. We have a massive reduction in credit ratings, as Emmettmentioned, and a very high level of business failures. What more doyou want? We have the economy essentially out flat. And under any ofthese alternatives we don't get a great deal of recovery. At the endof the [projection period] we get to maybe 75 percent capacityutilization and still have well over 8 percent unemployment. As Ithought through it, so many of our other problems would be alleviatedif we just had some reduction in interest rates at this point. Itwouldn't help all the thrifts, but it would certainly help some. Andgoing along with a 13-1/2 percent or 13-1/4 percent interest rate,[with rates] rising sharply next year, is not my idea of how to putthis economy back to work.Given the alternatives that we have and the wide division ofpreferences here, I obviously want to associate myself with GovernorPartee and Governor Gramley and go for alternative A. And if it turnsout that that's not doing the job of recovery then, as I said lasttime, we should raise our targets. We can do it a number of differentways. The one modification I would make on "A" is that I would go fora billion dollars of borrowing rather than $750 million because Ithink the $750 million is too strong a signal that we are going forease. But I don't think 13 percent is an acceptable level of interestrates for this stage of the [cycle]. I think we can do more. I havesome reluctance to ease sharply because I don't think we are going toget the correction in the federal deficit that we need to offset thecollision course that I anticipate next year if the deficit is notchanged. But, under normal circumstances and with a normal fiscalpolicy, we should be a lot easier than we are now. And the fact thatfiscal policy is so overly expansionary is the only thing that keepsme from urging an even greater relaxation in monetary policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.-45-3/29-30/82MR. BOEHNE. There was a good bit of talk earlier aboutjeopardizing the gains that our policy has brought so far, but theother side of that is that we also must avoid becoming prisoners ofour own mechanical procedures. And I think the questions that Chuckand Frank and others have raised about NOW accounts underscore thatfact. We don't really have a good handle on M1 and whether we'reexcessively tight or excessively easy. So, I think we ought not befearful about superimposing our judgments on these procedures. Iwould start out with alternative B, but I would accept errors in thedirection of alternative A. I would find erring on the side of "C"not to be acceptable. I would put an M2 sentence in the directive anduse it primarily as an informational variable. I think we ought togive more weight to M2 in this period. But my main point is that weought to remain more flexible than usual in this period by weighingthe incoming information on the economy, the size of the [M1] bulge,if any, and interest rates and so on, and not become overly wedded toa set of policy specifications that we agree to today and that mayrequire more frequent consultations than usual.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I will admit to a significant bias caused by thecircumstances in the Middle Western District. And though I certainlydon't disagree in any way with the fundamentals of the staff economicforecast, I am skeptical or merely unconvinced with regard to thetiming as well as the strength of the recovery. Also, it seems to methat an awful lot of uncertainty about the composition of M1 and M2has been expressed around the table. Meanwhile, we have an economythat is operating under the very most difficult circumstancespossible. While I'm not in any way suggesting a major change in whatwe are doing or how we are doing it, I do think that we have toprovide at least a modest degree of relief, and it seems to me thatalternative A is a way of doing that. I would be very strongly infavor of alternative A as a way of trying to accommodate a possiblebulge that could occur in April, but particularly because M2 is in areasonable position within its range. So, I would very much be infavor of alternative A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I listen to this dialogueand debate, one thing seems to stand out loud and clear as far as manyof us are concerned. And I think Frank expressed it and othersfollowed: That the observed money supply has really overstated theeffective money supply, given the fact that so much of the growthsince November has come in NOW accounts and in OCDs. Therefore, Iwould join those who would not be in too much of a hurry to leanagainst that kind of bulge. In responding to the tactical questionthat Steve posed to the Committee of how long we can continue to letM1 run above its range for the year, if this bulge had come in regulardemand deposits, I'd be on the other side of the fence. But since itdidn't and since the April bulge will be equally mysterious for awhile, I would not be in any hurry to lean too hard against it untilwe have more solid information as to what we're really doing. Iexpressed myself pretty forcefully earlier on about the urgency ofgetting real interest rates down. We can't do much about long rates.That is going to have to be a solution that depends on some majorefforts to get the budget deficit down. But I think we can do3/29-30/82something in the short run about short-term interest rates. And I'mreally quite concerned that in the immediate future, unless theseshort rates come down, we are going to be inhibiting seriously if notaborting a prospective recovery. Where all this nets out is that Iwould lean somewhere between "A" and "B" in terms of what we ought tobe doing in the March-to-June period. And as others have suggested,I'd place more emphasis on M2 in view of the low visibility that weare going to have on the meaning of the M1 figures, particularly as wemove into April. As I say, I'd not be in too much of a hurry to getback within that range until we get better information on what thetrue effective money supply is, based on its changing behavior [and]content.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, Governor Partee stated thecase for alternative A very well, I thought. I don't have anythingreally to add to that. I would just like to remind everyone of what Ithought I heard Mr. Axilrod say and that is that alternatives C and Bassume that the NOW accounts or precautionary balances or whatever youwant to call them are going to work themselves out very soon. And ifthey don't, there is the likely implied risk of their being anobstacle to the recovery. I don't think we ought to take that risk.We don't need to take that risk and I think we'd leave ourselves in aposition to be more flexible if we adopt alternative A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, as I stated prior to the recess, thedecisions we make today have to be made in the context of what theywill mean for our policy in the second half of the year. In lookingat this, I don't think we can take lightly the targets that we haveannounced. I don't think we can assume glibly that we can arbitrarilyadjust those targets upward when we make our July adjustment withoutrisking a perception by market participants that our action was pavingthe way toward further inflation. And if we made an upward adjustmentin order to bring relief to the economy, I would assume that it wouldhave exactly the opposite effect from what its proponents might beseeking; an upward adjustment in our annual ranges would probablybring an upward movement in interest rates rather than any reductionin interest rates.So, I would opt for something like alternative B because Ithink it would position us probably as well as we could anticipateunder our present difficult circumstances. But I feel just asstrongly as anyone could feel that if we temporize, that if we do havean April bulge and if we say we don't want to be mechanistic [inresponding to it] or however we phrase it, we are going to getourselves in a position where we are going to have to live withunacceptably fast growth of M1 in the first part of the year. If welook at it from day to day and from week to week, and if by doing so,as we have occasionally in the past, we validate that increase anddon't take action to pinch it out and pinch it out awfully quickly, Ithink we are going to have to jam on the brakes in the second half ofthe year. And that is going to bring us a negative reaction in termsof economic activity later this year or early next year and and wewill be accused of having precipitated another recession. Regardlessof how we want to view it and explain it--and nobody is more skillful-47-3/29-30/82than you are, Mr. Chairman, in explaining the confusion that arisesout of NOW accounts or sweep accounts or financial innovations--thepeople out there who set these interest rates have their eye on M1.You can't fool them into saying, well, M1 has performed this way andM2 has performed that way. That is what runs this locomotive and Ithink we have to recognize those things. And that's why I woulddisagree with those who say that we shouldn't respond quickly if thisbulge occurs. I think it is incumbent upon us to react very quickly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee has an additional comment.MR. PARTEE. Well, yes. Larry, I don't regard that targetfor this year as set in stone. I think there are circumstances underwhich we would be prepared to shift the target. What I said was thatif the NOW account dominance continues and we find ourselves, let'ssay when we next meet, looking at a sustained 30 percent rate ofincrease in NOW accounts or something like that, I think then would bethe time to consider whether or not to make an adjustment in thetargets for the year, based on an unexpected strength in NOW accounts--not in M1 generally, but in the NOW account performance--because ofsome kind of precautionary development. Now, I'm inclined to thinkthat [the bulge] is going to come out. I can't understand why peoplewould keep so much money in their NOW accounts at 5 percent interestwhen they can get substantially more in almost any alternative theycould go into. Or, Paul may be right; the seasonal may be bad, butthat would bring it out too. That is, if the seasonal has been wrongin the first part of the year, by definition it will be wrong later onand we'll see a weakness in NOW accounts. Or it could be that thesweep accounts will develop so that we'll get an observed slowing inMl because sweeps are taking money out of the accounts. I don't wantto prejudge at this point but I'd just say that if in fact NOWaccounts continue to perform as they have so far this year I, for one,certainly would be prepared to change the targets. And I think theChairman could very readily state why we changed the targets. Itwould not be because we eased but because of this unexpecteddevelopment with regard to NOW accounts. We have to have that kind offreedom or we're slavishly stuck with numbers whose contents we don'tknow.One other comment I would like to make is that I rather agreewith the thought that we ought to use M2 more as an informationdevice. But I'm still very concerned that I don't have a good handleon what information M2 is giving us. It looks as if we are going tohave to pay more attention to M2 in the period ahead than in theperiod past, and I would like to have the staff begin to develop arationale, which so far is totally lacking, for using an M2 guide.[We need information on] what kind of cyclical attributes or interestrates or elasticity attributes M2 would have. I think we need thatbefore we can really rely on it, because we don't know what thebehavior of that number [means] in the short run.MR. ROOS. There have been studies and recent studies made--not that our studies are necessarily all inclusive or all conclusive--that show that M2 is a much inferior predictor of economic activitythan M1 and that we can't control it.MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, there are people who maintainjust the opposite: that M2 is a better predictor. I think the last3/29-30/82study I was associated with showed that we got very little additionalinformation when we added the M2 components to M1. And I don't knowthat that has changed much. But M1 is deteriorating, I think, and itmay be that we'll have to have a rationale for using M2. There's noreason that can't be developed. After all, until he found that hedidn't have so much to hit the Federal Reserve over the head with,Milton Friedman was for M2; it's only recently that he has changed toM1.MS. TEETERS. Could I ask Steve to repeat his proposal on howwe might use M2? I don't think I understood it.MR. AXILROD. Well, what I was suggesting was that if M1 wererunning strong relative to this 8 to 10 percent that we think makes arough allowance for the possibly peculiar behavior of April, theCommittee might consider in effect adjusting the reserve paths whenthat is happening if M2 is not running strong--if it were runningright around the top of its range or something close to where it isnow. On the other hand, I also thought that because of theuncertainties in April, if M1 were running weak, it might simply meanthat we did make a good seasonal adjustment; and you may not want toreact to that. Then, too, you could take into account the behavior ofM2 and, if M2 were also running weak, it might mean that the moneysupply as a whole could be considered to be running weak relative toyour basic objectives. I'm suggesting using M2 as kind of a fly wheelto help judge the behavior of the whole group of aggregates, given theuncertainty about M1 in April and May.MS. TEETERS. As I read the first quarter, we had atremendous increase in M1 but the associated increase in M2 was notall that strong. Is that correct?MR. AXILROD. Well, it was a pretty good growth. I may beoff slightly in my number, but it's something like 9-1/2 percent on aquarterly average basis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a little high on a quarterlyaverage basis. If you look at it on a December-to-March basis, it'sjust about at the top of the range.MR. AXILROD. It would be 9 percent from December to March;it's running right at the top of the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't heard from Mr. Boykin and Mr.Morris in terms of specifics.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative B.Given the uncertainties and what we don't know about April and what wedon't know about the NOW accounts and many other things, alternative Bwould seem to me to represent a prudent course that would at leastposition us to address the situation as it becomes clarified withoutan abrupt change in direction. With respect to the conversation abouta change in the ranges, it seems to me that any change should be avery forthright decision as opposed to a de facto working in thatdirection, which I think alternative A might do. So, at this point intime at least, alternative B seems to me the prudent place to be.-49-3/29-30/82MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, there was a time when we hadanother man named Martin on this Committee.MR. MARTIN. A much better tennis player!MR. MORRIS. He used to talk about leaning against the wind.If you want to know which way the wind is blowing right now, the windis clearly blowing the economy down. Therefore, we ought to have apolicy which is conducive to a turnaround in the economy, even if weonly get a sluggish upturn as I expect. So, for all the other reasonsthat Lyle gave, I would support alternative A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you were against a leaning inthe wind policy.MR. MORRIS. I used to be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon how strong the winds areblowing. I guess we've been through everybody with a little varietyof opinion.MR. PARTEE. Except for you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Members of the Committee are nicely splitand nonmembers of the Committee are nicely split. We have an oddnumber of nonmembers, so they're not quite split evenly; there is asmall majority.Let me say just, in terms of changing the targets and howtemporary this NOW account phenomenon is and whether it's partlyseasonal, that I have a little suspicion that we're not going to knowby the next meeting, unfortunately. My suspicion is that if it ispartly seasonal, we ought to begin learning about it rapidly afterApril. That's because it may be partly a tax phenomenon: Individualsbuild up their balances--and they always did, we just didn't know itbefore--as we move into April. But the timing of the next meeting isgoing to give us maybe one week's clue to that, I guess, the way itworks out. We are not going to have much of a track record, but wewill have to live with that.MR. PARTEE. Well, we wouldn't have to [change the ranges] infact until the July meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends. We can [change theranges] any time. But by July we certainly ought to have a handle onthat. We may not know all the answers; we may not know why; but wewill have more suspicions and we will have some results of whateveranalytic or survey work we do.Just in terms of the economy, I share the view that was goingaround earlier. The staff has [projected] a pretty good recovery,considering the circumstances and considering that we don't want tolose the progress on inflation. But there are a lot of doubts thattend to register on the low side rather than on the high side. If wegot that much, I wouldn't be unhappy. I don't think we are in aposition where it would be wise to try to manipulate interest ratesovertly downward. I'd love to see them come down and stay down. I-50-3/29-30/82wouldn't love to see them come down for a month and then have to go upagain. That would kill us for a variety of reasons, I think.Anyhow, we have this great variety of opinion. I think whatis of operational significance before we meet again is largely goingto be how to handle this April situation. We don't know in whichdirection it's going to go. We have a great split in opinion on theCommittee. I must say I reconcile that in my mind very nicely, but Idon't know whether the rest of you do. Given all the problems wehave, I think it may make more sense in the short run--or even in thelong-run period given the doubts about what M1 means in some cases--ineffect to watch pretty closely what is happening to M2. For M2 overthe course of the year as a whole we've been anticipating growth ofsomething between 8 and 9 percent; I suppose slightly below 8 percentis the staff's forecast for the year as a whole. Nobody knows forsure whether it's reasonable analytically or not, but with the kind ofnominal GNP that results from a quite reasonable economic forecast Idon't think it's a bad forecast in terms of our objectives and wherewe want to go. And M2 in the 8 to 9 percent area seems to be [viable]against recent experience. Maybe recent experience is no good, but inthe last 3 years M2 has been within 1 percent of that and we havenever had a decrease in velocity of more than 1 percent. And if itcame out in the 8 or 9 percent area, it would seem to allow enough forthis forecast, if nothing else went wrong. Given all theuncertainties in M1, and given the doubts in the economy, I would notfeel comfortable about tightening up in effect to chase too hard at anApril M1 figure if M2 is also running low. I don't know whetherthat's going to be the case; I have no reason to believe that it willbe the case, but I would feel very uncomfortable about "tightening,"in the common parlance, with a low M2 figure at the same time. So, Icome out close to the A alternative so far as M2 is concerned. Let'ssay around 8 percent. I'm not sure I'd want to push on M1; it's verydoubtful where it's going to go, but I don't know that we have to setout for a 4-1/2 percent M1 figure. I don't even know what it means inthe context of dealing with it before the next meeting if we are goingto allow for more [growth] than that in April because we will comeback by the time we know April and then re-decide on the basis of whatwe know about April. But the more orderly thing for M1 somehow doesseem to me to be something like "B," which on the face of it brings usback about where we want to be, if you take the numbers literally. ByJune or July it follows what the midpoint of the range would have beenif we had started from the base of last year's target rather than fromwhere we did start. It doesn't say we can't raise it if all theanalysis shows [the need for] that. But I feel a little morecomfortable with something on the lower side for M1, particularly ifM1 produces a little miracle for us and comes out lower than we nowexpect in April and early May.MR. PARTEE. Well, as you say, as a practical matter, it'salmost entirely where we set April. "B" has April at 9.1 percent and"A" has it at 9.9 percent. I don't care whether it is put at 9 or--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether either of those isright. It seems a little strange, putting all our money on somebody'sjudgmental correction of a seasonal adjustment which is doubtful. Itis piling doubts on doubts. But I think we have to reach somejudgment as to how we want to accommodate or not accommodate, howrapidly we respond to an increase, and where we set the borrowing in-51-3/29-30/82the first place. If we set the path consistent with a lower level ofborrowing than we now have, which is what--$1-1/4 billion roughly?MR. AXILROD. The current week's path implies $1.4 billion inborrowing.MR. STERNLIGHT. The last several weeks would average morelike $1-1/4 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me finish. If we [set theborrowing level] below that, theoretically we produce a little easing.If the April bulge is [large] enough, we might have to respond to somedegree; it would give us a little more room for responding withoutbeing any higher than we would have been in the first place. I don'tknow whether that is a good idea or a bad idea. But I can imaginethat in a difficult circumstance it might give us a little leewaywithout sending things through the roof. If we have to respond tosome degree, maybe it does make some sense to start out at $1.1 or$1.2 billion or something in that area. I guess that's what I wouldpropose and we'll see what happens. I'd leave the federal funds raterange where it is. I'm not sure at this time that I would want toannounce a higher fed funds rate range. If anything, I'd ratherannounce a lower one, but I--MS. TEETERS. Where is it now--11 to 18 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 12 to 16 percent happens to be whereit is now. [Not changing it] in some sense just doesn't raise aquestion. I surely would feel uncomfortable about raising it.MR. PARTEE. Then why don't we widen that range again towhere we like it and make it 11 to 16 percent?MS. TEETERS. With a billion dollars of borrowing.MR. PARTEE. A lot of Committee members would like a widerfed funds range and this seems an ideal time to do it, consistent withthose desires, Mr. Chairman.MR. BLACK. Widen it at both ends?MR. PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not among those who are enamored of anenormously wide range, but I wouldn't object to that. Well, let methrow something like this out on the table: Something around 8percent for M2; something close to, say, "B" for M1; and 12 to 16percent for the funds rate range--I don't feel strongly about 11 to 16percent; and for borrowing let's say $1.1 billion, just to pick afigure out, to start the path off. The operational question iswhether we build into the path some allowance for a bulge in April.If we do and it doesn't appear, then we get the borrowings droppingpretty fast.MR. AXILROD. That's what I was going to mention, Mr.Chairman.-52-3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we can make it asymmetrical, if wewant to.MR. AXILROD. Well, we could go whichever way the Committeewants. What we have proposed is given in the Bluebook, which would beallowing for something like 8 or 9 percent [M1 growth] in April tostart with and zero in May. But if the first week or two in Aprilseems weak rather than strong [relative to] the 8 or 9 percent, therewould be no reason--if it were consistent with the Committee's view--not to reconstruct the path to where it would allow for 3 or 4 percent[growth] each month, as we normally would do, absent some doubts aboutApril itself. But that would depend on getting some evidence in theearly part of April.MS. TEETERS. Steve, when does that bulge come? Does itusually come in the first weeks of April or a little early?MR. AXILROD. Well, last year in the first week of April, M1seasonally adjusted rose $5.4 billion: unadjusted it rose $17 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can see the difficulty of thisbusiness just in that figure. We had a $17 billion increase in themoney supply in one week last April that came out to $5-1/2 billion orwhatever seasonally adjusted. They sit there and guess. Well, maybethis week it will be $18 billion. Who knows when you get that big afigure?MR. AXILROD. This year we've allowed--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they have made a good estimate if itis anywhere between $5 and $20 billion, I suppose. But that's goingto produce all the difference between a minus and a big plus number inthe seasonally adjusted figures.MS. TEETERS. The point I want to get at is that we wouldknow early if it is going to occur. It probably would occur early inthe month of April; that is traditionally when it has happened.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am not sure. Is that right?MR. AXILROD. The earlier it occurs, the bigger the odds areon the month being high. Last year it occurred early. In 1979 theincrease unadjusted was pretty large; the first week had the biggestincrease but the last 3 weeks had increases, unadjusted, of about 50percent. So, it was fairly evenly spread in 1979, looking at theunadjusted number. And in 1978 it was more in the first week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A lot of it does depend on how the taxchecks are handled and that would be after the 15th. If they sit onthem for a while, then we get a big increase after the 15th.MR. AXILROD. The market is sitting around worried that thefirst week will be strong, largely because they have looked at lastyear. And, as I say, we are projecting a big increase, $3.2 billionseasonally adjusted. If that didn't develop, and the week of the 14thweren't strong, we would get a preliminary view of that in mid-April.Then one would tend to think that it would be better [to constructthe] path on a more even basis, consistent with whatever view the-53-3/29-30/82Committee has as to what it wants for the 2 months. But it would takea week or two to know about that.MR. BOEHNE. That means it would be mid to late April beforewe'd really get a handle on it.MR. AXILROD. Yes, if the Committee wants to give someflexibility to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we have now deals with hopes, but wehave a minus coming up this week. We expect--we have a string of"ifs" here--if it held the following week, we would have room for someincrease in the first week in April without making April high.SPEAKER(?). That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But who knows whether any of it will hold?MR. PARTEE. As you suggest this, would you visualize that wewould say in the directive that we're seeking growth in M1 at a 3percent rate from March to June? No, it can't be; that's too low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That isn't very low compared to ourtargets.MR. PARTEE. It's well below, I tell you. As we say, we areprepared to take 5 percent or so when we are running in a currentstate well below what we say our target ranges are. I'm prepared togive up. I'm prepared to concede the winter as being a NOW accountsurge if it doesn't go away.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, if it doesn't go away. But how do weknow that it is going away?MR. PARTEE. But if it goes away, we ought to be running asteady state that is closer to our target ranges.MR. FORD. Yes, but Chuck--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but if we also say M2 around 8percent and the staff builds that operationally into the path, comingout with a path that's somewhere between "A" and "B" is not asrestrictive as the 3 percent.MR. PARTEE. But M2 has very little effect on the path.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, [unintelligible] deal more.MR. GRAMLEY. Is the path that we are building one that saysa 9 percent increase in M1 in April and a 10 percent increase in M2?If so, I'm not worried too much about the words.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I would buy that.MR. GRAMLEY. I am worried about the substance of yourargument. I think 3 percent as a target for the second quarterassumes that we are going to get a reversal of this build-up in OCDs,and I am not at all sure that that is going to take place. And I3/29-30/82don't want policy to follow a course that is going to push up interestrates if that doesn't happen. On the other hand, if we have a pathbased on a 9 or 9.1 percent increase or thereabouts for M1 in Apriland a 10 percent increase in M2, then we can come back next time andlook at it again. Maybe that--MR. PARTEE. Yes, I agree. But I thought we were wavering onwhat we were going to build into the path.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, that's what I wanted to be sure of.MS. TEETERS. Are 3 percent for M1 and 8-1/4 percent for M2compatible? The 3 percent M1 [in the Bluebook alternatives] has 7-1/2percent M2.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's what we have in there. Thatassumes a decline in growth in the nontransactions component ofsomething more like 9 percent. That is a drop from the rate of growthwe have in the first quarter. If that doesn't happen, then I'd sayit's more like alternative A. So, again, it depends on how much scopethe Committee, in its own judgment, wants to leave.MR. GRAMLEY. The thing that I think we need to worry aboutnow is the phenomenon that happened last summer. In putting moreattention on M2, I think we let more constraint develop on the economyex post than we wanted. And Governor Partee was reminding us over andover again that we were going to do that. I wish I had listened tohim then. I think that's something that we have to be careful aboutin April. If the M1 number happens to come in at 3 percent, let'ssay, one could easily interpret that as no bulge. But in fact if theeconomy was weakening and the signals of economic weakness weregathering [momentum], then we would be sitting back and accepting 3percent and it would just be the wrong thing to do.MR. PARTEE. Then we'd have a quite weak May and June.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.MR. PARTEE. That's right.MR. CORRIGAN. But if the NOW accounts were starting tounwind, 3 percent wouldn't be the wrong thing to do.MR. PARTEE. That's right.MR. GRAMLEY. If that were happening and if we had a fairlysignificant continuing growth of currency and demand deposits and M2and the OCD phenomenon began to unwind, then I wouldn't worry too muchabout it, particularly if it were not accompanied by further signs ofdeveloping economic weakness.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't know the meaning of that Aprilphenomenon. We'd have a very strange result if M1 in April were goingup by 9 percent and M2 were going up quite a lot and we got an easingmarket.MR. GRAMLEY. Can we take a vote just to go right on to Mayinstead of all this?-55-3/29-30/82MR. BLACK. Let's stick to the one we all can agree on!MR. FORD. I like the combination that you cooked up here,Paul, if I understand it correctly. You are saying to the Desk, as Iwould interpret it, to anticipate unusual growth in M1 and don't getexcited about it unless both M1 and M2 get completely blown away, witha very high M2 growth rate and an M1 that was going over the estimatethat's built in. The Committee would be saying, as I understand you,start to close in on the path and come back to the path fairly rapidlyonly under those conditions--if both M1 and M2 were being blown away.On the other hand, also resist, if it turns out that the professorsand Arima are right, and you find that early in April the money supplyis fading away on us. Don't necessarily just sit by with that eitherand let us get a collapse.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, wait a minute. I think I'm sayingthe first half of what you are saying. The second half is--MR. FORD. You wouldn't mind?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't mind M1 coming in lower thanthat. I tell you, I'd be delighted if M1 came in lower than 9percent. And if M2 were coming in around 8 percent, that would befine. I wouldn't react to that all that quickly. I would lower thatbulge path because the bulge didn't take place. And then if we getweakness coming into May, that's the time to ease.MR. BLACK. I think we ought to consider leaving thatsentence in the directive that we debated about and put in last time,to implement that thought you just expressed, Mr. Chairman. We saidin effect that some slowing in the rate of M1 growth, associated withreduced pressure in the money market, would be okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, by coincidence or otherwise, I wrotethat sentence in myself. That is what I am saying. Just to clarifythe issue: Let's cite this "A" and "B" combination for the quarterlytarget and say $1.1 billion in borrowing, which raises the path fromwhere we now have it. It says, okay, tentatively construct the path,believing in a bulge in April. If the bulge appears, we have notightening of that general magnitude. If the bulge does not appearand M2 growth is running reasonably high, we change the path to makeit a more even path. If M2 is running weak, we may keep the path upthere.MR. FORD. And do you go for this widening of the funds rateband to 11 to 16 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ipsy-pipsy, so far as I'm concerned.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm a little worried about the marketperception when we narrow or widen the range--I'm not talking aboutthe absolute levels now at all--because the market attributes muchmore significance to our narrowing or widening that range than we do.We don't really give it much significance. But market observers don'tunderstand why we would be narrowing or widening the range unless it'sof some importance to us. I have heard recently views that we arekeeping the fed funds rate within a very narrow range in terms ofactually looking at the market behavior. So, I don't particularly-56-3/29-30/82care, except that if we want to de-emphasize the constraints that areimplied by the range, we ought to try, if at all possible, not to keepshifting back and forth between a narrow range and a wider range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on balance, I agree with thatargument. My own attitude would be that if the federal funds ratebegan going below 12 percent, consistent with everything we have said,I would be in favor of a two-second consultation or none at all. Ifit began going up in the 16 percent area, I'd be extremely worried.MR. GUFFEY. First of all, let me say that I'm attracted byyour proposal with respect to the aggregates and the implications forconstructing the path. But it does bother me a bit that you areproposing to drop the borrowing level from about $1-1/4 to $1.1billion. Actually, this week the [target] level is $1.4 billion. Myconcern stems from--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How is it running this week, by the way?MR. STERNLIGHT. It's averaging $1.2 billion so far thisweek.MR. GUFFEY. But the path has $1.4 billion.MR. STERNLIGHT. But $1.4 billion is--MR. GUFFEY. And it has been greater than that over theintermeeting period, hasn't it?MR. STERNLIGHT. Over the last several weeks borrowingsaveraged about $1-1/4 billion; in the preceding several weeks it wasmore like $1-1/2 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the funds rate today?MR. STERNLIGHT. Funds today are at about 15-1/4 to 15-3/8percent. I think the rate is being affected by these pre end-of-quarter statement date pressures.MR. GUFFEY. Well, my concern about dropping the borrowinglevel at this particular time is the perception in the markets; theyare expecting a big bulge in April. Whether they are right or not isall speculation, but the fact of the matter is it will be visible verysoon after this meeting that the borrowing level has dropped from theprior week's level. And it would not be uncommon if [marketparticipants] arrived at the conclusion that we had met and that wehad eased in the view of a very large bulge in the money supply inprospect. As a result, I like very much your proposal for theaggregates, but I'd rather have the borrowing level remain about whereit is at the present time until we see some additional developments.The path should be constructed on about $1-1/2 billion of borrowings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have a point. I don't knowwhether I'd worry about it or not. Mr. Solomon characterized ourproper attitude earlier as alert but relaxed, or relaxed but alert.Maybe it would take some of the steam out of all this worry aboutApril if they felt we were indeed a little relaxed. I don't know.-57-3/29-30/82MR. GUFFEY. But if you give--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suspect the difference is so small thatthey won't notice it much because they haven't seen $1.4 billionrecently.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Also, there is a special situation inthe market whereby in the last few weeks the fed funds rate has comein almost consistently higher than one would expect from the level ofborrowing. So, therefore, probably with $1.1 billion we will getabout 14 percent with today's conditions. I don't think the marketwould see that as terribly significant. The funds rate has beenaveraging about 14-1/2 percent, fluctuating between 14-1/4 and 14-3/4percent roughly, in the last few weeks with that borrowing level of$1-1/4 billion. So, I don't think we would see that much movement inthe fed funds rate.MR. BLACK. I share Roger's concern. I think he expressed itvery well.MR. FORD. Well, you said $1.1 or $1.2 billion. Why don't weput it at $1.2 billion and everybody might be happy?MR. GRAMLEY. I strongly would prefer $1.1 billion.MS. TEETERS. We can afford some easing. You know, we arereally at the bottom of the recession. I don't see why you are soenamored of keeping interest rates in the 13 to 15 percent range. Andit certainly won't help the international situation. We are reallyruining ourselves with the rising value of the dollar as far as ourexports are concerned. We could afford some narrowing of thosedifferentials in the international market.MR. BLACK. Nancy, my concern is not with the short-termrates, but what I think it might do to the long-term rates.MS. TEETERS. The long-term rates haven't moved at all.MR. BLACK. They're moving down to some extent.MS. TEETERS. There are still 17 percent rates on mortgages.MR. BLACK. They're higher than I want to see them, and Isurely would like to see them come down. But if we relax much, we maysee them go the other way and that would be really bad at this point.MR. PARTEE. I can't really imagine, Bob, whether we choose$1.1 or $1.2 or $1-1/4 billion for the initial borrowing level, thatit is going to affect long-term interest rates.MR. BLACK. Well, I think a lot of that is psychological,Chuck.MR. PARTEE. They won't even know what we have decided hereuntil the middle of May and then it will all be history.MR. BLACK. Well, they will know what the figures are comingin at. Last week borrowing was $1.3 billion, and if we come in-58-3/29-30/82anywhere near $1.1 billion, in view of their expectation that we willhave a bulge in April, I think that will be interpreted as Rogerexpressed it. I may be wrong; it's just my feeling. I think wereally have them believing us now, and we have to appear to be movingagainst that bulge if it's greater than the market is expecting it tobe. I'm hoping and rather expect that it's not going to be as big asthe market thinks and that we might even have short-term rates comingdown. I hope that happens, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what I wouldn't particularly like tosee happen--but we can't play it all that finely--is to have themarket rally a little and the short-term rates go down and that laststhree weeks and then goes back the other way.MR. BLACK. Yes, I wouldn't want to force it down; but ifthat falls out as a result of the aggregates being within what I wouldconsider a reasonable range, I would certainly welcome that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we don't get a bulge in April, Isuspect we will get a rally in the market regardless.MR. BLACK. Well, I think so too. And I hope that's whathappens.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why don't we flip a coin?MR. BOEHNE. Well, on the argument between $1.1, $1.2, $1.3,and $1.4 billion, if you go back over the last few weeks, adjustmentborrowing in billions has been $1.1, $.99, $.97, [$1.2], and the lastweek in February it was $1.5. I didn't see the market falling out ofbed one way or the other.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're looking at different figures. Iget confused by that, too. You are looking at pure adjustmentborrowing. Apparently the figure we use is adjustment borrowing plusseasonal borrowing.MR. BLACK. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, you have to add $150 million or so.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think the main point about variabilityin the level is still there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think your point is right. But we are alittle lower relative to the recent average than those figures say. Idon't think [the difference] is big enough to be terribly noticeable.MS. TEETERS. But the point is that interest rates also havebeen a full percentage point higher than we anticipated with the levelof borrowing over this period of time. So, there's a tighter marketwith that level of borrowing than we thought there was going to be.MR. BLACK. But we knew we were guessing at what the rateswould be at the time we projected that.-59-3/29-30/82MR. PARTEE. What are the borrowing numbers? Now I'm totallyconfused. What has been the recent record of borrowing that we areassociating this beginning number with?MR. STERNLIGHT. I believe the last several weeks averagedabout $1.26 billion or something like that.MR. AXILROD. In the eight-week intermeeting period, theaverage was $1.4 billion. But the average has been a little lower inMarch. March 3rd was $1278 million; March 10, $1141 million; March17th, $1163 million; and March 24th, $1343 million.MR. BALLES. Steve, that's just the grand total excluding theextended borrowing?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. BALLES. Okay.MR. PARTEE. Well, that $1-1/4 billion sounds fine.MR. CORRIGAN. So, in those four weeks it averages to about$1.2 billion.MR. AXILROD. That's right. So, the aggregates strengthenedwhen the borrowings were rising.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the difference between $1.1 billionand $1.2 billion is not going to make or break me. I think the lowerwe go the more quickly we may have to snug up a little if April comesin high. So, you play one of those off against the other.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have a little more room with $1.1billion if April comes in high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can argue that we'd have a little moreroom [to tighten], that's right. We have to show a little moremotion--MR. WALLICH. It may be giving a false signal; the rate maygo down first and then [go back up].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that is what it comes downto. We have to balance a small chance of a false signal againstbuying ourselves a little more flexibility by moving [borrowing] upagain. It is not driving things through the ceiling. I'm not dyingto give false signals, and that is a consideration if [the bulge] isgoing to be temporary. We have more room for flexibility and falsesignals; [we'll have] real signals once they get that budget in place.MR. FORD. Let's not hold our breath waiting for that!MR. BOEHNE. Well, what difference would it make in the fundsrate, Steve, with a borrowing range from $1.1 to $1.2 billion?MR. AXILROD. Well, on our rule of thumb, either 20 or 25basis points, and that's [likely to be] wrong.3/29-30/82MR. BOEHNE. We're getting carried away with our owninability to be precise here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it's not going to make that muchdifference. We're playing at the margin.MR. BLACK. Well, the big difference is in expectations, Ithink.MS. TEETERS. What is your proposal again?MR. FORD. Make a proposal, Mr. Chairman.MR. CORRIGAN. It depends on whether we get the bulge or wedon't get it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The proposal is to put in around 8 percent[for M2] and around 3 percent [for M1]--either "around" or "about,"one of these terms of art that we use--for the quarter as a whole.And I'd slightly prefer just staying with the 12 to 16 percent fundsrate range because that's where we are and recently we have been aboutin the middle of it, roughly. I'd make one wording change. I'd say"probability" instead of "possibility" in this sentence that'sproposed: "The Committee also noted that deviations from thesetargets should be evaluated in the light of the probability..." Thatsuggests a little more weight on the M2 number. I also thought ofputting in some sentence, as Bob Black suggested, to the effect that ashortfall of M1 growth, consistent with progress toward the upper partof the range for the year as a whole, would be acceptable in a contextof appreciably reduced pressures in the money market, which is verysimilar to what we had last time. Operationally, what I am saying isthat we tentatively allow for some bulge in April in making thetarget. In other words, the borrowing would not go up with an [M1]increase in April of a magnitude of 9 percent at an annual rate, whichI guess is what Steve is suggesting. I gulp a little at somethingthat big, but that's what he said. I'll take it. That's what wewould do if M2 in fact is somewhere around this number that we aretalking about.MR. GRAMLEY. But the number we use for M2 for April is notthe quarterly average, presumably.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was thinking of that.MR. GRAMLEY. If we get a bulge in M1, then presumably M2 isgoing to be higher also, since M1 is a big component of M2. In fact,what is consistent with 9 percent in M1 is about the same or a littlebigger M2 growth, is it not?MR. AXILROD. If you took the alternative A path, we have9-1/2 percent for M2 in April.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Lyle has a good point that wewouldn't want to apply the M2 directive factor, so to speak, on aquarterly basis. We would have to see a stronger growth in April inM2 before we clamped down. And if we're targeting a 9 percentincrease in the nonborrowed reserve path for April---61-3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically, all else being equal, thatis right. I don't know what it amounts to quantitatively when M1 is$400 billion and [its growth] is 6 percentage points high relative tothe quarterly target, 6 percent or 1/4 of the whole, less than 1/4,1/5 of the whole, 6 percent at an annual rate. I don't know what thatamounts to. What is 6 percent of 20 percent? I guess it's about 1percent.MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's probably about 1-1/4 percent, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will moderate my comment by saying forthe month of April "around 9 percent" is set for M2; it begins to getme a little nervous, but I guess that's all right. Now, I lost thecontext of where I was. We have that path for M1; if [its growth]just for the month [of April] is around 9 percent, we hold to it. Ifit's above that, the suggestion is that the borrowing level would goup. If it is below that, and M2 is also around--I guess in this casesomeplace between 8 and 9 percent, depending upon how much M1 isbelow--we might not ease up on those borrowings very much at all untilwe saw M2 coming in low too, so long as M1 were around the 3 or 4percent area. If M2 began actually going minus, we would be easingup; or even if it went below 3 percent, we would be easing up.MR. CORRIGAN. But in that case, doesn't that mean that thepath effectively would have to be redrawn?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, depending upon what M2 is doing we'dhave to be redrawing the path. If M2 were weak and M1 were coming inat 9 percent or maybe even higher, we would accommodate it.MS. TEETERS. Will we have enough information to know what M2is doing during the month?MR. AXILROD. Well, we do now get weekly M2 data.MS. TEETERS. We do?MR. AXILROD. We have shifted over to that through theMonetary Control Act data, so we have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By the middle of the month or a littleafter the middle of the month we should begin getting an idea.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you mean that if somebody filed aFreedom of Information Act request, you'd have to give [the data] tothem? You prepare a weekly M2?MR. CORRIGAN. Not if we are quiet!MR. AXILROD. We certainly don't do it in anything except atentative experimental way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the record we do not prepare a weeklyM2 number, but we get some hints as to where it might be in terms oftrends. We do not have a weekly M2 number.MR. AXILROD. Not seasonally adjusted.-62-3/29-30/82MR. GRAMLEY. There's a danger, I think, in this operationalprescription, and that is that if the economy weakens and the demandfor M1 weakens correspondingly, so long as M1 growth is above 3percent, we would proceed to adjust the path downward. But we wouldkeep initial borrowing where it is and interest rates where they are.If the source of this weakness in M1 is a weakening economy, we havebig problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, wouldn't you expect to see that alittle in M2?MR. GRAMLEY. In one month? I don't know. It seems to methat the shifts in demand for M2 are sufficient so that it may or maynot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what we're going toknow from a weakening in M1, either, for a couple of weeks.MR. PARTEE. I would have thought that we would want to lookmore at what NOW accounts were doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'd certainly look at that withinthat total, too. But I suspect this early part of April is going tobe so mixed up that we won't be able to make anything out of it.MR. GRAMLEY. I would hope. though, if we saw an M1 numberthat was coming in around 3 percent, that we would want to have aconsultation to make sure that we are following procedures that makesense in light of what we see going on in the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, around 3 percent is a flex point interms of this prescription I had. Unless M2 looked pretty strong, weprobably would begin easing, just in terms of what I said. If M2looked strong, we would not [ease], taking literally what I said.MS. TEETERS. If M2 comes in weak, would you tolerate ahigher level of Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Higher than what?MR. RICE. Like 5 or 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, higher than 9 percent even at somepoint, if [M2] is weak enough. I think that's what we are saying.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's giving a lot of flexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It comes into that application of judgmentthat somebody made a plea for.MR. GUFFEY. I assume this all contemplates a consultationbefore the paths would be redrawn, based upon the data that you havejust described.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't think so, necessarily. But ifthere were any confusion about it, we might well do it.-63-3/29-30/82MR. GUFFEY. I would hope so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are talking in the firstinstance about a very small change.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, if it's a very minor adjustmentwe don't need a consultation to do it. If it's a significantadjustment, then there's an advantage to having a consultation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure. We're talking here in the firstinstance about adjustments of $100 million or so.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, if M1 is between 3 percent and 9 percentyou're talking a minor thing, but if--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, yes.MR. CORRIGAN. In the extremes--if it's greater than 9percent or less than 3 percent--it's not minor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If M1 is coming in at 15 percent or atminus 5 percent or something--MR. PARTEE. Which is probably what it will be doing.SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It well might. I would not discounteither of those possibilities.MR. BOEHNE. Well, there are so many "ifs" here and we arenot going to nail them all down or even come close to it. I think wesimply have to have confidence in the Chairman's good faith and goodjudgment to get the Committee back together to take a look at thesituation if too many of these "ifs" begin to pop up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that I think we have nailedthem down beyond what the situation probably can stand. If we dothat, there has to be a certain reliance on judgment. I agree withthat.MR. PARTEE. Operationally, you are going to put in 9 percentfor April?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At this point.MR. PARTEE. And we are going to start with what initialborrowing level?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I didn't get to that point.There is some disagreement about $1.1 or $1.2 billion. I can livewith either.MR. FORD. Well, why don't you name one and let's vote on it?MR. PARTEE. Make it $1.150 billion.3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's an obvious solution. Whydon't we put in $1.150 billion. That's my solution.SPEAKER(?). I'll vote for that.MR. CORRIGAN. That's a variation of Partee's law, isn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a beautiful solution. I was goingto ask for preferences, but--. Partee's solution is never quite rightbut it's just a little bit wrong all the time!MR. BOEHNE. It's never right but always wrong.MR. PARTEE. Well, it's never entirely wrong, either!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You know the Solomonic decision is tocut the baby in half.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, just so I understand the M2 forApril. Left to our own devices, if the Committee adopted 8 percentfor M2 growth, we would put in a 9-1/2 percent for April and a 7-1/2percent for May. That's what falls out of our patterns.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd put it a little lower in April. It isjust so close, what difference does it make? Put in 9 or 9-1/2percent; you are not going to judge it that finely anyway halfwaythrough the month.MR. AXILROD. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Is it understood or shall Irun through it again?MR. BLACK. Is the M2 figure 8 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the quarter, it's "around" 8 percent.MR. BLACK. Oh, that's okay. That's March to June you aretalking about?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I interpret "around" to mean that I wouldnot be very upset if it went a little above 8 percent for the quarter.MR. BLACK. I would not be either on that [aggregate].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd put it at 8-1/2 percent, but that'sfine-tuning too much. I don't have to repeat it again. What itamounts to is: With something between 3 and 9 percent on Ml, we lookvery hard at M2. And we look at M2 when we are outside the rangethere, too, as to how hard to move, but we would move [if it were]outside that range. I think that's what it means in practice. Thatgreat discrepancy between 3 and 9, 6 percent at an annual rate, isjudging the money supply within one half percent a month. We haveallowed ourselves all of $2 billion leeway.MS. TEETERS. How often do we hit our April projection?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How often do we hit any projection?-65-3/29-30/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, actually I meant to comment on thatearlier and I did not. I just want to take note of the fact that forthis period since the last meeting, which was exceptionally long, wecame about as close to the M1 and M2 targets as I can ever remember.MR. BLACK. M1 too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, both M1 and M2.MR. CORRIGAN. A sign of things to come, Mr. Axilrod?MR. BLACK. At one point. Don't count on that, either.MR. PARTEE. That, however, probably increases the odds thatwe'll be wrong in the future.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably. Shall we vote?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER(?). If Ivote at 1:00 p.m. Ready?MR. ALTMANN.Chairman VolckerVice Chairman SolomonPresident BallesPresident BlackPresident FordGovernor GramleyGovernor ParteeGovernor RiceGovernor TeetersGovernor WallichPresident Winndelay 30 seconds, we can have theYesYesYesNoYesYesWell, I'll say "yes" one moretimeYesYesNoYesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you.END OF MEETING-66-