Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 5, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 5, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. Martin 1/Mr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternatethe Federal Open Market CommitteeMembers ofMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Ettin, J. Davis, R. Davis, Koch, Prell, Siegman,Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting following approval of minutes.10/5/82Mr. James McIntosh, First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of BostonMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Secretary, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Mullineaux, Scheld,and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof St. Louis, Dallas, Kansas City, Philadelphia,Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Bisignano, and Soss, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, San Francisco,and New York, respectivelyMr. McCurdy, Research Officer and Senior Economist, FederalReserve Bank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 5, 1982CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes.SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Next is the report onforeign currency operations.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?MS. TEETERS. We hear rumors through the paper about otherproblems in South America. How much of that can you [verify]?MR. CROSS. Well, there certainly have been some otherproblem situations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the understatement of the day, if Imust say so.MR. CROSS. The Argentines have been mentioned a great deal,and currently they have an IMF [team] down there looking toward thepossibility of a Fund program for Argentina. They also are seekingsome assistance from the BIS and from commercial banks. TheBrazilians feel that they are being [adversely] affected largely bythe spillover effects of the Mexican and the Argentine problems. Fora period they found it very, very difficult to roll over theirmaturing debt, but more recently they sounded a bit more encouraged[so] that situation looks a little better. But you're quite rightthat there are a number of these very difficult situations, withmonetary troubles in the period [ahead] for a lot of countries downthere.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the [Brazilian] problem isparticularly sensitive with regard to their foreign exchange deposits[and whether their] backing by foreign banks will be resumed [as wasthe case for] the Argentine agencies. In New York we have 17Brazilian agencies and they have been having difficulty getting newdeposits or getting people to leave in the foreign deposits. We havea liquidity problem here because, like the Mexican agencies, most ofthat money was used to finance Brazilian borrowers, either public orprivate.MR. PARTEE. Did you say you have 17 Brazilian agencies,Tony? Is that right?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Two of them are much larger than theothers. But this is part of the whole credit contraction going on inthe foreign member bank markets between--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I want to come back to some of thesequestions later. I think it's better to take them up later in thecontext of the whole policy problem. But immediately, we intervenedyesterday, as Sam said, and we may intervene today. The market isstill high. Technically we have to approve yesterday's transactions10/5/82anyway. So, do I have a motion to that effect?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, it is approved. As forthe Mexican swap [drawing], whatever our "druthers," the situation isthat I don't think they have any money to pay it off. So, I don'tthink we have much alternative to rolling it over. As I understandit, that doesn't take a Committee action but I think you should beinformed. If somebody wants to object, he or she can object, but theintention would be to roll that [drawing] over as it matures, notingthat we still have first claim in effect on any Fund drawing that theMexicans make, assuming they come to some conclusion with the Fund.We'll consider that at the time. But as to the immediate rollover, wecan roll that over cooperatively since otherwise.... With thatunderstanding, I think we can return to some of these other problemslater in the midst of a more general discussion, as I said. Mr.Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions?MR. FORD. [If] we can't get the new legislation and thisruling gains weight in the marketplace, what restructuring would youanticipate in the market with regard to day-to-day operations? Howwould the market accomplish that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they will be looking at differentthings. I think there will be some effort to see whether there's away to restructure the basic repurchase agreements to do pretty muchthe same thing but in a more acceptable manner in that it would standup better than [now]. To some extent there may just be a lessenedwillingness by a number of "lenders" in the market who provide funds,particularly to smaller, less well-capitalized firms. When the issueis settled--and I get a little sense of this already and that couldspread with [unintelligible]--I don't think it would affect the Desk'stechnical ability to [make] repurchase agreements. But it could thinout the market in which we do those agreements or we could havesomewhat less [access] to instruments or operations [of this kind].MR. ROOS. Peter, do the nonbank dealers let yoursurveillance group come in?MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, yes.MR. ROOS. On what general basis? That it's the only way--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they've been cooperative right alongin doing that and are particularly keen to cooperate now. They preferthe--MR. MORRIS. Peter, is the surveillance limited to therecognized dealers?10/5/82MR. STERNLIGHT. In an [unintelligible] way, yes. We areexploring whether we would want to extend it beyond that. Certainlyif we hear of any problem situations that go beyond the regularreporting dealer group, we would want to take a look quickly at thosesituations.MR. MORRIS. Because that is where the problem has arisenthus far?MR. STERNLIGHT. Thus far, yes.MR. RICE. Peter, you said that you had the feeling that themarket would be much more tolerant of increases in the money supplyfrom the target ranges today than it would have been, say, two orthree months ago?MR. STERNLIGHT. That is my impression.MR. RICE. What's the evidence of that? How does thismanifest itself? By discussion on the part of some of the dealers atthe Desk or by--MR. STERNLIGHT. [Unintelligible] from the market who havewritten commentaries and from discussions with market participants.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments or questions? I mightsay that I think this surveillance business involves a moving target[if that] is the right term; we are feeling our way.We have to ratify the transactions.SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are approved. Mr.Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to suggest short comments orquestions and we can return again to the general problem a littlelater.MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. Your forecast and almost allthe forecasts have a phrase in them that says something like: "Theconsumer is going to lead us out of this recession," and economiclogic would suggest that there's something to that. However, when Italk to people who are in the consumer business--retailers, forexample, and bankers who are in the consumer loan area--they hear thatstatement with almost disbelief. The attitudes both on the part ofthe sellers, and it seems the buyers, are pretty sour. At least inthe northern part of the country, one hears a lot about sellingblankets and heaters and worries about oil bills and gas bills forwhat is supposed to be an unusually cold winter. My real question is:How do you weight these attitudinal factors versus the real factors.such as the tax cuts and personal income increases and so on. I thinkhow one comes down on that says a lot about what one's forecast is.10/5/82MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think that's right. I would say tobegin with that heaters and blankets count as consumer spending asdoes natural gas use, so that may be a plus in terms of the forecast.Secondly, I would say that for some time the views that have come outin the Redbook and elsewhere from retailers are fairly gloomy; infact, one might be led to the view that personal consumptionexpenditures were declining dramatically, just looking at that. Thatis really not the case. In the first half of the year, personalconsumption expenditures were up at an annual rate of 2-1/2 percent.Our estimate for the third quarter is a rise at a rate of 1-3/4percent and we have 3-1/2 percent for the fourth quarter. Soconsumption will be up, in our view. But I would say that one wouldhave to be cautious interpreting what retailers anticipate and whattheir results were. They have been disappointed, very clearly. [Yourcomment about] the consumption-led forecast is quite correct in thatif two-thirds of the GNP doesn't respond in the way we have forecast,we're in a great deal of difficulty in part because of the rather poorprospects in the investment sector and the export sector. So,overall, [the consumer sector] is a source of concern. I would onlyremark that in our forecast we have what is a very mild cyclicalupturn. It's a bit weaker than many of the other forecasts and theattitude issue, I think, is important. It's probably very importantin the short run where the economic news is likely to be verynegative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, coming at this confidence factor from alittle different direction, since as we all know both consumerconfidence and business confidence do play a key part in what reallyhappens, and both I'm afraid are quite weak today: I was wondering,Jim, if you have given any thought--and I'm sure you have--to thelikelihood that we may see a triple-dip recession. What probabilitywould you assign to that, if you really had a chance to think itthrough?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I certainly wouldn't make it the mostprobable outcome. Our forecast represents our highest probability[outcome]. But for the near term, and let's view that as over thenext quarter or two, there are clear downside risks in that there isquite likely to be a negative [GNP] number in the third quarter or anegative number in the fourth quarter, and one might classify that asa triple-dip. I wouldn't say the same if I were to take a bit longerhorizon, particularly over 1983. I'd just like to say that in thefirst year of recovery in the postwar period we've had rates ofincrease of real GNP on the order of 7 to 8 percent. The staffforecast is for 3 percent. It is 3 percent for good reason. Butlowering that number, I think, begins to get a bit risky on the downside. It's very difficult when the economy, hopefully, is near thebottom of a recession to spot the potential sources of strength, butfor now it seems to me that there are clear risks on the consumerside. On the business investment side, while we have had a majordownturn in this cycle, it could very easily go weaker. So, I thinkthe short-run risks are on the down side.MR. BALLES. Jim, one other question, if I can follow up onthat: As we look back to, say, last spring--I haven't really checkedthe record so this is strictly my recollection but it is reasonably10/5/82clear--your forecast, our forecast, and most private forecasts wereconfidently expecting an upturn in the third quarter. Month aftermonth has gone by and we haven't seen it; I still don't see it. It'sstill a forecast and not a fact. Do you have any insight into whathas delayed that widely expected and anticipated upturn?MR. KICHLINE. Well, in our own forecast, one of the majorthings that we have done is to write down business fixed investment;there has been a greater deterioration there. And in the thirdquarter, while we had the tax cut, it came along a bit smaller than wehad anticipated earlier; nevertheless, it was there. In fact, otherincome didn't come along, so that we didn't have as large a growth indisposable income in the third quarter principally because of thesharp cutbacks in business fixed investment and the lingeringinventory problems. So it's in these other sectors that weunderestimated the weakness or overestimated the performance. I don'tknow of any other major area. I guess net exports is another area, asJerry is telling me; that indeed is one of the reasons why we're muchweaker than the Commerce Department in the third quarter. Theexpected performance of net exports is much below Commerce's estimateand the August data that have come in are even weaker than that. So,exports and business fixed investment have been quite weak relative toour expectations and actual experience.MR. BALLES. I wonder, in the final shot at this: To whatextent, in your opinion, do the still unprecedentedly high levels ofreal interest rates explain some of this weakness or failure torecover?MR. AXILROD. I intend to get into this in my briefing.MR. BALLES. I'll wait for your words of wisdom.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. You have an impressively low inflationprediction. In evaluating the impact of interest rates on investment,business, and housing, does that mean that you're also looking at ahigher real rate and consequently a greater restraint on investmentthan other observers?MR. KICHLINE. I have a lot of trouble with real rates--well,a lot of difficulty in terms of knowing what inflation expectationsare. It seems to me that real rates are high; if inflation rates aregoing down and expectations of inflation allow for that, then weindeed do have higher real rates. That's one of the elements, I wouldsay, in that some of the major commercial forecasters have assumedhigher rates of growth of M1 for next year--a percent or a percent anda half faster--so they indeed have lower nominal interest rates thanthe staff. So, interest rates are one of the drags here, and theyhave been for some time, in terms of monetary constraint standing inthe way of recovery.MR. MARTIN. Let me ask a question with regard to consumerattitudes and the [role] of the consumer balance sheet, if you will,in that. Which way, if any, does the substantial improvement in theconsumer's liquidity position cut vis-a-vis attitudes toward10/5/82residential [property] on the asset side? That is: Is the consumerlikely to consider his wealth as a plus or a minus factor?MR. KICHLINE. Well, that differs with individual consumers.I think you are quite right in pointing out that short-term borrowinghas been rather moderate; in fact, repayments relative to income havecome off from their peak in late 1978. But at the same time one ofthe major sources of wealth in the household sector, namely housing,has clearly become less liquid for many.MR. MARTIN. And less valuable perhaps.MR. KICHLINE. And the price may well have gone down. Thoseare offsetting factors and I don't know how one would come out, but itcertainly--MR. MARTIN. That was my question. How does one come out?You're not coming out?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The answer is he doesn't know.MR. KICHLINE. One simply has to put those two thingstogether. One can't look at the improvement in short-term liquidityalone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I heard a commentary on the radio when Igot up this morning indicating that fuel is in ample supply for thiswinter season. I don't know the survey, but what surprised me is thatthey said prices are going to be--I forget precisely what number theyused--6 to 12 percent above last year. That surprised me a littlebecause I thought that oil prices had leveled off during this period.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Gas has gone down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This was oil.MR. PARTEE. Did they say that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it was about oil supplies.MR. GRAMLEY. I think the reports have been on private homeheating fuel.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This was home heating fuel that they weretalking about.MR. GRAMLEY. Supplies of home heating fuel I think arerather low relative to the stock of petroleum generally.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This was a two sentence comment in thenews. They said they had done a little survey and stocks were ample.People were going to have plenty of fuel this winter but the price wasgoing to be 6 to 12 percent higher.MR. PARTEE. Being a consumer, Paul, [I recall that] theprice rose as the last heating seasonal went off and it hasn'tdeclined except by two or three cents. So, this season will start outwith prices materially higher than at the beginning of last season.10/5/82MR. KICHLINE. Well, we don't have that in our forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it had been level for a longwhile but it may be that it got back to where it was a year ago. Itsurprised me that they were up that much in a year.MR. FORD. I have one quick question about your forecast.Looking at your forecast compared to others we track yours against--Townsend-Greenspan, DRI, Citibank, and Chase--you are uniformly themost bearish for the next three quarters, and by a substantial margin.You have far and away the lowest GNP growth rates, the lowestinflation forecast, and the highest unemployment forecast, which areall consistent in a very bearish pattern. I just want to understandif what you said in answer to a question--from John, I think--was thatyour next-best forecast was even more bearish.MR. GRAMLEY. May I point out one other factor in thisrespect? The staff forecast has been uniformly the most pessimisticfor the past year-and-a-half and it has overestimated the performanceof the economy.MR. FORD. You are saying they are right.MR. GRAMLEY. We're looking at a situation in which I thinkJim is quite right that all the risks at this point are on the downside, both from the domestic demand side and from export demand.MR. FORD. One thing that worries me is what none of usexpects. We are all very bearish and you are very bearish. Do yougive zero probability, then, to the possibility of a surge in theeconomy? The consumer's car is getting older and older; more and moreconsumers are looking for a place to live as all these baby boomersget married or whatever [and create households]. With householdliquidity getting stronger and stronger and with savings up, you don'tsee any possibility of a surge in the economy?MR. KICHLINE. Not in the very short run. We have indeedbuilt in a bit of an increase in auto sales. In that market, all ofthe news I've run across has to be viewed as rather negative. Iwouldn't perceive any of these areas as bursting out on the up side inthe very near term, but I wouldn't extend that forecast through 1983,as I said. We have in our forecast some pluses in these areas. It'sa matter of how much. I don't know of anything at the moment thatwould suggest to me that we are likely to see major growth in the veryshort term. But these issues are debatable and I certainly wouldn'twant to argue the consumer case very strongly [even] in the shortterm.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I was one who believed that there would bea recovery in the second half. But I must say that over the years thetwo indicators that I have watched and thought most consistentlyindicated the future were new orders for durable goods and initialclaims for [unemployment] insurance. And they both have [tended] tovary significantly. We had a 4 percent decline in durable goodsorders in the latest month and we had a very substantial increase in10/5/82initial claims for insurance. So I see no reason that we shouldn'tpredict a decline in activity in the period to come.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, sir.MR. ROOS. Just to avoid total desperation, we have a littlemore positive view of [the outlook]. First of all, we weren'tsurprised at the fairly slow growth in output in the third quarterbecause we feel that it was to a great extent a reflection of themonetary contraction that occurred earlier in the year. However,-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I never figured out where that expansion[went] from the monetary expansion still earlier in the year.MR. ROOS. We think--and again it's a matter of relativevalue--that the contraction in output would have been even worse hadthere not been that expansion. However, we feel that if money isallowed to grow at, say, 5 to 5-1/2 percent or slightly above that, wewill see a much more positive effect on output certainly starting nextyear. We observe in the record that the economy always tends to movetoward about a 3-1/2 percent trend growth of output. We think,inasmuch as we've had about 3 years of very slow growth--and we blameit on monetary contractions--and price increases have finally slowedand real interest rates are approaching normal levels, that much ofthe adjustment that was caused by that and by foreign competitionbeing a factor in heavy industry has been completed. We think thatquite conceivably we could have a bit faster rebound next year, basedon 5-1/2 percent money growth, than some others have forecast. If I'mwrong, I won't be here, Mr. Chairman; if I'm right, you'll hear fromme!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Larry rescued us from the straitsof desperation and said some of the things I had in mind. There aretwo things that might be helpful to remember here. One is that italways looks very, very bleak right at the bottom and we all get verypessimistic, and I'm much more pessimistic than any of my associatesin Richmond. The second point is that there's a very low pickup invelocity projected over the next four quarters. And traditionallymost forecasters at this stage of the business cycle--maybe I shouldsay at this apparent stage--have underestimated the pickup invelocity. We ought to bear those things in mind as we move throughthe meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If no one else has an immediate comment,we'll turn to Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. MORRIS. Steve, I think the answer to all your questionsis "yes."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't want to prejudge these things toohastily.10/5/82MR. ROOS. Well, isn't this similar to the NOW accountsituation? Didn't we adjust for NOW accounts? Can't we do the samething and avoid the possibility that people would misconstrue this asa major change in policy?MR. AXILROD. We could make efforts to make shift adjustmentsin somewhat the same way, probably with the same degree ofcredibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I might feel differently if Ithought they had the same degree of credibility. I don't think thestaff is capable of making them with the same degree of credibility,however great that was, as last time.MR. AXILROD. I thought it was small.MS. TEETERS. Steve, how would you actually operate? Howwould you draw your reserves paths [with a] wider specification?MR. PARTEE. Run on the funds rate!MR. AXILROD. If there were not a specification for M1 andthere were for M2 or M3, we would draw them on the basis of the M2 orM3 specifications and we would draw an M1 path, unless told otherwise,that we thought was generally consistent with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we may be getting a little aheadof ourselves in this.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a question on the instrumentthe DIDC [plans to authorize]. As I understand it, it seems that at aminimum what we're going to get out of the DIDC is an instrument thatgoes into M2. But it depends on how they word it. If they put outtwo instruments, one of which is reserveable, then the one that isreserveable would be in M1. Is that correct?MR. AXILROD. Well, the one that is reserveable certainlywould be in M1. Where the other one would be is a question one wouldhave to consider carefully, I think. It will [allow] at least sixtransfers. Our present boundary line, other than for money marketfunds, is about three transfers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't make any difference where weput it.MR. PARTEE. But, Tony, a ceiling-free reserveable deposithas a lot of different implications for M1 than one on which themaximum [rate] paid is 5-1/4 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right; I understand that. But if theDIDC words it fairly broadly, and we insist that because of the numberof transactions exceeding the six--I gather it's three drafts orchecks and three other forms of authorized transfers--then we couldput a reserve requirement on it so that in both cases on anythingover, let's say, $5,000, they would be paying market rates, exceptthat one would be marginally lower than the other because of thereserve requirement. It seems inevitable to me that the reserveableone would be in M1, in which case we might get a major bulge. It's10/5/82unpredictable as always. But the other one, which we're sure to geteven if they word it narrowly, must be in M2. I don't see--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I'm not sure it makes anydifference analytically. It makes a difference in the number,obviously. But in either case we won't know what the heck the numbermeans.MR. AXILROD. If it were in M2, it could lead to a very sharpcontraction in M1, if NOW accounts shifted into [that instrument].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We would get two unknowns withenormous swings.MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think you touched upon the problemthat may begin in October.MR. AXILROD. No, I didn't mention in this briefing the allsavers certificates, Mr. Chairman. We mentioned in the Bluebook thatthis week $22 billion of originally issued all savers certificatesmature, with a maturity value of $25 billion including interest. Ourlimited preliminary estimate of the likely effect on M1, which isnothing more than a very informed guess--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's informed about it? Steve did asurvey of four people all of whom are going to put it into M1,including himself!MR. AXILROD. We are at the moment guessing that there willbe about a $7 billion increase in M1 in the current week from that.But it could, depending on how long it lasts--though we think it wouldbe temporary generally--have a very sizable effect. And there are atotal of $33 billion or so maturing in the course of this month.MS. TEETERS. People could roll it over into another allsavers certificate, couldn't they?MR. AXILROD. Yes, if they haven't used up their $2,000 intax-free interest. But to the degree one is going to invest insomething else, it could go into a NOW account or demand accounttemporarily as one waits to invest it.MS. TEETERS. And then the all savers certificate disappearscompletely on December 31st? You can't go into it afterwards?MR. AXILROD. That I'm not sure about.MR. PARTEE. You can't go into it, but of course there couldbe a lot of outstandings for quite a while.MR. BALLES. Where is that now--in M2?MR. AXILROD. Yes, they are all in M2.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you think the country would rallypatriotically, if we made a public call that maturing all saverscertificates should be reinvested in M2?10/5/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a little late, I'm afraid.MR. MARTIN. On the theory that only the lost causes areworth fighting for?MR. MORRIS. You ought to get your moat up and keep them out!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black, please.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Tony touched on my question. I wasjust going to ask Steve if he would elaborate a bit more on conditionsunder which this might increase M1 as opposed to decreasing it.MR. AXILROD. Do you mean partly the all savers certificates?MR. BLACK. I'm talking about the money market account.MR. AXILROD. Well, if an account were offered, let's say aSuper NOW account, where you could write all the checks you wanted andthat was already in M1 and it was [ceiling] free on funds over acertain amount, I would see sizable transfers out of money marketfunds as well as other savings deposits right into M1 from that. Thatwould occur almost instantaneously.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we counted it in M1.MR. AXILROD. Yes, and it would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically we could get an increase inM1, I guess, without counting it in M1 if it was so attractive thateverybody went into NOW accounts for their basic account and got anautomatic sweep arrangement into these new accounts. We would getmore increase in the below $5,000 portion of NOW accounts as a kind oftail on the dog of this new account.MR. AXILROD. It's quite conceivable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how we'd ever measure it.MR. AXILROD. We could. It's like suddenly permitting amarket rate of interest on demand deposits. And to the degree theaccount is like that, it's in M1, which ought to increase.MR. BLACK. I have been assuming that the instrument wouldnot have that much in the way of check-writing privileges and it wouldprobably depress M1.MR. AXILROD. It may very well. I was answering yourquestion on the conditions under which it would increase M1.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, would you comment on the likelihoodin your judgment that it would have that much check-writing ability?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. The law says so. There's verylittle left to decide on this. I think the size of the check is theonly thing that will be---11-10/5/82MR. BLACK. That's what I had in mind. That might limit itsuse to no more activity than present money market mutual funds, whichhave a very low rate of turnover relative to the NOW accounts andother kinds of transaction balances as currently defined. That's whatI was thinking was the most likely outcome.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [The DIDC] clearly can't circumventthe intent of the Congress by putting a minimum value of $5,000 forchecks.MR. BLACK. Even $500, Tony, might give it characteristicsmore like M2 than M1. But one could certainly debate that.MR. CORRIGAN. Even then, we still could get a very sizablebuildup in M1 balances in connection with the account. It's verysimple to conceive of that situation even with a $1,000 limit.MR. MORRIS. Is there any work being done by the staff inanticipation of the time when we will have to decide what to do withmonetary policy when we finally admit that M1 is no longer a sensibletarget?MR. BLACK. You're prejudging our conclusions!MR. MORRIS. I'm talking about contingency planning.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with Frank, strange asit may seem, that before we bury my old friend M1 at this meeting--this [new instrument] won't take effect for a couple of months--thereought to be some work done by the various economic staffs to try toproject the effect. There are a lot of people who don't like my oldfriend M1, and whenever anything changes they say this is a good timeto bury M1.MR. MORRIS. We love it. We just can't find it!MR. ROOS. But couldn't some study be done prior to changingour basic approach to policymaking? I'm a little paranoid--I guess Ihave been for most of my life with the Federal Reserve--that everytime something comes up that casts some suspicion on M1, there's anawful lot of readiness to bury it. Does our policy action todayrequire that we do something that's a significant departure from theway we've been doing things? Couldn't this matter be studied andcouldn't we have a summit meeting if necessary, a la Jerry's[suggestion], prior to our next meeting of the FOMC to see what thebest brains in the System think will be the result of the DIDC actionand everything else?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, yes and no is the answer, I think.Obviously, we can study the matter. I see no prospect that any amountof study is going to tell us what the behavior of M1 is going to be inthe short run. It is unknowable, in my opinion, to all the bestbrains in the world. It's going to be an empirical question; we willdiscover what happens when it happens. And we have to look at it overa period of time. But I don't see that any amount of rumination--isthat the right word?--is going to produce an answer to a knowablequestion but an unknowable answer. The wish for a study is fine; butthe sense that it's going to give us an answer in a month before we10/5/82get the new instrument I think is totally unwarranted just by thenature of the problem that we face.MR. GUFFEY. If I understand what we're discussing, you arereally talking about M1. The impact on M2 would be considerably less;it is a more reliable guide.MR. PARTEE. A little more subtle, I think.MR. GUFFEY. More subtle perhaps but nonetheless--. And M3-type deposits--MR. PARTEE. Other things equal, it ought to increase thevalue of M2-type instruments compared with market instruments.Therefore, M2 ought to be larger relative to total credit flows thanbefore. And by the way, I think the real world effect will befantastic shifts of funds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any question,however, that Roger is right. The impact is going to be much less onM2 and M3 than on M1. The only place it can come out of basically isTreasury bills.MR. AXILROD. President Roos, I wasn't suggesting burying M1;I was suggesting that there is a problem over the next two or threemonths.MR. ROOS. Well, you didn't suggest we praise it!MR. FORD. This is sounding more and more like Pericles'oration on Caesar's burial!MR. ROOS. It was Mark Antony's.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will get to the issue of what to dowith M1 a little later, but I--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Just one last question on the DIDCinstrument: Based on your information, what kind of rate do you thinkthe depository institutions will pay as the so-called market rate?Will they simply be competitive and vary it with the average moneymarket fund rate or will they pay a Treasury bill-type rate? What doyou think they will pay?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there will be a tendency amongsome to pay a money market funds rate plus; the question is whetherthe market gets driven there. I'm just guessing. Among other things,we approved what I think of as the "bucket shop relief regulation" atthe last DIDC meeting, where an institution can broker all of thismoney. So, we'll have people advertising all over the country. Thesewill be insured deposits and people will keep it with the guy payingthe highest rate. And that will tend to force the rates higher. Iwould think there would be two tendencies initially: To pay a moneymarket funds rate plus, or to pay something related to the Treasurybill rate. My guess would be that the bill rate fellows might getforced higher. In a tight money situation, I would feel ratherconfident of that result. With rates going down, if they are going10/5/82down, I think banks would be cautious. But I think those will be thetwo polarities. The question is where it will end up.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If there is any erosion of the banks'core deposits moving into these Super NOWs or whatever we call thisnew instrument, it's going to put a terrible squeeze on their profits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If this had been done three months ago, Ithink it would have been an utter disaster. It may just be a disasternow. You know, I joke with the banks at times. I tried it out withthe banks this morning and they said fine; they haven't thought thisout. But I said that the simple way to do this and be perfectlyconsistent with the law is to say [to a depositor] "If you have a NOWaccount or a savings account [with a balance] above $5,000, it nolonger has a ceiling rate and it's checkable." If a financialinstitution thinks of it in those terms, immediately that puts itscost of funds up by a significant amount. I'm sure when they thinkabout it, they won't want it that way. It will take time for thesavings depositors to pull out their money and go to the bank and sayinstead of my savings deposit, I want this new account. Some of themwill never get to the bank, so the banks will retain some of theirsavings deposits and NOW accounts by a kind of "discrimination byignorance" approach. And who knows how long that transition periodwill take!MR. PARTEE. They don't have to pay a market rate or tie itto a market rate; they could pay the CPI plus 4 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The European bankers look at thisderegulation process going on in the United States and they react withhorror. In their view, this whole deregulation is such a disasterboth for monetary policy and for the stability of the banking systemthat I think we are once and for all--through our experiment, if youwant to call it that--making sure that no deregulation process isgoing to be copied in foreign countries.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will mention one other aspect of thisand then I want to go back to somewhat broader subjects. If there isa big drain on money market funds, there probably will be a big drainon bank CDs. Money market funds have become the major source of bankCDs for a group of major money market banks who are already indifficulty in the CD market. And since I'm almost certain that bankCDs would be the favorite instrument for money market funds to cutback on now, there is going to be a squeeze [on] banks and possiblycommercial paper; there will be a squeeze in the other direction, too,on banks that are not anticipating or have not thought through thatparticular consequence of re-intermediation.In any event, as a setting for reaching a policy decision ora broader discussion first, let me try what I might term from myinternational experience a tour d'horizon because I think we have arather wider setting that has to be brought to bear [on our decision]A large part of that, of course, is the domestic business situation,which we've just gone over to some extent. We can discuss it furtherbut I don't have anything particular to add there. We have beendisappointed at least on the timing of the recovery. The inflationpicture is going well but the business picture certainly is not.Everybody looks to the consumer. I don't see any place else to look.10/5/82Whether he will appear or not is necessarily in some doubt. We haveobvious pressures on the investment sector and the commercial buildingsector and the agricultural sector. It's hard to see any of thosepressures going away in any short period of time, and I have to agreewith the conclusion stated earlier that the risks here, just lookingat the domestic economy, are quite asymmetrical.But let me look around the world and say what somebody didmention--I guess, Sam Cross--right at the beginning: We are in aworldwide recession. I don't think there's any doubt about that. Mr.Truman's imagination may be larger than mine, but I don't know of anycountry of any consequence in the world that has an expansion goingon. And I can think of lots of them that have a real downturn goingon. Obviously, unemployment is at record levels. It is risingvirtually everyplace. In fact, I can't think of a major country thatis an exception to that. There are particular sore spots in thedeveloped world. France is a leading example where they have tried toexpand over the past year or more and they have been forced to reversethat. They are in increasing trouble internationally, although ithasn't been the focus of the same attention that it has in some of thecountries I will get to shortly. But they have a rather massivecurrent account deficit and heavy external borrowing needs. They havecome through a couple of devaluations with the question [remaining] ofwhether they can hold the franc at the current level. The Germansituation is rather sour looking, with political uncertaintiesaffecting that country and its prospects. The British have hadmomentary signs of advance off and on for the last year but the latestsigns are negative there as well. Japan has caught a kind of sourdespondency as well. I mention all this because it does affect theprospects for our own outlook as well as the world outlook; there isobviously a feedback among all the world markets. World trade isdoing poorly and our exports are doing poorly. It also contributes toa feeling of nervous uncertainty throughout the world. And I think itall has had an influence on the exchange rate, the next subject I willget to.One can have different opinions about the exchange rate but Ithink it is an obvious fact that we have had a considerable narrowingof interest rate differentials in recent months and the dollar hasgone up instead of down. I saw a comment yesterday on the ticker fromJacques Delors, the French Finance Minister, who said that somethinghas to be done because whatever news comes out of the United Statesthe dollar goes up. If it's good news, the dollar goes up; if it'sbad news, the dollar goes up. And that's about right these days. Itis very hard to argue that the dollar is not out of line, with veryserious repercussions for our export industries. I can't think of anyadvantage, really, to the rest of the world of our present situation,partly because it is obviously a factor inhibiting their own monetarypolicy flexibility. The only explanation that one can see of thedollar's behavior in a very nervous and uncertain world whereeverything looks bad is that the dollar looks less bad for politicaland economic reasons and may even look good. Maybe I ought to put apositive cast on that, but it is a situation that itself is animportant distortion in world markets.When I look at developing countries, there are well knownproblems in Poland that have not been of largely political origin inthe sense that Poland has very serious economic problems but they are10/5/82terribly complicated and sui generis in terms of the politicalproblem. There are other problems in Eastern Europe in that thePolish situation is to some degree infectious there. The problems inEastern Europe should be manageable in magnitude, but initially thethrow-off from the Polish situation affected them and they are nowbeing affected by the more general world situation. More acutely, wehave the situation in Latin America, which is an interesting panorama.We have gone over the Mexican problem as nearly as I can see on thebasis of inadequate information. It may not be at dead center, but itseems to be at dead center for the moment. That's the best guess thatI have in a period of very difficult political transition, strongdifferences of opinion within Mexico about what to do and, in the bestof circumstances, an extremely difficult adjustment problem withinMexico with important social and economic consequences. Whether anorderly or halfway orderly solution to the Mexican problem, with its$80 billion--or probably realistically $100 billion--of external debt,can be foreseen in the next weeks or months is problematical. I hopeso, but I don't think anybody can bank a lot of money on thatparticular situation.When one looks elsewhere in Latin America, at the other endof the continent we have Argentina, which is basically unable tofinance its needs in the markets and is in substantial arrears on itsindebtedness. The financial officials there are willing to go to theInternational Monetary Fund. Fund negotiations are starting withrather an unknown situation as to whether Argentina has a governmentof sufficient strength to sign a reasonable Fund agreement even ifthey want to, or to carry out a Fund agreement if they do. That is asituation that in some sense doesn't look unmanageable economically,but there is a question as to how manageable it is politically. Whenone goes up in that continent, there is Ecuador, which may be facingan inability to service its debt in a matter of weeks. We have Chile,which as nearly as I can see is unable to finance itself at the momentand is rapidly depleting its reserves; and at the rate of depletion ofreserves one can perhaps measure their debt difficulties in a matterof months, if not weeks. We have Bolivia, which has had chronicproblems for years and is no better; it is basically in default.Costa Rica is in the same position. Peru is not much different. Andthen we come to the strong countries in the continent like Brazil!That is another $80 billion debtor, which in my eyes has undertaken astrong adjustment program for the past 18 months, has had a recession,has had monetary restraint, and has attempted to get its budget inshape. Their balance of payments deficit is as big today as it waswhen they started the program, reflecting in considerable part thesourness of the world economy. Then of course we have Venezuela, thepremier country in terms of financial strength of the continent. Itis a relatively small country with big oil reserves, but it also isapparently unable to finance itself freely in the market currently[despite] more substantial reserves; it is not an imminent problem inthe same sense that the other countries are, but it is affected by thetotal situation. Those countries have a collection of debt of what,Ted--about $300 billion more or less?--of which a sizable fraction isowed American banks. But every big bank around the world is more orless equally committed. All of these countries are dependent uponsustained borrowing to maintain a semblance of equilibrium during thisperiod; indeed, all of them are dependent upon sustained borrowingsimply to keep the loans that are now on the books in a semblance ofgood order.10/5/82All of which brings me to the banking system. We have hadsome rather well-known problems with respect to individualinstitutions, stemming largely from domestic concerns in the UnitedStates. Those particular institutions have had financing difficultiesin the market for some time. They are basically unable or unwillingto sell any substantial amount of domestic CDs and are having theirlines from other banks cut back in the day-to-day market. There isconcern, obviously, more generally about banks with large externalexposure. And when we talk about banks with large external exposuresthere are no exceptions among the major American banks or among a goodmany of the regional banks. There has been a tendency quite clearlyin this circumstance not to test the domestic CD market and a feelingthat everybody could run to London for the money. That [approach] isa little more anonymous; it isn't [unintelligible] futures markets,and what premium which bank is paying above the prevailing rate isn'tgossiped about to quite the same extent as in the American market.But it is quite apparent that the Eurodollar market is in a state ofsome confusion and concern. One can see that specifically in the factthat the Eurodollar rates have a margin over domestic rates that isnot explicable by normal arbitrage calculations between the two rates.And we have a situation in the Euromarket, according to myunderstanding, that normal trading procedures--somewhat like in theU.S. CD market--have now broken down. Trading that used to be donemore or less anonymously or indifferently among banks is now done on apersonalized basis with each bank rated on its own and differentialrates among particular participants, and there is a sense of acontracting market. Whether it is really contracting ex post seems tobe problematical. The volume is probably going up because that iswhere the demand is going, but there is a sense of a contraction incredit. I might say that it is complicated by the fact that someAmerican banks that have liquidity problems have chosen to doplacements in the Eurodollar market as obviously their only source ofliquidity, so they're running them down.I think we have, as I mentioned, an unwillingness to putpressure on the CD market domestically not only by the particularbanks that have been in everybody's mind but much more generally inrecent weeks as the international problems have gotten more severe.Tony mentioned earlier the particular problem that is beginning tostick out like a sore thumb with what I think of as motherless banks,by which I mean banks whose home country either doesn't exist in anyreal way or doesn't have any dollars or doesn't have any means ofputting its hands on any dollars. These banks are funded in dollarsor other foreign currencies but largely in dollars. Their assets arenominally in dollars but often are in effect in frozen form becausethey are backing a country--Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Korea--that hasn't the money to make those debts liquid if they had to. Wehave had further attention to this kind of problem from the BancoAmbrosiano affair where subsidiaries of a good--at least "good" inquotation marks--G-10 country were in the position of not having amother, so to speak, because they operated through a subsidiary. Andwhen liquidity pressures began in that case, or when the bad loanbecame evident, there was no obvious recourse to provide liquidity tothem.In these circumstances, I think it's fair to say that therates of interest on government securities that we tend to look atvery frequently are not a reflection of what the rates of interest are10/5/82in the market because the spreads are substantially wider even in thequoted rates both on government rates and private rates, reflecting atiering of successive risks or precautionary premia. There is thesituation, for instance, in financing developing countries now wherethe CD rate is high relative to the bill rate by a considerablemargin. The Euro-rate is high relative to the CD rate. Thesecountries are financed at LIBOR plus a margin; those margins areincreasing. So by the time you go from the bill rate to what aforeign developing country actually is paying, there hasn't been adecline in interest rates; the decline observed in our market has onlya pale reflection in the actual interest rates paid by thosecountries. There is a sense, repeated to me again this morning by anABA group that I had breakfast with--it's put quite openly on thetable by some of the banks--that they are attempting to withdraw frominternational markets. They say "We are doing our best to do so. Werealize everybody can't do that, but we have our boards of directorsand that's what we are doing."MR. FORD. Excuse me, who is this group?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was a group of ABA bankers, but that'sincidental. It is going on. That is why all these South Americancountries together suddenly can't find financing or financing inanywhere near the volume that they were anticipating. And to theextent that that financing demand is going on, that presses more andmore on a relative handful of major money market banks that arealready, of course, very heavily extended. The extent to which thisis going on in domestic markets is less clear, but I would sense thatsome of this atmosphere is developing in domestic markets. In a sensethat means that market rate quotations don't mean quite the same thingas they meant some months ago, because there's a question of who canget those rates and with what degree of aggressiveness. All of thisin a way, it seems to me, is explained in the velocity numbers. Thereis a little liquidity preference or desire, or however you want to putit, which is why the relationships that we look at all the timebetween liquid asset totals and money narrowly or broadly [defined] donot seem to bear the same relationship to economic activity that wemight have anticipated. I find it difficult or impossible to explainthat except, in part, because of a change in liquidity preference.People want to be liquid; they want to hold as many liquid balances asthey are permitted to hold and the constraining factor is how many ofthose are made available to them.I'd say all of this leads to a considerable feeling infinancial markets and elsewhere of developing disarray, a certainfloundering. And that in itself contributes to uncertainty, whichfeeds upon itself. And it is dangerous in and of itself. I don'tmean to suggest going back to point number one about the domesticoutlook and saying that the prospects as a matter of probabilityaren't along the lines that Mr. Kichline suggested. Hopefully, asattitudes change, it could turn out to be significantly better thanthat. But I do think we are in an extremely tricky period oftransition that is complicated enormously by the factors not just of aperiod of potential transition for us, but for the world economy as awhole. There is not a single source of real strength or certainty outthere.10/5/82So far as the international situation is concerned, let mejust suggest that we sorely need a victory, or a series of victories,in terms of stability in some key countries. We would like to havethat in Mexico. Whether that's possible or not I already expressed myuncertainty about. If it's not going to be in Mexico, there hadbetter be dikes built pretty promptly around some of these othercountries so that there is not a feeling of absolute inevitability,which is developing rapidly in the market, that all of these countriesare going to go down like a bunch of tenpins. If we cannot deal withthat prospect, we are going to be in sorry trouble indeed. There areobvious cases in point; Yugoslavia and Argentina are both now innegotiation with the Fund. Neither of those countries has[irreparable] economic conditions by any means, as nearly as I canunderstand it. The amounts of money involved are relatively small butnot exactly trivial in either case. Right behind them is a countrylike Chile, and not very far behind that, of course, is the big one,Brazil. I don't see how any of those situations, with the possibleexception of Brazil and conceivably Chile--if the dikes are strongenough around Argentina and Yugoslavia--is going to be handled withoutFund assistance and without further official assistance outside theFund. I think this is logically the Treasury's job. Whether thelogic is going to prevail in the end here is something that at somepoint we're going to have to consider, given the stakes involved.Domestically, I would simply say that I don't think this isany time for taking any great chances. There is a substantive needfor a relaxation of pressures in the private markets in the UnitedStates. How best to achieve that seems to me is the question beforethe house. I will cease and desist at this point. I note that coffeeis ready and maybe this is as good a time as any to have it.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can now have a general discussion. Atsome point I will give you some directive language that is somewhatdifferent [than shown in the draft provided by the staff]. But beforethat, we can have a general discussion of the business scene, theinternational scene, or whatever. I would like not to neglect theinternational situation with respect to some of these countries. Thisis not a time, as I undoubtedly implied--that's a mild word--forbusiness as usual, certainly, in the international area. I don'tthink it's time for business as usual in the domestic area either.Extraordinary things may have to be done. We haven't had a parallelto this situation historically except to the extent 1929 was aparallel.MR. MARTIN. And 1931.MR. PARTEE. 1931.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I might say that I commend you all: Idetected no leaks after the last meeting. We are discussing obviouslyhighly sensitive subjects in this particular meeting and I can'timpress that too strongly upon you. I'm talking about some of theseinternational financial problems, especially their domestic ones. Anyone of these things can be blown by inadvertent comments. There isdiscussion going on, particularly with respect to Argentina andYugoslavia, of central banking monetary authority packages. The-19-10/5/82question is whether those packages are big enough for the situation inboth cases. As I said, they are in negotiation with the Fund.Yugoslavia has been operating under a Fund program, but it's a rollingone-year [credit]. The third year of it is under discussion at themoment. These are in theory governmental matters and in ourinstitutional structure more appropriate for the ExchangeStabilization Fund than for the Federal Reserve. I think the Treasurywould say that, too. But they have concerns and limited amounts ofmoney, and at some point I think it's possible that we will have tomake a decision within the confines of this room as to whether wecontribute to them too, simply in order to get the money big enough.And that raises issues that we have not had to face before--exceptperhaps marginally in the case of Mexico. I don't know if it's goingto come up; I hope it doesn't. My position is that it should not comeup. On the other hand, I cannot exclude it, given the nature of theproblem.MR. ROOS. How should we respond, if we are on the speakingcircuit and are asked what our impression is of the internationalsituation? How do you respond to that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with difficulty.MR. MARTIN. Very carefully.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, you give some sense ofconfidence as best you can.MR. PARTEE. Say "I have another appointment."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say in that connection--and Ishould have said it more clearly before--that I think this situationis manageable. In a very big sense, I think we are on the verge ofvictory in what we've been trying to do. It's a delicate situation,but it's also a very risky situation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What kind of victory, a Pyrrhicvictory?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, though it could turn into a Pyrrhicvictory.MR. PARTEE. We're going to get prices going down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But, in my opinion, it's only going to bemanageable with unusual exertions. And in the end I'm afraid thisinstitution may be called upon for unusual exertion simply becausethere is no other in a comparable position. It's the only possibilityin terms of having the leadership and the resources necessary to dealwith some of these problems. I don't know whether we can[unintelligible] that issue. But I think that is the nature of theproblem.MR. ROOS. Is it possible to assume that this internationalproblem is not a consequence of our anti-inflationary efforts and thatif our [anti-inflationary] program had never been undertaken this samesort of international situation could exist in a highly inflationary[environment]?10/5/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think all of these problems in aconsiderable degree emerge out the inflationary situation most broadly--a decade or more of loose practices, if that's the right term.Sooner or later Mexico was going to get in trouble. They borrowed $20billion last year. And they borrowed heaven knows how many billionsof dollars net this year when they still could borrow--before they gotin trouble. The timing of it is affected by recession, high interestrates, and all the rest. But I think it's patently obvious thatMexico was going to borrow all it could borrow and all the banks weregoing to give them and at some point that was going to come to an end.And it was going to be a crisis situation. I think one can say thatabout most of these other countries. So we may be talking about thetiming, but we are not talking about the essence of the matter in thatmany of these countries, as are companies at home and bankingpractices at home, are on an unsustainable course. We can't have abanking system that's totally loaned up to Mexico, Brazil, Venezuela,Argentina and Yugoslavia, but that's the direction they were going in.And some day that had to stop.MS. TEETERS. Will these containment efforts be done incooperation with the BIS the way Mexico was?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, the current ones are under discussionwith the BIS but there is the inherent management difficulty of theseproblems. There are very substantive economic problems and,underneath that, social problems and political problems. But from themanagement standpoint, the difficulty is that there are so manyactors. Mexico is the extreme case, but it's only a more extremeexample of reality. In Mexico, we are dealing with 1,100 banks orsomething like that. When you're dealing with that many banks aroundthe world, not just all over the United States but all over the world--and I mean banks you've never heard the name of in [Saudi] Arabia orthe Far East or wherever--getting all those banks to sit in the canoetogether is a little difficult. The same problem exists when dealingwith the BIS or in any cooperative international effort. There are alot of actors. They don't all understand the problem in the samedegree and they all see a little different self-interest in thesituation. I think almost all the central banks recognize some commoninterest in seeing an overall solution to the problem, but they have alot of individual interests, too, and getting them all to negotiatetogether is difficult. Everybody wants all the countries in; that'sthe tradition. And we get into this ridiculous situation where acountry that is putting in $12-1/2 million has the same voice as theUnited States does. That's a bit of an exaggeration, but there isthat kind of problem. They are all dealing with their owninstitutional structure. No central bank wants to touch thesesituations in the sense of a traditional central banking operation.They all would take the same attitude that we probably would take:It's a governmental problem. And some of them have institutions to doit and some don't. In virtually every case the central bank has moreflexibility in the short run than the government; some governmentshave none. Some central banks may not have any. We have this kind ofproblem, of course. The U.S. government itself is like dealing withfour different countries! But you multiply that and the difficultybecomes geometric, I guess, even when we're only dealing with 10 or 12countries. It's obviously important to get not just a facade but thereality of some international cooperation in these things--not justbecause of the money, which is significant, but because of the general-21-10/5/82feeling of solidarity, a common problem, a common approach, and allthe rest. And the banks, of course, are distributed among all thesecountries, too, including some countries that are not involved, and weneed the support of the central banks in dealing with their own banks.MR. WALLICH. I think a fairly persuasive way of answering aquestion about how all those countries are going to pay back all themoney is to say that basically these countries--and I'm speaking notof the East bloc--are viable. They can produce enough to take care oftheir needs. They may go through a difficult time, but it's aquestion of the policies that they pursue and, therefore, how they canbe influenced by the IMF rather than whether they can. It is possiblefor them to meet their obligations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that; that's another way ofsaying the situation is manageable. But they all do have very heavydebt burdens. And it gets into political questions as well aseconomic questions at some point. The country may say "Is itworthwhile to meet them?" whether they can or cannot theoretically.[The problem] is exponential for some of them; they have gotten sodeeply into debt. But, of course, in that sense, there is no questionthat lower interest rates, to the extent that is reflected in theirborrowing, are very important. For a country like Mexico or Braziltheir debt service--not their total debt service but their externalinterest payments for a year--are $10 billion plus.MR. TRUMAN. $12 billion.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. $12 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And their exports are $20 billion.MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. You made the point earlierthat even with the drop in interest rates we've seen that very littlehas trickled down to the real problem cases because of the tiering onquality considerations. Just suppose that it were the view of theCommittee that an effort ought to be made to have a significant dropin rates. In your judgment, how much can we realistically expect thatit would trickle down to some of these countries who really need thiskind of relief, in light of the experience we've had in recent months?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would not propose reducing interestrates simply as a method of getting their interest burden down. It'sa by-product there.MR. BOEHNE. I understand that. I was just asking--usingthat as a vehicle.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that I can give you anadequate answer. I suppose the answer must be that it's going to bethat much less than it would otherwise be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the indirect effect on otherindustrialized countries' exchange rates and their ability to lowertheir interest rates, and the reversing if possible of the decline inthe real volume of world trade that is going on, would probably have abigger impact on the exports of, say, Mexico and Argentina and Brazil10/5/82than the direct reduction in the interest rate burden unless thatlower interest rate prevails over six months or a year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the more important thing wouldcertainly be a sense that there is at least enough money to lend here,given the bank liquidity incentive that they don't have now.MR. GRAMLEY. Isn't the more basic problem that, in order forall of these countries around the world who have severe difficultyservicing their debts to find a way out, we simply can't rely oninternal adjustments within those countries to do it. We have to havesome world economic expansion. That's really a necessary conditionfor finding a way out of this whole problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not disagreeing with the thrustof what you're saying. That is very important in setting the climateof the whole thing. But I don't think one can honestly say that someof these countries [around which] you could build a dike, are totallydependent on world economic conditions. I think of Yugoslavia orArgentina in particular, where the balance of payments is not in thatbad shape to start with. Wheat is a big export in Argentina; that'snot, I think, terribly sensitive to world economic conditions. Idon't mean to detract from your point about a climate of expansion;particularly for a country like Brazil, it's critically important.But I don't think one can argue that we can't deal with a lot of theseindividual situations without an absolute necessity of having strongworld economic expansion, although it obviously may [help].MR. GRAMLEY. No, I wasn't talking about strong [worldexpansion], and I would agree with your point on individual countries.But it's no longer a question of just one individual country and whatit does to get its problem solved. It is how all of them together aregoing to get out that I think requires some degree of economicexpansion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't disagree with your basic comment.MR. PARTEE. One might say the same thing domestically.MR. GRAMLEY. Indeed. I think growth of the U.S. economy andof the world economy is a necessary but not sufficient condition toget us out of this severe difficulty we find ourselves in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On a global basis I don't disagree withyou.MR. WALLICH. I'm sorry. I feel like turning it around andsaying it is a sufficient but not absolutely necessary condition. Wecan find equilibrium at the level of some degree of recession.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, you're also assuming that wecan have a stable level of recession in the world.MR. WALLICH. That is true. [The world economy] doesn't haveto keep going down all the time.MS. TEETERS. The political implications of that, Henry, insome of these other countries may be much more severe than they are10/5/82here. Put a country into a situation of restraint in order to correctits external debts and I think there is the potential for politicalupheaval.MR. GUFFEY. Just a related question: Has our governmentalposture with respect to intervention in foreign exchange marketschanged at all? I noticed we did some purchases yesterday, as Samreported.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a nice semantic question, I guess, ofwhether the attitude has changed or whether the circumstances havechanged. We are certainly intervening.MR. FORD. Any pressures?MR. GUFFEY. Not in any size [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not aggressively, no. We have this notterribly aggressive [unintelligible]. But I think the attitude tobegin with is that there is a concern about this repetitiveappreciation of the dollar and the dollar reaching levels that seem--SPEAKER(?). Overdone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --unusual, overdone, or whatever the rightword is. So, there is a more sympathetic climate. There is no greatfeeling, which I share, that this [intervention] is going torevolutionize the world in and of itself, by any means. But that--MR. GUFFEY. That together with some lower interest rates mayhelp.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And at the very minimum that at leastreduces the [tensions] in international relations at a time when wedon't need any more.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The loss of U.S. exports due to anuncompetitive exchange rate, as best as one can make rough estimates,has been estimated in work I've seen as the equivalent of 2 percent ofour GNP in real terms. I don't know what the staff here has.MR. GUFFEY. Well, my question is whether or not there is arecognition by this government of that fact. And I assume the answeris, to a greater extent, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I don't want to suggest thatthere is great eagerness to intervene. It is a reluctant willingness.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There was a major surge in the dollaryesterday. To answer your question: I don't think there's anywillingness in this government to try to get the exchange rate valuedown in terms of levels. Given Paul's talks with the Secretary [ofthe Treasury], there may be a tad greater willingness to be in themarket on days when there are surges but not a [willingness to]sustain the effort, I don't think, to get the level down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not yet.10/5/82MR. WALLICH. Well, it's very doubtful that we can change the[exchange rate] level substantially unless there are policies thatsupport it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm afraid that this [discussion] isgetting a little ahead of us in some sense. I don't know whetherthere are any policies that support it now. There's something toDelors' statement that whatever happens, people want to go intodollars. In the long run obviously one can change that, but whetheror how changeable it is in the short run [involves] some fairly basicpremises. Germany may not be able to have a stable government becauseit is going to get polarized politically or the French may not be ableto manage their internal situation or whatever other concerns thereare in the exchange markets may change rapidly but are not amenable toobvious kinds of policy measures.MR. WALLICH. One would think that the market would observethe outlook for [some period] to come and tumble to the implicationsof that after a while.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I just came back from Europe. I amstruck by the degree of malaise and of nervousness there--fears of allkind--and the willingness of players to move enormous sums of money toSwitzerland and the United States on gut instinct that things are justgoing wrong in Europe and that the future just doesn't look good forEurope. And, of course, this was happening even in Japan where thestatistics look better. There is a lot of money going out of Japan.And the exchange rate now is ridiculous; it's 270 yen for the dollar.MR. MORRIS. Well, I find the same kind of attitude amongU.S. businessmen.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, that is pushing the money out[unintelligible] the world.MR. MORRIS. No, no.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. All right.MR. MORRIS. I am seeing an attitude that I have never seenbefore, not even in the depths of the 1974-75 recession. There is afeeling of apprehension, a vague apprehension that maybe things aregoing to get out of hand. And it's leading businessmen to take a verydefensive posture. I talked to the head of a quite successful companythat is being cushioned by a big increase in defense contracts. Butthe firm's domestic business is off, and he said--and I thought thiswas a rather striking statement--that the objective of his company wasto generate cash. If that kind of thinking is very widespread--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that that thinking iswidespread. Somebody was telling me the other day, a member of aninvestment banking firm, that he had visited a number of companies andwas struck by one fact. These companies were in various businesses.Obviously, everybody is affected by the business [situation] to agreater or lesser degree; these happened to be profitable companies.And at company after company, they were all building up cashliquidity. He was just amazed at the size of their cash balances.10/5/82MR. MORRIS. So we shouldn't be surprised if liquid assetshave grown relative to nominal GNP at a rate that is out of line withpast experience.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My mental image of the business world isthat those that are profitable are sitting on cash. Those that arenot profitable are being squeezed.MR. KEEHN. But even with the profitable ones, the level ofmalaise is rising very dramatically. So, I sense that with thepassage of time--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This isn't a comment that they are notexperiencing malaise; their sitting on cash is an indication of amalaise.MR. PARTEE. There is a sense of pull-backs, though. Do you,Si and Frank, get the sense that they are pulling back on theirspending plans in order to generate this cash?MR. MORRIS. Absolutely.MR. BALLES. Yes.SPEAKER(?). Universally.MR. KEEHN. At Caterpillar, for example, they are not[unintelligible], but they are being particularly hard hit. Theirsales [in the third quarter] and their estimated sales in the fourthquarter of this year will be 50 percent under the sales for the thirdquarter of last year. That's a massive decrease. They went backthrough their records and the last time that they had a decrease wasin '29 and in '30. And then they had their first loss year-end '32.They're going to have another loss year this year, and they are at theend of their string.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, the discouraging thing is thattheir workers are out on strike. I don't know what they're askingfor, but--MR. KEEHN. Yes, but they are not posturing for negotiations.Their comments are based on their--MR. MARTIN. The point is the militancy in the unions despitethese realities.MR. KEEHN. Yes, the union is basing its position on '81results, which were pretty good comparatively, and they are notbeing--MR. PARTEE. That strike might run a long time.MR. KEEHN. Also, Caterpillar is being killed by the yen-dollar rate. [A Japanese company] has just taken their ears off.MR. MORRIS. We're seeing in New England highly successful,very rapidly growing companies such as Digital Equipment being hit.They have had traditionally a "no layoff" policy; so they announced10/5/82that in order to substitute for the cash flow improvement of a layoffthey were going to have a wage freeze for 3 months. This really hitBoston. If Digital Equipment is in trouble, then the issue is: Whois doing well?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I ran into a fellow the other day atdinner--unfortunately I think this is an atypical experience of amajor multi-national company with a foreign base with a big U.S.operation--and asked him how things were going and what hisinflationary expectations were and what else was happening. This guyis obviously quite conservative, but he said he had just come from ameeting of his American managers and the purpose of the meeting atleast in part was to decide upon what he called "merit increases" nextyear. It sounds like the Federal Reserve! He went around to themanagers and asked them what they thought was appropriate for meritincreases this year. They all gave him figures of 10 to 12 percent,and according to him he started off by saying: "Are you laying offworkers?" And all the managers said "yes," they were laying employeesoff. He suggested to them that merit increases this year shouldaverage 3 percent so long as they were laying off workers. I said tohim: "Managers don't like to do that because it may affect their ownsalary scales. What did you do about that?" He said: "Oh, I forgotto tell you! I told them they were getting zero." Unfortunately heis a Frenchman, not an American. I don't know how typical that is.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He didn't want to [unintelligible].I was shocked the other day when the head of one of the big insurancecompanies was in for lunch and said his company is giving wageincreases that average about 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you give him a lecture?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I did. I gave him a much strongerlecture than probably was politic. He apologized but gave me theargument that it's a catch-up because their workers' wages had fallenbehind. I don't know how true that is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Catch-up for the executives right now.MR. PARTEE. Well, if they're not doing it in Boston, theinsurance business will shift to Boston from New York.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe the new form of a viableincomes policy. Chuck, is to try to put constraints only on the [payof] top executives.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If you do that, they'll see thatnobody else--MS. TEETERS. Like the Federal Reserve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there's something to that. Maybewe'll add that to our directive today. [Unintelligible] salarysurveys.-27-10/5/82MR. BOEHNE. I had a similar group in to our Bank--peoplefrom Philadelphia or nearby--and their figure wasn't 10 percent but 8percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm surprised it's so common in thefinancial world; they give the same kind of argument. Well, whatother general comments are there?MR. CORRIGAN. With all this understandable talk about Mexicoand all the rest, you didn't say a word about small banks at the otherend of the spectrum. But I think it's relevant to this generalconversation. We started about four or five months ago carefullymonitoring the small banks in the Ninth District. The monitoringtakes several forms, including literally getting an instant picture ofan examination the minute it is completed, and we are compiling listsof one-bank holding companies [in difficulty]. The criteria that weused was that if a one-bank holding company will consume at least 75percent of the bank's 1981 earnings to meet its debt servicerequirements in 1982, it is on the list. It's really striking, to putit mildly, to see the number of institutions that fall into thatcategory in the case of the one-bank holding companies. The number issubstantial, and that of course assumes that they have the equivalentof 1981 earnings to work with in the future to meet these debt servicerequirements at the holding company level. With the problem loans andthe loan losses and this new instrument and all the rest, one could atleast question the proposition that they're going to be able to retainthose earnings. Similarly, in the case of small banks, at least theones that seem to be scattered around the Ninth District, it's notuncommon to see that the classified loans in the recent examinationversus the last one are up anywhere from 200 to 500 percent. As ofyet most of that increase is in the commercial sector and the MainStreet retailers. There is not yet a major increase in the problemloans reflecting the agricultural sector itself. But one has towonder how long that can last, given what is going on right now.The other thing that I would observe in terms of these smalland medium size banks that I think is directly relevant to what wassaid earlier is that it is rather astonishing to me to see the extentto which these regional and small institutions have money placed inthe London market. There are very logical and natural reasons whythey should do that, and certainly we don't want to chase that moneyout of there right now. Nevertheless, it is a form of exposure evenin these banking organizations that ties in with this internationalsituation and goes in many cases well beyond our general perceptions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This situation is exposing, in my view,the structural weaknesses in the banking world of which thesemotherless banks are one example. But this kind of thing is anotherthat gets these small banks in that kind of a market. The problems inthe Eurodollar market to which I alluded are not confined to Americanbanks by any means. North of the border, they have had problems inspades domestically and that has not gone unnoticed in internationalmarkets, and one can make the same comments about some banks in otherareas.If we are ready, I think we ought to return to the policydiscussion. The staff can distribute this draft text that I have fordiscussion purposes anyway. I have not read [the directive] probably-2810/5/82literally for years; I don't know whether I've read it since I've beenhere. But for some reason I got this boilerplate part in front of me,which goes in front of the [operative part of the] directive, and itseems to me singularly inappropriate. It probably always is, but itis more so now. I think this could use a judicious sentence or two,making some allusion to the strains or pressures or whatever in thebanking sector these days and to the problems of foreign lending inparticular--it needs to be expressed very judiciously--just toindicate that we are someplace in the real world. And I would suggestthat it might possibly be left to the Chairman to figure out asentence or two to stick in there at an appropriate point.MR. FORD. I beg your pardon? I don't understand whereyou're going to add a sentence or two.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not quite sure where I would putit.MS. TEETERS. What are you looking at?MR. PARTEE. He's talking about the first several paragraphsin the directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about something called thegeneral paragraphs.MR. PARTEE. It's probably on the calm side; it's bland.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's the first paragraph he's talkingabout.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm talking about the first twoparagraphs. I think [the additional sentences] would go appropriatelyeither at the bottom of the first page or in the top paragraph on thesecond page. I'd add just a sentence or two saying that the marketswere influenced during this period by concern over internationallending--something expressed very calmly, but not ignored entirely.MR. ROOS. This would mean that we would set no targets forM1?[Secretary's note: The draft directive wording circulated atChairman Volcker's request did not include a target for M1.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are ahead of us. I'm just referringto this general boilerplate now, which I will cease talking about withthe understanding that you may see a new sentence or two in there, ifthat's acceptable.MR. MARTIN. I think it's necessary.MR. PARTEE. Well, even in terms of the facts, there is noreference here to the deterioration in employment, to the rise ininsurance claims, or to any of the indicators of weakness. It iscovered by "The unemployment rate was unchanged at 9.8 percent."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think--29-10/5/82MR. PARTEE. Nonfarm payroll employment dropped a couplehundred thousand.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We don't get the new [unemployment]number until Friday.MR. PARTEE. And it's not going to be 9.8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but we can put in something like:"The unemployment rate in August was unchanged at 9.8 percent butthere were some indications of a deteriorating labor marketsituation."MR. PARTEE. Yes, something like that.MR. MARTIN. We have the initial claims.MR. PARTEE. We know that employment went down in the nonfarmseries.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do a little editing of the wholething. Everybody has a copy of this now, except for me I guess. Iwill open this for a general discussion when you're ready.MR. FORD. I'd like to start with a technical question. Ifwe put in this 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent [range for M2 and M3], wheredoes that put the broader aggregates by the end of the year? I didn'tsee that projected.MR. AXILROD. If M2 were 9-1/2 percent, for the year growthwould be about 9-3/4 percent; if it were 8-1/2 percent, growth for theyear would be about 9-1/2 percent. M3 looks as if it's going to bearound--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's for the fourth quarter to thefourth quarter?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's for the fourth quarter to thefourth quarter. I don't have the year-over-year figure.MR. BOEHNE. Does the Humphrey-Hawkins Act require anynotification to congressional committees on such a change or do yousimply have to explain it when you testify in February?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the Act particularlyrequires, but if we change the annual target rather specifically, thenI think we would report it. I would not interpret this that way. Wesaid we would run around the top or were willing to run above for awhile, and this is willing to run above for a while.MR. PARTEE. It does, however, involve the question of marketinterpretation of numbers that are going to be running quite high.MR. BOEHNE. Well, aside from whether this is a good idea ora bad idea, when this directive is made public I think it is going tobe viewed as a substantial change in the way monetary policy is beingdirected.10/5/82MR. MARTIN. A substantial temporary change or a substantialchange?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A change to reverse.MR. BOEHNE. No, I wouldn't say it's a reverse, but it is asubstantial change. And the time horizon on the financial markets issuch that whether it's a change for three months or two or three yearsat this point--MR. PARTEE. It won't be until Christmas time when it isrevealed to the public.MR. BOEHNE. No, it will be revealed at the end of November.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume there will be some occasion,probably fairly soon, for describing in general terms what we aredoing.MR. FORD. Before it's published?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Certainly before it's published.MR. FORD. The market will start to see the results of this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Long before it's published.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, why would this be preferable tocontinuing to specify the target for M1 but putting in a disclaimer orat least the warning that M1 might behave in an unusual manner and ifthat occurs, we would reserve the privilege of adjusting itaccordingly? I'd prefer that for the sake of continuity. If weignore M1 totally, despite the explanations that are given, I thinkpeople could read sinister purposes in it; it would make base driftpale in comparison to dropping one of our important targets totally.I'd rather see us say that we're doing this but it is somewhattentative due to what might happen on these new instruments. Toignore M1 would really run the flag up that in some people'sperception we are making a basic change. There is still a significantamount of debate between Frank and me and others; some of us thinkthat M1 is not as unreliable as others do. I just think to drop itwould look as though we've really retreated in that regard.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't think there should be anyimplication here of more than a one-quarter problem. It may be morethan that, but this isn't meant to carry any implication of that. ButI would like to separate the substance from the presentation. Insubstance what I feel very strongly about is that it would be amistake to have any kind of directive that would drive us deliberatelyor otherwise to higher interest rates. I think it was a mistake tohave that kind of directive last time. I think it would be more thana mistake this time, and it's not going to be acceptable to me.Beyond that it is desirable to get some easing in this situation.MR. ROOS. Well, doesn't alternative B for M1 as shown in theBluebook imply roughly that the fed funds rate would remain in the 8to 12 percent range? In other words, how would this avoid--10/5/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me clarify my comment. A 12 percentfederal funds rate currently is totally unacceptable to me.MR. MARTIN. That's the top of the range for "B."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought you were going to say 11.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eleven percent is also unacceptable to me.MR. PARTEE. But even so, I think you have to recognize,Larry, that the staff hasn't factored in the possibility--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The central point is that whatever the[monetary variable] is that we are operating on, it is a staff guess,which may or may not be right. I'm saying that I am not willing tostake my life, so to speak, on that guess being right. The risks aretoo great.MR. ROOS. How would this give you greater assurance, Mr.Chairman, that rates could not [rise]? For example, if some peoplefelt through some complicated thinking that ignoring M1 was anexpansionary or inflationary act, how would this wording assure thatthe fed funds rate would not increase just as substantially as settinga "B" target for M1, for example, and saying it might be right orwrong depending on how people respond to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to respond to the particularwording at this point. Obviously, we have to get into that. But whatthis is meant to convey is an operational approach that modestly movesthe federal funds rate down. Whether it involves a discount ratechange or not is something the Board is going to have to decide. Butthat is the tenor meant to be given here, rather straightforwardly, Imight say.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, this indicates your dissatisfactionwith the way we handled it last time--that is, to have a target thatwas sensitive to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I am totally dissatisfied. What wedid last time was unacceptable to me. I just want to make that plain.I think we made a mistake last time. I think we would not have sodifficult a problem psychologically this time if we had not done whatwe did last time. It wasn't that big a mistake in some sense. Butit's unfortunate that we ended up at this meeting with the federalfunds rate and private rates about 1 percentage point higher than theywere at the time of the last meeting because we had a high M1 figurein September. That was the only reason it happened.MR. WALLICH. There was still some hope then that we couldget within the target ranges for the year. This time it looks verydoubtful that without a self-defeating effort we would get M1 withinits target range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not going to cry over last month'sdecision. All I'm saying is, looking ahead, that I don't want to endup a month from now with a 12 percent federal funds rate. I don'teven want to end up with an 11 percent federal funds rate, based upon10/5/82everything I know about the market situation, the national situation,and the world situation.MR. FORD. What you are saying quite plainly, if I hear youcorrectly, is that you think rates are too high now and you don't wanteven a tiny increase from the present rate of 10-1/4 percent on thefed funds rate. You don't want it averaging 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I surely do not.MR. FORD. You want literally to cap interest rates wherethey are now, or better yet, to drive them down.MR. PARTEE. To a 10 percent top?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Drive them down? I'd like to see them alittle easier, yes, if we can get by with that.MR. FORD. I want to say, respectfully, that I'm flatlyopposed to this. If we were to do this, especially now, I think itwill consolidate any adverse opinions against us that are already outthere about our motives for doing this at this particular time. At abreakfast meeting with the leading bankers in Atlanta 72 hours or soago, at which Mayor Young was the guest of honor speaking to us, hevolunteered in front of all the bankers in the room a comment--we werediscussing the city's problems--that he was instructing his staff toissue some municipal bonds immediately in order to do a certainproject in the city of Atlanta. I said: "What's the rush about this,Andy?" And he said: "You guys are going to change policy right afterelection day and now is the time to do it." This was Andrew Young.I've heard from more people than I care to describe to you commentsquestioning our integrity and our motives in the context of anelection campaign.MR. MORRIS. Yes, but Bill, we've got to do what we think isbest for the economy and let those comments go.MR. FORD. First of all, I'm not convinced that pegginginterest rates at today's level or trying to push them down is bestfor the economy. Secondly, changing policy now in this context andsaying overtly, as you said it, that we should hold interest rateswhere they are and try to push them down is going to make us extremelyvulnerable to charges--unfounded I feel, because I don't question themotives of the people here who would vote for this. I think therepercussions of this are going to be terrible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's an enormous concession.MR. FORD. People are going to come down all over us.MR. PARTEE. You know, Bill, I would put the emphasis alittle differently here. Maybe the wording needs to be changed some;I wouldn't put it in terms of moving interest rates down. I think theproblem is that M1 could do almost anything in the period to come. Infact, it already has done almost anything. In August and September wehad a 35 percent rate of increase in NOW accounts. And that's notassociated with the--10/5/82MR. FORD. I'm not trying to defend M1.MR. PARTEE. Our problem, though, is not just that the numbermight be 1/2 percent too high; it might be way too high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may have a $10 billion increase in M1in the first week in October.MR. PARTEE. So, I support the idea of getting off M1 at thisparticular time. Perhaps there is more emphasis on it than thereought to be here. It really doesn't come through as strongly when onereads this [draft directive language] that we're trying to moveinterest rates down as when the Chairman talks.MR. FORD. I'm reacting to what the Chairman is telling us,which is I think commendably honest, in that he is saying he reallydoesn't want to see interest rates raised. That's what I'm reactingto regardless of what it says here. And I think that will be apparentin the marketplace well before this is published and our integritywill be brought into question if we proceed along that line.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your vision of our integrity.MR. FORD. My vision, yes.MR. ROOS. Even if this were done, people will still measureM1 in their closets and under their beds and so forth in order to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't suggested that we won't publishthe number, Larry.MR. ROOS. If, in order to keep interest rates artificiallydown or otherwise down, we have to inflate M1, the minute that becomesapparent we've lost the ballgame and we will have just as high--MR. PARTEE. We're not inflating it. I think youmisunderstand. These are structural shifts that are occurring thatpossibly are going to produce a much higher M1 for a time. And thequestion is: Should we resist it, which inevitably would mean higherrates, or should we recognize that there has been a structural shift?Would we be better off not looking at it so much for a little while?MR. ROOS. Well, how does this differ, Chuck, from ourexperience with NOW accounts? I remember when everybody got all jumpyabout NOW accounts.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think NOW accounts are causing us anawful lot of trouble.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. I think we probably havenot adjusted for NOW accounts correctly. The total growth in M1,almost, has been in NOW accounts this year. To what extent does thatreflect real money? Who knows?MR. WALLICH. I think we have to detach temporarily from M1because it has become so uncertain both because of the all saverscertificates bulge and the new instrument coming along. Even if thatbulge were not to occur, we would have the new instrument and we10/5/82simply don't know [its likely effect]; all we know is that it could bevery major. We can put more stress on the evidence of risingliquidity preference, and that gives us the opportunity to target onM2 with a proviso that if it exceeds [our expectations], we'll takethis as evidence of an increase in liquidity preference and not followup with interest rates. That seems to me perfectly defensiblesubstantively and still within the formal framework of our policy.MR. MARTIN. I'd like to turn the integrity argument aroundand argue for the second thoughts of the commentators and the analystsof our policy. If we move in this direction of minimizing oreliminating M1 temporarily--and I'm not ready to throw it overboard--and we pursue a policy that deliberately brings down interest rates,the first thoughts will be that we caved in, the election is coming,and here they go again. The second thoughts, I think, will bedifferent. The second thoughts--which may be based on some analysisrather than on a knee-jerk reaction to what we do--would be that theintegrity of the Federal Reserve is that they pursued policies with aneye to the growth of the economy, to the liquidity of the domestic andinternational system, and indeed, they did this despite the politicalconsequences that occurred in the short run. They maintained theirintegrity as a central bank. I think that's a very differentconclusion from the second thoughts on the other side which might bethat the Federal Reserve should have brought interest rates down butthe politics of the situation were such that they couldn't.MR. ROOS. Well, who has been able to demonstrate anyreliable relationship between the growth of the broader aggregates andeconomic activity? M2 was growing way above its range last year, Ithink, or the year before and the economy was sick.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Milton Friedman wrote a big book on thesubject.MR. ROOS. I can't read, but--MR. PARTEE. It is certainly true that velocity has beenincreasing for M2 but not as much as for M1.MR. ROOS. Do you think the evidence shows that M2 is as gooda predictor as Ml?MR. PARTEE. No, as M1 used to be.MR. MARTIN. But this is short run.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon which analyst looks at it.MR. WALLICH. We have made that switch, though not quite asexplicitly; nevertheless, we've made it from time to time. We haveplaced more weight on M2 at times.MS. HORN. It seems to me that the [appropriate] timing mightbe the next meeting. In terms of setting quarterly targets, we mightlook at an M1 target and tolerate above target performance [now], withall saver certificates and so forth coming due. And then at the nextmeeting if we are looking at an instrument that is very unpredictablein terms of what it's going to do to M1--having set the quarterly-35-10/5/82targets at this meeting--we could say that for some weeks during thispart of the quarter we're going to have to look more heavily at M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Let me first of all say that I agree with theproposal that rates shouldn't go higher, that they should be in someway capped from this point forward for some period of time. Indeed,they should be urged to come down, not precipitously but in a modestway, over the quarter. But having said that, I look at the languagethat you have put before us and am trying to equate that with what thestaff has in the Bluebook. It seems to me that the 8-1/2 to 9-1/2percent range for M2--or at least the "A" proposal [of 9-1/2 percent]--and then the caveat in the last sentence would suggest that we willtolerate growth above that given some perception of liquidity needs orotherwise. I'm suggesting that in my view at least--and I will ask aquestion of Steve in a moment--that probably will result in ratescoming down immediately following this meeting, depending upon how webuild the path. And I would hesitate to associate myself with thosewho would want a fast drop in rates. If that's not a correctassessment, I would like to ask Steve: How would you build your pathfor the reserve objective based upon this kind of language? And whatwould you expect to happen within the next two weeks? That is rathera critical period for us.MR. AXILROD. Well, with this kind of language, I would takeM2 growth at somewhere around 9 or 9-1/2 percent or whatever theCommittee sets and project the M1 that is roughly consistent withthat, which by the Bluebook [estimates] would be on the order of 5percent, forgetting these special circumstances. So, if we assumesubstantial increases in the first week of October and take theborrowing that the Committee says to take--MR. GUFFEY. Well, it is important where we're going to setthe initial borrowing level; that is critical to what happens tointerest rates in the next two weeks.MR. AXILROD. Well, that would be the Committee's decision.But consistent with some easing, one would assume that the initialborrowing assumption would be down [to] about $200 million, movingback toward where it was at the last meeting and probably a littlelower because that initial borrowing assumption is really pushing tomove the funds rate back above the discount rate. So, in partdepending on the sense of what the Committee wants, it may be belowthat level.MR. GUFFEY. I guess that sort of makes my point. I'minterested in the rates coming down and not going up, but I wouldobject to seeing a precipitous drop built upon this kind of path. Itoccurs to me that we may have fed funds trading in the 8-1/2 to 9percent range rather quickly if we're going to set that kind ofinitial borrowing level and these kinds of targets.MR. AXILROD. Well, at the 10 percent discount rate, if youhad a borrowing of $200 million, just to take an example--I'm notsaying it should be at that level--I would not expect the funds rateto get as low as that. It would be more like 10 percent or a shadeunder. Peter may have another view.10/5/82MR. STERNLIGHT. I would agree with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might remind you of the probable settingin the next few days. Indications are that we will have a very sharpdecline in the money supply for the last figure that means anything.And we probably will have an unemployment rate well over 10 percentpublished this week.MR. ROOS. You said a decline in the money supply?SPEAKER(?). In the week.MR. GUFFEY. Those money numbers are not going to last exceptfor the one week?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but that is the last number that willhave no distortion from all savers certificates in it.MR. PARTEE. Steve, in setting the path now, wouldn't youregard a change or a shift in the relationship between M1 and M2 thatyou could identify as coming in a week or two or three sort of as amultiplier adjustment?MR. AXILROD. Yes, if the Committee were adopting this sortof directive, those variations in M1 would all tend to be allowed foras multiplier adjustments.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. AXILROD. That would be the logic.MR. PARTEE. So, it would depend on the setting of theinitial borrowing level, but it might not in fact result in a bigdecline in borrowing. It would depend on their relationship as to howmany nonborrowed reserves you provide.MR. GUFFEY. But we are at a borrowing level of about $500 or$600 million.MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. GUFFEY. And if you're going to build the path on $200million--MR. AXILROD. No, I was using that as an example.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to decide what to build the pathon. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we are all in agreement on only onething, I think: that we would like to see interest rates come down.I would like to raise the question of whether it might not bereasonable to suppose that a little resistance now to the strengthwe've had in the aggregates might not save us from a bigger move lateron. We have engineered a pretty sharp reduction, almost 400 basispoints, in the federal funds rate from its level back in July.Historically when we've had that [kind of decline], we've had anexplosion of the aggregates. And if that does happen--though, of-37-10/5/82course, all of us hope it doesn't--we may find ourselves in a positionwhere we are going to have to move against that. We have justfinished a discussion of countries that have delayed taking wise stepsand they have gotten to the point where they have to take very drasticsteps. I have a whole collection of quotations from members of theBoard of Governors who have stated very eloquently that this is thepoint at which we've lost it, usually, in the past.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You won't find that quotation from me.There was a quotation to that effect cited at this meeting before,which I must correct for the record. I have said upon a number ofoccasions that the way we have lost this game is by staying with anexpansionary policy too long during a recovery period. That statementalso says the mistakes were not made at the bottom of a recession.MR. BLACK. Okay. Well, it may be a delay of timing, but I'mnot going to quarrel with you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's rather significant.MR. BLACK. My feeling is that we can't pay too muchattention to the aggregates right now but that we ought to nudge thefederal funds rate [up] a little as a way of showing that we'reconcerned about that. I don't expect that to have much effect. But Ithink it could keep us from having to move [rates] a whole lot lateron, which really would worry me a great deal. But maybe I am deadwrong on this. It may be that the aggregates will come into line verybeautifully and we will have no worries. That would be the best ofall possible worlds. But that's not what I think is the most likelycase. So, I'm opposed to what you have suggested here, although Iunderstand full well how a reasonable person could be expected to--MR. RICE. Do I understand that you want to nudge the fundsrate up?MR. BLACK. A little. I wanted to do that between the lastmeeting and this meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think the period ahead is one in whichwe have ample reasons not to target on M1. My own judgment, however,is that the problem we face is much more fundamental than whether wetarget on M1 now because of all savers certificates and the new DIDCregulations that will come out as mandated by legislation. I thinkthe world economy is literally starved for liquidity. And I'd likenthis [situation] to the dietary analogy that suggests. Fat peoplehave good reasons to go on diets. Diets are very good things unlessthey get out of hand. They sometimes do. And when they get out ofhand, the patient becomes anorexic and that's often a fatal disease.If it's not fatal, it's often a life-long disease. I am worried thatwe have gone on long enough starving the world economy for liquidityand that we may be at a point of impending anorexia.Larry Roos mentioned earlier that he thought real interestrates were getting down toward normal levels. I must say I don't knowhow he reaches that conclusion. The three-month commercial paper rateis 10 percent, and my perception is that the three-month expected10/5/82inflation rate would be somewhere in the neighborhood of 4 to 5percent. So that makes the cost of issuing commercial paper 4 to 6percent in real terms. Private corporate bond rates for AAA issuesare 13-1/2 percent and are much higher for lower-graded issues. Iunderstand that most businesses now have a 5-to-10 year inflationexpectation of something like 6 to 7 percent .So that makes 6 to 7percent the long-term real interest rate. That simply isn't normal.It is not even close to being normal. There are all kinds of reasonsfor that, and I think fiscal policy is one of them. But if you lookat what has been happening to the real money stock recently, I thinkyou will find the answer largely in a very, very tight monetarypolicy. And it started before October 1979; it started earlier. In1979, we had an increase in the nominal money stock of 7-1/2 percent;prices went up above 12 percent. In 1980, nominal money went up 7-1/2percent; prices again went up around 11 to 12 percent. In 1981, moneygrowth was 5 percent against a price increase of 10 percent. Thisyear it will be a little closer probably. But we've had a very, verysubstantial drop in the real money stock in this country. It hasforced the kinds of policies other countries are following. So, Ithink we have to do what is necessary to provide the liquidity thatwill permit this economy to grow and will permit the world economy togrow. I think we're right in going in the direction we are at thisparticular meeting of unhinging [policy] from what is likely to happento M1 in the months ahead. I am wondering as I look at this directiveif the last two sentences are necessary. This leaves the directivefocused on expanding bank reserves as necessary for an orderly andsustained flow of money and credit and that leads to an expectationabout M2 and M3, without these last two sentences about somewhatslower and somewhat [more rapid]--I'm sorry, I think I'm losing myvoice.MR. PARTEE. I think the last sentence particularly raisesquestions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I clearly would fall on the sideof the argument that says we don't want an increase in interest rates,even by accident. An increase in interest rates in the currentsetting, even if it came about by accident, would border almost onbeing irresponsible at this point. On the other side, I'd like tothink that maybe we could orchestrate a moderate and temperate andfurther gradual reduction in market interest rates. In the currentcircumstances that inevitably calls into question relationships aboutthe discount rate and our view about what frictional levels ofborrowing really are, much as they did back in July when the lastreduction of the discount rate took place. But having said that, Iwould be somewhat uneasy to find ourselves in a situation where we aredealing with an unbridled attempt to force down interest rates asopposed to trying to nudge or orchestrate them in that direction. So,in general, I have no great problem with what is being suggested here.I would just throw out the idea, and I'm not sure how to do it, thatone way we might dissipate some of the concern about the longer-runimplications of this--or stated the other way, reinforce the view thatit is a temporary thing--would be to put a sentence in the directivesomeplace that makes at least oblique reference to a continuinglonger-run commitment to achieve moderate and declining monetarygrowth, perhaps in the context of the '83 targets or something like10/5/82that. It's not easy to do. But it might help deal with thisperception problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. My views are well known, so I can be very[brief]. I don't think we can get a recovery with interest rateswhere they are, and I am very disappointed that they went back upsince the last meeting. I had hoped that they would go through the 9to 9-1/2 percent level and maybe go down again. Therefore, I wouldsupport anything that is going to bring us a generally lower ratestructure and bring mortgage rates and other long-term rates down andgin up the economy not only here but worldwide. So, I'm in favor ofthis. I don't object to those two last sentences. I think they givethe directive a very good flavor by saying that we're going to operatein the interest of liquidity in the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. I would join with Governors Partee and Teetersin the view that the impending recovery is probably not as projected,given today's interest rates. I would call your attention to therather heroic assumption, in current dollars, of the recovery inresidential structures quarter-by-quarter running between plus 24percent and plus almost 40 percent. Given today's interest rates andtoday's lack of liquidity in the financial system, I simply don't feelthat those are obtainable growth numbers. If that's part of theconsumer leading the recovery, it is not likely to occur. Much moreimportant is the weakness in business fixed investment; it is toostrong as projected. The first thing corporations have to do is toreliquify themselves; they're going to have to raise $20 billion or$40 billion or $60 billion in a very short period of time. Andthey're not likely to be able to do that in an economy with the degreeof liquidity it has today. It appears that there are notuncertainties anymore but fear out there in the capital markets. Partof it is derived from the international situation but a good deal ofit is the awareness of the precarious nature of our own privatecorporate sector in this country. And I think the need forreliquification extends very obviously to the thrift industry and tothe small banking industry as they face the changes that need to bemade there. But to get back to business investment, which I think isgoing to decline more than our projections show, corporations facevery low returns on investment after taxes despite the efforts of theCongress to change the depreciation and the cost recovery situation.As we know, the recently enacted tax revenue measure has taken backhalf of the benefits, plus or minus, in that area. So, we face anextended period of weakness in business investment.I think the best thing we can do is to bring rates down andhelp reliquify so that sometime out in 1983 or even 1984 we will havea recovery in the private sector. I would support a temporary movingaway from an M1 target. I believe that is consonant with maintainingour integrity as a central bank. We would be making a real mistake ifwe become too mechanical in the application of a policy in a multi-trillion dollar economy. So, I would like to see this directive,perhaps with the Corrigan codicil adding language pointing toward thereduction in the growth of the money supply over time. I would alsolike to see a borrowing level of $200 to $300 million with a verbal10/5/82directive, if you will, that interest rates be brought down, but in agradual way, echoing a previous comment here. [Unintelligible] thatwe temporarily target interest rates and that we be overt and candidin our specifications.MR. ROOS. During that temporary period, may I just inquirewhether we would continue to publish weekly M1 figures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course.MR. MARTIN. Yes, indeed, unless we can get the four-weeknumbers published one of these days in addition.MR. ROOS. Pres, what if those weekly figures over thistemporary period showed a rather unusual and alarming increase in M1?They would be out there for everyone to see. Do you anticipate thatif that were to happen we would be able to move interest rates down?In other words, if the consequence of what we were doing[unintelligible]. The traditional means of bringing short-terminterest rates down was to pump money into the economy, and if thatwas reflected in the weekly figures and they showed a bulge, assumingthat everyone around this table wants to see lower interest rates--MR. MARTIN. Larry, this is not the problem here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This isn't the problem, I'm afraid. Thosefigures may show a bulge and it may have nothing to do with pumpingmoney into the economy. It may show a bulge because $22 billion ofall savers certificates are maturing, some of which are temporarilybeing lodged in M1. Now, what do you do with that figure?MS. TEETERS. We go out with an announcement telling thepublic what happened.MR. MARTIN. We would explain it.MR. ROOS. Well, I would suspect, and I'd be prepared toplace a small wager on it, that the all savers phenomenon will washitself out within 60 days at the most.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I agree with that.MR. PARTEE. Then in 60 days we will have a new instrument.MR. MARTIN. In the meantime, John Deere fails.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course it will wash itself out. Thatparticular phenomenon will wash itself out in less than 60 days.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Less than 60 days?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I don't know that for sure.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, since we're on this subject, if Ican jump in here for a minute, one proviso I would make in my generalsupport of your proposal is that we breach a second tradition here, ifwe are going to drop the M1 target temporarily. Normally, is it not10/5/82true, Murray, that the minutes of this meeting would not be publiclyreleased until the December FOMC meeting?MR. ALTMANN. No, November 19th, three days after theNovember meeting.MR. BALLES. After the November meeting. I don't think wecan wait that long.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I agree with that.MR. BALLES. I think we need to get out this information PDQ.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to say something if we get a bigfigure in the first week of October. We have to say that so far as weknow that figure is an all savers phenomenon and we're not going topay any attention to it or to the M1 figures in the immediate future.MR. BALLES. Okay, I agree completely. I'm glad to hear thatbecause to do otherwise I think would be very, very risky.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I feel very much that we would be betteroff if interest rates were lower. The question is: How do we getfrom here to there? The wisest thing, if we wanted to get there,would be that we shouldn't start from here. That option isn't open tous. We have to get there without sacrificing all that we've createdin the last year in terms of credibility and a framework for givingpeople confidence. So, I think we should still have a money supplydirective not, as this looks to me, a money market or interest ratedirective. I think we should give up temporarily on M1, which isbeset by all the uncertainties of the all savers certificates and thenew instrument. That doesn't mean we wouldn't go back to it.Logically, M1 is the best of the aggregates. We should stressliquidity preference more than the alternative directive does byputting a reference to it at the beginning of the last sentence,indicating that there is mounting evidence that exceptional liquiditydemands are upon us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the beginning of what sentence?MR. WALLICH. The last sentence. Instead of starting with"Somewhat more rapid," I would say "In the light of mounting evidencethat economic and financial uncertainties are continuing to lead toexceptional liquidity demands, somewhat more rapid growth in thebroader aggregates would be tolerated." So, we allow for an overshootof M2, which is the one thing I would suggest that we target.MR. GRAMLEY. Do we have evidence of that, Henry?MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could be up.MR. GRAMLEY. Liquidity preference?10/5/82MR. WALLICH. It seems clear that velocity, instead of risingas had been expected, is--MR. GRAMLEY. I thought the staff said that the increase inthe quantity of M1 recently is pretty much in line with a movementdown the demand function, given the current interest rates, and not ashift in the demand function.MR. WALLICH. As you look at the behavior of velocity overthe year, it does not--MR. GRAMLEY. That was a good argument last April, but I'mnot sure it is now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well--MR. WALLICH. Well, I think it is a defensible argument. Iwould suggest that we drop the reference in the first sentence of thesecond paragraph to the expansion of bank reserves and reducedpressures but shape the M2 path in such a way that we would have agradual decline in interest rates. We would have to formulate theborrowing assumption to make that feasible. I can't do it off the topof my head; I don't know just what that would be. I would make thefunds range narrow to reflect the fact that we are backing away frommoney supply targets. And we could cap it at 10 percent, if that werereally necessary. All it would mean is that we would consult, and attimes like this we ought to consult more frequently anyway. That'show I would structure the directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think how one comes out on this dependson whether one wants to take the risks on rules or on the side ofdiscretion. It does seem to me that we have pushed the domesticeconomy and the financial system and the world economy about as far aswe can push them. And this is not business as usual. I think we haveto take our chances on the side of discretion, which tells me that ata minimum we cannot have higher rates in these circumstances; and ifwe can get lower rates, that's fine. I must say, however, thatwhenever one bets on discretion versus rules, it depends a good bit onwho is making the discretionary decisions. I believe this kind ofdirective puts much more than the usual amount of authority in thehands of the Chairman. And with this particular Chairman, I don'thave any problems, given the circumstances. So, because of thesituation and because of the person who is going to have to use a goodbit of this discretion, I'm supportive of the general approach asproposed in the alternative directive language.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, I have you on the list, butyou have already commented. Or do you have something more?MR. BALLES. I have one other question, Paul: Did you intendthat this be the entire part of the operational paragraph--that is tosay that we would have no mention of a federal funds rate range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have an open mind about that. I didn'tmean to infer one thing or the other; I don't know whether it's10/5/82necessary but I have no problem with it. I do think it has to be abit lower than we had before if we put it in.MR. BALLES. Right. When you are ready to discuss that, Ithink we ought to get that settled because if we create too manyrevolutions in one directive, we're surely going to shake up themarketplace.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any problem with thetraditional sentence.MR. BALLES. I'm not sure what the better part of wisdom is;but if we stay silent on the federal funds range, that would really bea major break in tradition.MR. BLACK. Then the issue is whether we're symmetricalaround [the current level].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Given my sense of the general economic scenery, Icertainly am in the camp that thinks that we simply must bring ratesdown. I think we are at a point where we cannot go much longer in theway the economy is currently performing or we're going to see somevery serious results emerging. Therefore, I think it's exceptionallyimportant that we move toward bringing rates down. I certainly wouldunderstand and agree that there is a risk to this in that the markets,as we know, could see it adversely. But I would agree with GovernorMartin that mature and careful thinking is likely to [bring themarket] to the view that this seems to be a realistic change, giventhe circumstances we're dealing with. And I think the result could bepositive as opposed to being negative. So, I support the directive asit has been laid out. It seems to me that the last sentence is a veryimportant conclusion; [I'd leave it] rather than delete it. It is ourview that this is a major change that we're making but one that isappropriate and very important.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have very little to add toyour tour d'horizon. I think it covers admirably the situation thatwe find ourselves in. I would simply want to emphasize one thing andthat is the timing of the recovery; the recovery is very late indeed.We've been expecting recovery for at least six months, possiblylonger. And the longer the economy stays in the doldrums, the greaterthe risk and the greater the dangers. In your words, the developingdisarray feeds upon itself, and until we see some evidence of aturnaround, I think we're in a very vulnerable situation. So, in thisenvironment, we should not do anything that risks rising interestrates; on the contrary, we should do what we reasonably can to getinterest rates moving down. Therefore, I support this directivelanguage. I also agree with those who would shift emphasis away fromM1 temporarily at this time. I also would retain the last twosentences of the directive; they give the sense that we have nottotally abandoned targeting of the aggregates and I think it'simportant to maintain that impression at this time. I don't know ifthis is the time to discuss borrowing, but if it is, I would beprepared to see borrowing in the range of $200 million or less.10/5/82MS. TEETERS. That doesn't include those special liquidityneeds of particular banks?MR. RICE. No, it doesn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I also would support a change in the directivelanguage this time. I'm perhaps a little less enthusiastic than someof you about specifying a desire for interest rates to move in aparticular way because I don't really think we know that much. Everyindication that we have does seem to suggest that interest rates aretoo high, but we just don't know that much about what determinesinterest rates and what they need to be to equilibrate markets. Iwould remind you all that we are in a situation with a deficit runningat $160 billion or thereabouts. And that really substitutes a cashflow financed by the government for a cash flow financed by theprivate sector. And since the government is interest-insensitive, onehas to presume that higher interest rates will be needed in theprivate sector than would otherwise occur. That's just one of many,many analytic comments made.But I am convinced that M1 for several months looking aheadis going to be a very poor and implausible indicator of what is goingon in terms of monetary expansion. As I've said, we did have a 38 or39 percent rate of increase in NOW accounts in July and August and wecertainly are going to have an all savers certificate bulge in NOWaccounts in the period right ahead. If I could think of some way tokeep the M1 range, I would; but it's so implausible that we would haveany idea what the number will be that I just don't know how to keep itand retain our credibility. It may well be that when the newinstrument comes out we will get a low M1, depending on how weclassify the new instrument, as M1 or M2. For the moment, though,we're just in total disarray and we need to recognize that fact. AndI would say that we need to recognize it publicly and soon becauseotherwise the market will react in the way Larry says. They will seea high number and will say that the Federal Reserve is going to haveto screw down on their number and therefore rates will go higher, andthey will work them higher in anticipation of that event. So, therehas to be some kind of communication, if we go ahead with this, soon.I'm not a great supporter of M2, as you all know, because Ithink it does have very important problems of interpretation in thelonger run. But for this immediate period ahead I'm not so disturbedabout an M2 number of the kind suggested, 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. Ireally can't imagine a liquidity change that is going to get us veryfar off that as an upper limit of what is likely to occur. The earlyindications are that [M2 in] October is going to be pretty low, so Ithink it's a fairly safe thing to go on. And mainly because we'recontemplating so many things that will make our critics suspicious--and I agree that they will be very suspicious--I would drop the lastsentence of the proposed directive. I understand that something couldhappen that would lead us off [track], but if we say here [that M2 is]expected to be in a range of around 8-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent for theSeptember-to-December period, with the expectation that October isgoing to be fairly low, I think it gives us enough room withoutraising this additional question in people's minds.10/5/82As I think about what is bothering a lot of you, inparticular this rate setting issue--and I think Bill Ford spoke outmost strongly on that--it may be this phrase at the beginning of thesecond paragraph, "taking account of the desirability of somewhatreduced pressures in private credit markets in the light of currenteconomic conditions." That would seem to me to be a signal that theFederal Reserve is following rates rather than a more objectivemeasure. So, I think it may be desirable to drop that phrase andsubstitute instead something like "consistent with the earlyresumption of economic growth," which doesn't necessarily imply lowerrates and easier conditions but does imply the need for an orderly andsustained flow of money and credit. That might help a little withthat problem. On the suggestion that Jerry Corrigan made that weagain repeat our insistence that we're going to be conservative over along period of time, I don't know. Jerry, there's a whole paragraphthat would be picked up from the past directive that talks about thelong-run plans of the Committee and so forth; to force it into thisparagraph seems to me so apologetic that it would backfire on us.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't think anybody reads the boilerplate.The kind of thing I'm talking about, since I gather the Chairmanintends to say something, could be dealt with in that way as well.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the way to handle it is thatit would be quite easy for the Chairman to say that we expect the rateof inflation to continue to decline next year and that over the longrun we will be following an anti-inflationary policy. I wouldn't sayanything about the monetary aggregates next year but I'd say we expectthe rate of inflation to decline even with a--MR. PARTEE. It's difficult to handle here just in a phrasewithout sounding apologetic. The notion that we want to beconstraining and that we are going to continue to run monetary policypretty carefully is good, but the yardsticks have changed. We arehaving trouble measuring in this period using the conventionalyardsticks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The existing phrase I would remind yousays: "The Committee also indicated it was tentatively planning"--this is enshrined in our decision--"to continue the current ranges for1983 but it will review the decision carefully in the light ofdevelopments over the remainder of 1982." That's not exactly the mostringing [endorsement].MR. PARTEE. Not really, no.SPEAKER(?). I agree.MR. PARTEE. On the other hand, I'm not sure I would beprepared to support much more than that for the year to come.One last comment. You spoke a little about the level ofborrowings. I don't see any reason to reduce the initial borrowingsso much from where they have been. If I understand it, what we havedone is to allow almost all of the expansion that occurred in themonetary aggregates to show through in larger nonborrowed reserves.So, borrowings really are where they are in good part because of theneed to deal with these special situation borrowings. We might reduce-46-10/5/82it to $400 to $500 million, but I wouldn't take it way down to thekinds of numbers that people have mentioned, $200 million or less, asa starting position. That's all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, when I came to the meetingthis morning I was pretty much of the view that Bob Black and to someextent Bill Ford expressed. I must say that your review of the worldsituation prior to the coffee break woke me up.MR. BLACK. I demand equal time!MR. BOYKIN. I agree in that I don't believe rates should goup. As far as the shift in emphasis on M2, that seems to me a fairlylogical extension of what we did with the NOW account situation. Itis a little bigger and maybe not quite as subtle, but I don't think itwould be that hard to explain, really, what we are doing. There issome precedent for that aspect of it. In terms of understandabilityof what we are likely to be doing, [I was comforted by] the commentyou made that you would have an opportunity in the not too distantfuture [to explain this]. That would be extremely important in termsof how this is actually perceived, certainly in the short run, beforepeople have an opportunity to analyze the record in some detail. So,I would come out with those who certainly don't want rates to go upand who want even some decline. As far as the wording of thedirective, I don't think I could make very much of a contribution tothat. There are a number of subtleties being expressed and I'm notsure I appreciate all of them. I couldn't improve on any of them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just a coupleof observations. One is that, clearly, all the discussion around thetable has been [consistent with] a money market conditions or interestrate directive. Secondly, I agree with the comments that Ed Boehneexpressed with respect to the discretion that is vested in theChairman in the intermeeting period with this kind of a directive. Asa result, I'd like to ask the Chairman if he's prepared to make somestatement as to the appropriate interest rate level and the pattern ofgetting there. Clearly, it is in the down [direction]. But in orderto understand how the Chairman may exercise that discretion, it wouldhelp me to understand what you're thinking.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will respond to that shortly, after Mr.Roos and Mr. Morris get finished with their comments.MR. ROOS. In that order?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either order; I have Mr. Roos first on mylist.MR. ROOS. All right, I'd be pleased to.MR. CORRIGAN. There's a certain appropriateness to these twoguys being last!-47-10/5/82MR. ROOS. Let me say, Mr. Chairman, that I was bothimpressed and depressed with your review of the world situation, and Idon't minimize that in any way. Let me also say that no one at thistable would prefer lower interest rates more than I. I do takeexception to any implication that recent Federal Reserve policy haswrung out the economy of this country or has been detrimental to theinternational economy. I think what has occurred is more a result often or fifteen years of irresponsible monetary policies throughout theworld--as well as a well-meant effort on the part of the Federal OpenMarket Committee as long as I've been on it and until October 1979--totry to do just what we're doing today, and that is to lean againstinterest rate movements. I think that contributed in a major way toinflation, which really led to this high interest rate pattern that wehave. I believe that what we're about to do today will unquestionablybe viewed by those who watch what we do as a major change. I don'tthink it will be possible to explain away the fact that, albeittemporarily, we are moving away from [targeting] a narrow aggregatethat has predicted prices and output better than other variables. Itwill be apparent, in spite of any disclaimers we may or may not make,that we are moving toward placing greater emphasis on controlling thefed funds rate. And I think it will be misconstrued by the markets.It will be associated with the forthcoming election; I think it willgive comfort to those who, rightly or wrongly, have sat on thesidelines and implied that somewhere along the line we would cave inon our present policy posture.Mr. Chairman, there's no question that under your leadershipwe have made enormous strides toward wringing out the inflationaryproblem and restoring the economy to at least a semblance ofstability. I think our credibility and your credibility areunbelievably and deservably affirmed at present. If we fail tospecify in this directive at least some M1 range, with all thedisclaimers that these things that are going to happen could distortit and cause us to change, I think there will be a grossmisinterpretation and misconception of what we are doing. And itcould conceivably destroy much of the progress that we've made. So,although I don't have a vote, I feel it's a gross mistake to do whatapparently we're about to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, it just so happens that we haveopposite extremes finishing up this discussion. I look upon it as agreat step forward that we have gotten M1 out of the directive. And Idon't view it as a temporary phenomenon because I think our ability tointerpret M1 is going to continue to be highly questionable for sometime to come. This is not a two- or three-month phenomenon as far asI can see. But that remains to be seen. Nonetheless, I support themove at this point in time and I would hope that borrowing is set at alevel that would get the funds rate down to the 9 to 9-1/2 percentarea as a start.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a late starter, Mr. Solomon.MR. PARTEE. He hasn't said a word!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think this is a rather momentousFOMC meeting. I had thought that we had until maybe 1986 before the-48-10/5/82pace of deregulation and innovation would bring us to this point. Butthe Garn Bill and legislation that was [unintelligible] today--what'sthe name of that act?MR. RICE. The Garn-St Germain--MR. PARTEE. I can think of several names!MR. WALLICH. Depository surprise.MR. MORRIS. The destruction of M1 bill.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It has moved us very quickly most ofthe way to the deregulation that we expected by 1986. I think we havea real dilemma here today. On substance, I feel that we absolutelyhave to have some modest decline in rates. I believe there is a realdanger of a major cracking and then we would have to go even farther;whereas with a modest decline now that stays in place for a whilethere is a better chance of working ourselves out of this bothinternationally and at home. I recognize that there will be a gooddeal of questioning, not only in monetarist circles but moregenerally. I don't think there will be an avalanche of criticism,given our credibility, but there will be major questioning as to whatthis means in terms of longer-run anti-inflationary policy. And itseems to me that there ought to be some words [to convey] our longer-run commitment and our expectations that inflation will continue tocome down--and possibly they should be just in the Chairman'sstatements and other statements, not in the directive. I don't knowhow to do it in the directive without sounding defensive, but thereought to be some words about that.So, I would support this. I do feel that if one reads thiscarefully, we are really not targeting M2. We are targeting basicallymoney market conditions and we are saying that we expect this willinvolve growth of M2 in the range of 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.Therefore, I'm not sure that we really need the last sentence. Thelast sentence simply makes more explicit what is there quite carefully[unintelligible]. I don't see that the way this is written, with theexpectation of M2 growth of 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, is a constraint ondoing what is necessary to get the operative sentence. And if I amcorrect in my interpretation, I don't see why we need that lastsentence. In that sense, I would agree with Chuck.MR. PARTEE. But I also would drop the operative sentence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I wouldn't drop the operativesentence because then people don't know where we are.MR. PARTEE. We're targeting on 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent on M2.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The presentation is critical. Andjudging from past history, the presentation is probably going to bemore dependent on the Chairman's statements than it will be on thedirective, particularly given the [publication] lag and the fact thatwe are expecting such a large bulge in the first week of October andsomething has to be said. Now, since the Chairman has a mind of hisown, I would assume that if he gets a majority vote on the substanceof this directive that it may not be worth spending a lot of time10/5/82interpreting and arguing about the more marginal sentences. We aremaking a major substantive decision here. And the presentation ofthat in a way that does not undermine our credibility is absolutelyessential. But we do have a lot going for us in terms of credibilityon the longer-run anti-inflationary policy.Turning to the specifics, even with an initial borrowingassumption of $200 million, I don't think the funds rate would getdown even to 9 percent unless this action is followed by a discountrate cut. And I urge that, in the Board's infinite wisdom, that beconfined to 1/2 point rather than a point. It is my reading--and Icould be wrong--that if the discount rate is cut 1/2 point, themarkets will expect another half point later on, almost immediately.If we do a full point, many people in the market may say that afterthe election there will be another full point. This election thingis a damn shame because we are not being influenced by the election.But the timing is very awkward for us. Anyway, that's another area.I would recommend that the initial borrowing be $200 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a few not so randomcomments. Tony Solomon and others have referred to the role of theChairman. Let me just say in that connection that the Chairman isunable to explain and defend a policy he doesn't understand or agreewith. Larry Roos referred to the concern about the interpretation ofrecent policy and made a short but impassioned statement that we areseeing the results of ten to fifteen years of irresponsible monetarypolicies around the world. I think there's a lot of substance tothat. I wouldn't narrow it to monetary policies. I don't want to beassociated particularly with that part, but I think what we are seeingis the culmination of ten or fifteen years or more of a set ofattitudes and behavior that had to be changed. And that is difficult,but we've seen some progress.I think we're also in a very critical period right now forall the reasons I suggested. I don't myself perceive that the risksof misinterpretation are as great as some people think. Obviously,they are there. But I don't think many people, if you take this outof the election atmosphere, are going to interpret this as a cave-in,in and of itself. Most people in the financial markets at least, toput it bluntly, think we've overstayed the course now. It gets intothis great question of credibility that I suppose we're taking ratherpersonally. At the risk of being misunderstood, following amechanical operation because we think that's vital to credibility anddriving the economy into the ground isn't exactly my version of how tomaintain credibility over time. Credibility in some sense is there tobe spent when we think it's necessary to spend it and we can carrythrough a change in approach. I don't think this is all as extreme assome have painted it. But I don't think we're just dealing with thetheory here. We are dealing with a real world and assessing where therisks are. It's quite clear in my mind where the risks are. I thinkI made it quite clear in terms of economic developments around theworld. But if one wants to put it in terms of risk to theinstitution: If we get this one wrong, we are going to havelegislation next year without a doubt. We may get it anyway. It's amatter of judgment as to how that might come out and where the risksare, but I think I know where the risks are. I'm not sure how itlooks just in strict electoral terms, since that question has beenraised, to sit here in some sense artificially doing nothing and then10/5/82have to make a big move right after the election. I'm not sure thatwould wash very well in terms of anybody's opinion of our professionalcompetence as an institution, if one were convinced that this [changewas appropriate]. Obviously, that depends upon the substance and howstrong the case is for making a change at the moment. I'd prefer thatthis problem didn't arise now. If business conditions looked a littlebetter and interest rates were a little lower--and I wouldn't carewhere the interest rates were if the economic situation looked alittle better--and if we weren't going to have to deal with asuccession of sick foreign countries in this time period, if thedollar were not rising into the wild blue yonder right now, and if Ithought that all these accumulating problems that we face could waitfor a while, we'd have a much easier decision. Under presentconditions, four weeks looks like one hell of a long time to me. Idon't know what is going to happen in a number of directions over thenext four weeks.In terms of what specifically this means operationally, all Ican give you is an opinion of what I had in mind in looking at thiskind of language and putting a gloss on it. The first paragraph ismeant to say nothing more than that we don't know what M1 means overthe next quarter for two reasons, period. Therefore, since we don'tknow what it means, it seems a little fatuous to put down a numberpretending we know what it means when we don't. It is no specialprejudice against M1. If we had some experience to measure what itmeant during this kind of period, we would, but we don't.The first sentence in the second paragraph is basically meantto be the operational sentence. I think that is fair. It is meant toconvey the impression that we seek some expansion, however measured,in the monetary aggregates and in reserves and it is meant to reflectand note some concern about what is going on in the private creditmarkets and that that will have a bearing on what we do. I think thatis understood or assumed by sophisticated people in the market, at thepresent time anyway. They have assumed that we moved as alertly--ifthat's the right word--as we did during the summer because we wereoperating against the background of Penn Square and Drysdale andaccumulating international problems. This is in a sense a confession,good for the soul, in making that a little more explicit. And it hassome connotation without saying it directly that we certainly areconcerned, among other indicators, about the pressures in thosemarkets and what is going on in interest rates.The next sentence is meant to be a straightforward estimateof what we think and is put in there to show continuity with thepresent approach. This is consistent with what we have been saying,anyway, about the measures that we think are the most reliable, not inany theoretical or long-term sense but during this particular quarter.That is where we get the sense of continuity with the past and that ismeant to illustrate or to make that point. I might point out in thatconnection what somebody has already mentioned: That in the nearterm, in fact, my guess is that M2 growth is going to be very low andthat of M3 might be low, too. My interest in that phenomenon is thatI don't know what is causing it. We had a very high rate of growthfor a couple of months and it may just be a statistical thing. Itwent up rapidly for a couple of months and now it is leveling off fora couple of months. To the extent that it reflects some sense oftightness that we don't know we have--incomes going down or banks10/5/82can't finance themselves so readily--it's an indication that we aretighter than we think we are. Now, I'm not adopting that theory. ButI just point out that in the very short run, before we meet next time,my guess would be that M2 and M3 are going to be low rather than highrelative to these numbers. And I don't think the numbers we put inthere are terribly sensitive for that reason.As for the last two sentences, I'm inclined to think they'reoptional. The flavor is this: If they're helpful, put them in; ifthey're not helpful, take them out. And I think it is somewhatoptional whether we put in a range for the federal funds rate. If wedo, I'd make it, say, 7 to 10 percent. As for what we would dooperationally, and of course we'd have to discuss this a little more,I would propose that we drop the borrowing level. To precisely whatlevel, I'm not sure; $200 million seems to me the lower limit of whatwe would do; $300 million may be an appropriate number; one couldargue for something slightly higher than that. The borrowing figuresare confused to the extent there is so-called special borrowing in anyevent. And I don't know quite how to assess that. It's like M1;there is no right answer on how to assess it precisely. We can'tescape that problem. I don't have any particular interest rate inmind in setting forth this kind of directive. I've expressed theopinion that I don't think we should create an atmosphere or thereality of rising interest rates, insofar as we can reasonably avoidthat. I'm not talking about every conceivable contingency that mayarise in the real world. But based upon what I know now, theimplication of the borrowing level is that we would get a somewhateasier tendency in the federal funds rate in any event. Where itreally is would rest upon a discount rate decision and not thisdecision, I suspect, except within a very narrow range. I do not meanto imply any feeling as to where interest rates should be a month fromnow. Beyond what is implicit in what I've already said, if thingslook the way they do now, I wouldn't like to see an increase and Iwould feel more comfortable with some decrease. But I haven't anyparticular target in mind. The implication is that we would keep theborrowing level more or less the same until something happened tothrow us off--in economic activity, in financial markets, or in theactual growth of M2 and M3. We would have to reconsider that in thelight of all these factors, and consultation from time to time wouldprobably be appropriate in those circumstances. What else can I sayto be more specific?MR. GUFFEY. In terms of the pattern that you might expect tooccur: If I understood your most recent statement, you suggestedinterest rates would be at or near their present levels for someperiod of time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we would tend to have an easierfunds rate than we had just recently if [the Board] did nothing on thediscount rate. If the discount rate were reduced, I think rates wouldgo down. Again, we have a setting here where these numbers, even whenwe have them on a preliminary basis, are about as reliable as I don'tknow what. But over the course of the period that we're talking abouthere--in the next couple of weeks up until the Friday when the figureis published that will include a presumed distortion from all saverscertificates--we may have an M1 figure that is on target in the latestweekly figure. We probably will have an unemployment rate that is upsignificantly and an industrial production figure shortly--I don't10/5/82know when that comes out--that is down and, hopefully, a good pricefigure in there someplace, too. I don't know what other criticalnumbers are coming out in the next ten days.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, what does the unemployment ratelook like now?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. I don't have anyparticular guess. We can turn to the staff. We know that theunemployment claims figures have shot up enormously. I think thegeneral assumption is that it's going to be 10 percent plus, and I'mnot sure that anybody can be much more specific than that.MR. FORD. Mr. Chairman, you did say you were planning tomake some kind of public statement about this rather than just waitinga month [or so] until after the next meeting. When, roughly, were youplanning to say something about this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a tentative date with theBusiness Council at the end of this week where I have to appear at alittle press conference after I talk at any event. So, that's theeasiest occasion just because it's already scheduled and comes in thenormal course of events and we don't have to make any big deal aboutit.What I might suggest, since it's 1:20 p.m., is that people goout and get some sandwiches. There may be some desire to discuss thisfurther in substance. And if there is going to be some effort to foolaround with the language or drop sentences or whatever, it gives usfifteen minutes or so to think about it.[Lunch recess]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This need not be taken as strikingly assome people either fear or hope, depending upon which side of thespectrum they are on. I don't consider anything in here veryinconsistent with what we've been doing. We have said we are going tointerpret the aggregates somewhat loosely in effect--I'm nowinterpolating--in the light of our judgment as to whether there areunusual precautionary demands for money and liquidity. The market hasassumed we are operating that way quite comfortably and this is anextension of that idea. What it does is to take out M1 for a veryparticular reason. I raise the question because there is this talkabout how to say it publicly. If we write a letter to the Congress,for instance, and say we've changed the targets or we have some newoperating approach or some such thing, I think that makes it much moregrandiose than is intended in my mind. I am reluctant to have aspecially called press conference or a speech or something for thesame reason. It just makes it sound as if we're off on some entirelynew course. I think we have to get the message over publicly that,indeed, we're not going to be worried about the M1 figure in the shortrun, if we're not. We have in effect said--and we are repeating andamplifying what we said--that we would tolerate for some period oftime growth somewhat above the target range should unusualprecautionary demands for money and liquidity be evident. Going backto my testimony [in July], I know I had a lot of criteria--theperformance of the economy, interest rates I deliberately put in, theavailability of bank credit--all of which I said bear upon that-53-10/5/82judgment. That's what I said in the testimony. We think, yes, allthose things are operative now and we are willing to tolerate a bulgein the targeted growth if that is necessary in this time period. Itis precisely the circumstances that we foresaw as a possibility. Idon't think it's that big a deal. Other people put otherinterpretations on it. I just tell you that I don't think it has tobe read as too big a deal. In any event, assuming that we are in thisgeneral neighborhood, let us pin down the operations morespecifically, which comes down pretty much to the initial borrowinglevel, I think. We've had proposals from $200 [to $300] million andnow we have proposals above $300 million, too.MR. PARTEE. $400 million, I thought. What has it beenrunning?MR. STERNLIGHT. $500 million is what we've been using in thepath; it is actually $560 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's going to be $500 to 600million. What was it yesterday?MR. STERNLIGHT. $300 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may not be up-to-date on it. We havemore reserves in there than we should and deliberately haven't takenthem out, given the market conditions so far this week. We just leavethem, I guess; I don't know what borrowings will be. They can't bemuch below that, but the excess reserves may be very high.MR. AXILROD. We allowed for about $500 million and so farthey are a little over $1 billion; that could come out on its own ifour projections are wrong.MR. PARTEE. But in drawing the path you allowed for about$500 million?MR. AXILROD. We allowed for $500 million because the weekwith the quarter-end statement date normally has well above normalexcess reserves.MR. PARTEE. And that was after having made the adjustment toprovide the nonborrowed reserves consistent with the observedovershoot in M1?MR. AXILROD. That's right, and then to allow for the[unintelligible] week statement date excess reserve averaging.MS. TEETERS. Did the $500 million have any specialborrowings built into it, Steve?MR. AXILROD. There is some. The Midland Bank in Dallasstill is in for some; I've forgotten the exact number.MR. BOYKIN. That's down to about $75 million now.month.MR. AXILROD. Yes, they haven't been in for a while--about a10/5/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there is any mechanicalrelationship with these special borrowings. I must say that isdifficult to handle; the bank in the weakest position gets hit and themarkets are a little tight. If that bank didn't borrow, others wouldhave to borrow, in part.MR. GRAMLEY. When the staff made out the alternatives in theBluebook, the difference in borrowing levels between "A" and "B" wasrather substantial, $150 million versus $450 million. The $450million was associated with essentially no change in market interestrates and "A" was associated with some easing, but I didn't get theimpression that it was that significant an amount of easing. If wewere to go, say, to a number like $400 million, it would imply hardlyany change in market interest rates.MR. AXILROD. At the present level of the discount rate, Ithink that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think $400 million is too highmyself.MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the range of proposals around thetable, I can easily live with borrowings of $300 or maybe $350million; I would have a small preference for putting a 7 to 10 percentfederal funds range in the directive for no other reason than a desireto reinforce continuity at the margin.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me get to the directive later.MR. PARTEE. 7 to 10 percent is worse than nothing.MS. TEETERS. I would prefer a lower--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how many like $200 million? Howmany like $300 million? How many like higher than $300 million?MR. PARTEE. Well, obviously, take $300 million with--SPEAKER(?). From among the others.MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have determined that $300 million is thearithmetic average of--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If he took a weighted average, itwould be $293 million!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Assuming somebody is going to vote for thedirective, let's take that poll again.MR. PARTEE. Yes, it really should only be the people who aregoing to vote yes [on the directive] who are allowed to vote [onthis]. We've run into that problem with contemporaneous reserveaccounting.MR. RICE. We certainly have.10/5/82MS. TEETERS. That ought to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there other operational questions?MR. BLACK. Would we take Midland Bank out of that $300million, Steve, or would we leave it in there as we did on the $500million?MR. BOYKIN. They ought to be out by the end of the week.MR. BLACK. Well, that will solve the issue then.MR. STERNLIGHT. But on occasion we'll get another borrower,either them or somebody else, and that will raise the question ofwhether borrowing is going to [include or exclude that bank].MR. BLACK. Well, as nearly as possible it ought to be thereif it's interest-sensitive, it seems to me, if it's to give us anyguidance on federal funds rates. That's all I was hoping we would do.MR. PARTEE. When you say other operational questions, areyou talking about the question of the federal funds range specified?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, let's get to that as part of thedirective.MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see. But other operating considerations?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. In effect, we're in an area ofjudgment depending upon that happens to the aggregates and the economyand interest rates and so forth.MR. BALLES. I have an operational question, Paul. For thoseof us who are skeptical that M2 is going to grow as fast as 8-1/2 or9-1/2 percent, given the way that the money market funds are slowingdown and so on: How is the Desk going to operate under the directiveas it stands here? Are they going to be targeting on 8-1/2 to 9-1/2percent M2 growth? I just want to make sure it's a workable directivefrom the standpoint of Desk implementation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's an interesting question if infact [the M2 figures] run low for a month. There are twopossibilities, I suppose. Let's assume they are running low but theevidence that we have currently is that it is a temporary phenomenonand [the rate of growth] doesn't look unreasonable for the quarter.It is stated as a [rate for the] quarter. Then, I would think weprobably would not do too much. If they are running low and wethought they were actually running below these figures, theimplication is that interest rates will come down. We would ease theposition; that's what it says.MR. GUFFEY. Which drops interest rates and worsens that verysituation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean by "worsens"--that wewould get really slower growth?MR. BALLES. Yes.-56-10/5/82MR. GUFFEY. Sure, when interest rates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think the staff thinks so,but I would raise a very interesting question as to whether we haven'tbeen too tight because higher interest rates bloomed--MR. PARTEE. That next to last sentence I think has somemeaning.SPEAKER(?). Right.MR. GRAMLEY. It not only says would be "acceptable" butwould be "desirable" in the context of declining interest rates.MR. PARTEE. I presume that was put in, Paul, because we areover the target ranges rather--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we don't have to say it. Whetherthat is in or out, my interpretation would be that if [monetarygrowth] is running low, we are not going to be pushing terribly to getit up within a limited time but would go in the direction of easing.MR. PARTEE. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But hopefully we wouldn't go so farthat then we would turn it around three weeks later and rates wouldstart back up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as I say, we judge this in the lightof what we think is going to happen in the future too.MR. BALLES. But, Steve, haven't money market funds actuallybeen shrinking in the last few weeks?MR. AXILROD. Yes. They are up on average in the month, butthe weekly data are--MR. BALLES. That's the phenomenon I had in mind. Whathappens if that trend continues?MR. AXILROD. Well, market rates have been rising and therates on the [money market] funds have been dropping with a lag, sothey've come back together. If market rates began going down and if[money market] funds rates tended to lag the drop in market rates,[flows into money] funds would tend to go up. We have only a modestexpansion projected at the moment.MR. BALLES. Because of all the uncertainties, I would justsuggest a possibility--I'm not sure it will solve anything--of an evenwider range than the 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent shown here [for M2]. Butif we did that, it would make it tougher for the Desk to construct areserve path, I would think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a matter of judgment. I don'tthink we would ignore M1 either if we thought it was giving us someevidence. A lot of things could happen with the all saverscertificates. Suppose, after all this talk about all savers blowingM1 up, that there's a relatively modest increase. We have a big10/5/82decrease this week; suppose we get a relatively modest--say, anoffsetting--increase the following week and then it falls down againthe week after that. I would say that's a pretty weak M1 and it wouldinfluence my judgment as to what to do, even though we're notfollowing it in a mechanical way.MR. PARTEE. I think its composition matters. Suppose wehave very strong NOW accounts and very weak demand deposits?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we would try to get someevidence from that as well as we can.MR. BLACK. If that happens, Mr. Chairman, I would think youall were doing the right thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether we can clarifythat any further. Let me just look at the first paragraph as a whole,which is meant just to be a straightforward--MR. BALLES. Would you tolerate a little nit-picking--editorial, not substantive--on your first paragraph?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure. It's not my paragraph.MR. BALLES. Following the dash in the first sentence, "inthe very near term by investment of funds in maturing all saverscertificates," one doesn't "invest in"--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, no.MR. BALLES. The word "in" is out of place there. Maybe itshould be "reinvestment of funds now in" or "from" [all saverscertificates].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Reinvestment of funds from."MR. BALLES. I have one other suggestion, which is just amatter of reversing emphasis, I guess. In the next full sentencebeginning "The probable difficulties...suggest that substantialweight not be placed on," I'd rather say "suggest little weight beplaced on." Or we could say "little, if any." I don't know howstrong we want to be on that since we have ended up not specifyinganything for [M] .CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the best phrase isthere.MR. WALLICH. We might say, "suggest that no substantialweight be placed."MR. BALLES. I might drop "substantial." In effect, whatwe're doing is placing no weight, if we don't have [a target].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think we're quite doing that.MR. BALLES. We don't have a target. I'm just trying to makethe words for the first paragraph consistent with the absence of an M1target.10/5/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just gave you my interpretation. Iwould want to look at M1 for what information we can get from it.What we are really saying here is that we don't want to pin amechanical target on it or have a mechanical path for it. I don'twant to say much more than that really.MR. GRAMLEY. If I may pick a nit in the second paragraph, Iwould say "In these circumstances..."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just starting the first paragraph.MR. PARTEE. I think that "no substantial weight" is probablybetter than "substantial weight not."MR. MARTIN. Yes, "no substantial."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds to my ear like less, but I--MR. BALLES. That would be good: "less weight."MR. PARTEE. It must be "much less," though.MR. BALLES. "Less" would be a good word in the sense ofclearly implying less than we usually do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Much less than usual weight" is all rightwith me.MR. BALLES. "Less than usual."MR. PARTEE. That leaves it in as a factor to look at.MS. TEETERS. Now you have a problem with the last sentence,which says "much lesser."MR. PARTEE. "Much less" and "much lesser"!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mean just an English problem.MR. GRAMLEY. The subject should not be "these uncertainties"but "these developments."MS. TEETERS. Say "to a small extent;" take out "much lesser"then.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Much smaller extent."MR. WALLICH. It has to be small enough to justify not havinga target for it, which is really very small.MR. PARTEE. I think Lyle is right; it should be "thesedevelopments" instead of "these uncertainties."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "These developments."MR. WALLICH. Well, the last sentence of this paragraph leadsinto M2 and what one expects in the following paragraph then is an M2target. Now, if that's not what we're going to do, it seems to me we-59-10/5/82ought to modify the last sentence of the first paragraph. But Ireally would urge you, if it isn't tampering too much, to put the8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent M2 range early in the next sentence and thenafter that to say "taking account of the desirability of somewhatreduced pressures..."MR. PARTEE. "In these circumstances, therefore..."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, there's an interpretation ofthem--of what all the circumstances means. In my mind that means theprevious paragraph but more than that. I assume that this mentalimage includes the discussion of all the economic problems, theinternational problems, and all of it. This refers to everything.But it's obviously not clear when it just sits there, and that raisesthe question of whether it should be more explicit or not.MS. TEETERS. Why don't we be explicit and say, "In light ofdomestic and international developments, the Committee seeks tomaintain..."?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it seems to me if we're worried aboutchanging gears radically as opposed to small degrees, in terms ofpublic perception, we ought to leave it a little vaguer than that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just leave something like this.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.MR. PARTEE. We have sometimes used a phrase like that, butit goes back some years.MR. GRAMLEY. That's the problem; it goes back some years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This wouldn't be put in as any echo ofwhat happened earlier.MR. BALLES. In that second paragraph the first sentence endswith a phrase "in the light of current economic conditions." Wouldn'tthere be some other part of the old directive that stresses how poorlythe economy is doing now?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are you going back to? I'm sorry, Ijust don't know where you are.MR. BALLES. It's the second paragraph at the end of thefirst sentence. The last phrase is "in the light of current economicconditions."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, remember, Paul said that he wasgoing to expand what we call the boilerplate to make the worseningeconomic situation clearer and the--MR. BALLES. My point, Tony, is that the phrase "in the lightof current economic conditions" as it stands there is a very neutralone and, in my mind, too weak. I would like to see something like "inlight of the currently weak economy" or whatever, unless that is goingto be made clear somewhere else.10/5/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's what I thought was goingto be made clear earlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there would be a little moreemphasis earlier. Obviously, that phrase is a term of art. What itis meant to refer to is the fact we have some pressures in privatemarkets that aren't necessarily apparent on the surface because of allthis disturbance in the financial system and we are aware of it andconcerned about it. And we take that into account in the--MR. PARTEE. Then "in the light of" is not quite right, isit? We mean "resulting from" or "flowing from" or something likethat. I thought "in the light of" meant we were doing this because ofthe poor economy.MR. BALLES. That's what I thought.MR. PARTEE. But you are saying credit conditions areaffected by--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think one can interpret it eitherway. The reason we're concerned about this is because of the economy.But it also works in reverse. The economy, and the internationaleconomy in particular, is giving rise to the pressures. But we'reconcerned about the pressures because of economic conditions. So, Ithink it works both ways.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We could say "taking account of thedesirability of somewhat reduced pressures in private credit marketsand current economic conditions..."SPEAKER(?). It's both.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we always want an orderly andsustained flow of money and credit.MR. PARTEE. Now we have more doubt about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I like it terribly, but atthe risk of making the whole thing more cumbersome we can put "In allthe circumstances the Committee seeks to maintain expansion in bankreserves needed for an orderly and sustained flow of money andcredit...consistent with growth of M2 and M3 in a range...and takingaccount...." If we want to blur it a bit, we could say "takingaccount of the evidence of pressures in private credit markets in thelight of current economic conditions. It combines the sentences.MR. WALLICH. I think that's a great improvement. Thatmitigates the appearance of a shift in policy priorities.MS. TEETERS. I don't mind if we combine the sentences, but Ineed the "expects that this would involve the growth of M2 and M3"down to 8-1/2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, he likes the term "consistentwith."10/5/82MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with Henry. I think it's lessclearly a move to a money market conditions target.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think there is something to besaid for it in that it becomes a kind of quasi-target rather thansimply expectations. I don't think it puts any substance in here.MS. TEETERS. What if M2 went above a 9-1/2 percent growthrate? Does that mean we expect the staff to pull it down?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well--MR. WALLICH. With the sentences at the end it can run overor it can run under; nothing makes any difference.MR. BLACK. But there is some sentiment for eliminating thosesentences.MR. PARTEE. How would we get a great big increase in M2?MS. TEETERS. When we get the new DIDC instrument.MR. MARTIN. We'd define it so that--MR. PARTEE. That's not going to affect the [fourth] quarterthat much.MR. FORD. Well, if a portion of the money market fundscurrently in M3 were to shift into M2--MR. PARTEE. Yes, but those are institutional accounts.MR. FORD. Who says they won't like some of these newinstruments the DIDC is going to invent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They could.MR. PARTEE. That's right.SPEAKER(?). That's a possibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, there could be some transfer out ofTreasury bills or other highly liquid instruments, particularly ifthey pay a higher rate than Treasury bills.MR. PARTEE. We could have a sudden drop in consumptionrelative to income.SPEAKER(?). That's possible.MR. PARTEE. It would seem about as low as it can be.MR. BLACK. Demand is a lot lower.MR. PARTEE. Relatively, yes. [Unintelligible] withoutdestroying income [unintelligible].10/5/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one way to do it is just to say "inall the uncertainty" and leave the other wording as it is.MR. GRAMLEY. Save that "maintain the expansion of bankreserves" and leave the rest of the phrase as it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Just leave the first phrase as it isthrough money and credit comma, then "consistent with growth of M2 andM3 in a range of around 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent at an annual rate fromSeptember to December and taking account of the desirability ofsomewhat reduced pressures in private credit markets in the light ofcurrent economic conditions."MR. GRAMLEY. Then we need to change something else in thesentence; maybe we don't. The reference to those aggregates is prettyfar back. To then say "Somewhat slower growth..."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're in the next sentence. Well,tentatively that first sentence is all right. Then there are allsorts of suggestions about these last two sentences and whether toleave them in or take them out. I don't think it's too critical oneway or the other if we understand the thrust of what it's all about.MR. WALLICH. I would prefer to leave them in. They balanceeach other and they justify an overrun or an underrun.MR. RICE. I agree with that.MR. BALLES. I do too.MS. TEETERS. I agree with Henry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had a suggested rewording in that lastsentence which I didn't think changed it much substantively but madeit read better.MS. TEETERS. Just switch one of the clauses.MR. WALLICH. I would have put the second part of the lastsentence first so that the sentence would read, beginning with themiddle of the second line, "In the light of evidence that economic andfinancial uncertainties are continuing to lead to exceptionalliquidity demands."MR. PARTEE. If there should be evidence of something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's what I was looking for.MR. WALLICH. Well, I meant to say that there is evidence andthat is--MR. GRAMLEY. That, I think, is questionable, Henry; I reallydo.MR. PARTEE. Well, if there is, we should have taken thatinto account in setting our M2 target.-63-10/5/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I think it's all right the way itis, if I understand this correctly. "In the light of evidence thateconomic and financial uncertainties are continuing..." We leave thatopen as to whether it is continuing. That does say they have happenedin the past, which I have said.MR. GRAMLEY. M2 is again very, very low. [Relative to] thetargeted M2 now, the last number we have is very low. And it's justawfully hard to see why--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The last month's number?MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But not the previous two months.MR. GRAMLEY. I know, but the previous two months presumablywere affected by the fact that interest rates came down. We have toask ourselves whether we're talking about a movement along the demandfunction or a shift in the demand function. And as far as I know, therecent evidence does not strongly point toward an upward shift indemand for money. And that's the way I interpret the staff's commentsin the briefing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure that's right. Theirvelocity is rising.MS. TEETERS. Well, the NOW accounts are--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Falling, I'm sorry. Changing, anyway!MR. GRAMLEY. Well, velocity of M2 does have some cyclicalmovements to it. We sort of expect that when interest rates fall,velocity is going to go down some; now, whether it's off the function,I don't know. But I thought the staff said yesterday that theevidence of recent money behavior is consistent with movement alongthe function and not a shift.MR. AXILROD. Well, I wasn't there but if they said anything,the M1 behavior might suggest that. I don't think we can say verymuch about M2. On M1, if you look at the models--depending upon whichquarter you start with--you can interpret M1 as being roughly on thequarterly money demand model. If you start in the first quarter, itmight be an upward shift instead of a downward shift; if you start inthe third quarter, it's about on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure this is any bigdeal, I'm not quite sure what you had, Henry, but let's change it."In the light of evidence that economic and financial uncertaintiesare leading to..." That puts it in the future.MR. WALLICH. I don't want to press this very hard. There isa parallelism between the two sentences. The first says "somewhatslower growth" and the other says "somewhat more rapid growth." Andthat makes it look more understandable. I would like to see somethingabout rising liquidity demands. Granted, there are some questionsabout that. But that seems to me to give us a better argument forbeing flexible about the targets.-64-10/5/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though both sentences have aparallelism, the bottom line of both sentences is lower interestrates. Right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not the second one. It doesn't say lower;it just says they wouldn't be as high as they otherwise would be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, okay. But [conditions are]easier in terms of interest rates.MS. TEETERS. Why?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the thrust of both sentences,given the fact that we are making--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no. I think that's unclear yet,[though they are] easier than they otherwise would be. The firstsentence says interest rates would be going down and the secondsentence presumably says they wouldn't be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The second sentence says we wouldtolerate more rapid growth, which means we would have lower interestrates than we would otherwise have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Than we would otherwise have, but higherthan--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. The thrust of both sentencesis for easier conditions in the markets, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the thrust of the second sentence isnot for easier conditions in the market.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, you are interpreting--MR. PARTEE. We won't let it tighten the [market] up.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking relatively.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, there is nothing in the secondsentence that says the more rapid the growth the lower the interestrate will be.MS. TEETERS. Why don't you just take out the words "arecontinuing to"?MR. BALLES. And put in instead "are leading to."MR. CORRIGAN and MS. TEETERS. Yes, say "lead to."MR. PARTEE. Well, I really think "in the light of" also isvery ambiguous. It ought to be "if, in the presence of evidence" orthat kind of thing. We used "in the light of" up above in a way thatI didn't quite understand and we're using it again here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It [needs] something a little less awkwardbut "in the presence of" sounds like the presence of a---65-10/5/82MS. TEETERS. Take out that whole thing "in light of theevidence that" and just put "if." That would work.MR. PARTEE. Or "should economic and financial uncertaintieslead to exceptional liquidity demands."MR. AXILROD. There's the language of the last directive--"are leading to..."MR. PARTEE. I guess nobody else shares my preference thatthis sentence be dropped. None of those who plan to vote for thedirective shares my preference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe everybody is going to vote for it!"Should economic and financial uncertainties lead to exceptionalliquidity demands, somewhat more rapid..." Is that what we're saying?MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think so.MS. TEETERS. I don't think it really matters whether it'ssomewhat more rapid.MR. PARTEE. And that, of course, has to be interpreted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, that previous sentence almostgoes without saying and I don't know whether that's necessary.MS. TEETERS. Well, it gives us a little [unintelligible].It puzzles--MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it says that if we could do itwithout a lot of effort, we'd prefer to meet our targets.MR. CORRIGAN. I think that second to the last sentence isvery helpful.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we have to leave in somethingmore or less like the last two sentences since we have now said"consistent with M2."MR. PARTEE. Yes, we have a target.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Earlier, I didn't think it wasnecessary to leave in those sentences.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. What about the federal funds ratesentence? In or out?MR. PARTEE. I'd prefer not to have it. It's enough of achange that it's difficult to know what the funds range should be.Our tradition on the funds range has been to make it above and belowthe present rate; apparently that's not acceptable. And the rangethat was suggested was a 3-point spread; we dropped it from 5 pointsto 4 points last time and to go on to 3 points seems to me woulddestroy more than it would accomplish.MS. TEETERS. But it also gives us the trigger for aconference call, which I think is useful.10/5/82MR. PARTEE. We don't need to have a trigger for a conferencecall. There could be another understanding.MS. TEETERS. The understanding could be when the federalfunds rate is below 7 percent or above 10 percent. We may not have toput it in the directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As we're meeting here, the federal fundsrate is roughly 10-1/2 percent. I guess I don't have any problem withleaving in the sentence if you want to and saying 7 to 10-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm against it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It certainly seems a lot lessimportant.MR. WALLICH. If we drop it, that would convey less of aninterest-rate-oriented directive. And I think it's desirable to avoidbeing very specific about our interest rate [objective] here.MR. CORRIGAN. Who knows how the market will interpret it? Ithink the other argument is just as likely: That the absence of itwould lead to the view that we really have zeroed in on a specificnumber. I don't know.MR. FORD. How about just saying that the fed funds rate willnot rise above 10-1/2 percent? Isn't that what we mean? Why not saywhat we mean if that's what we mean. I don't mean to be facetious,but if we wanted to convey the true feeling of the group, I thinkthat's what we mean, so why not say it? That would be conveyingaccurate information to the market as to what our objective is.MR. MARTIN. Of course, if we say 7 to 10-1/2 percent, we'reconveying a little more information, which is that we might reallytolerate a low rate. That 7 percent might get their attention.MR. MORRIS and MS. TEETERS. It was in there last month.SPEAKER(?). But of course, that's--MS. TEETERS. They haven't seen it yet, though, Frank.MR. GUFFEY. I would opt to have a funds rate range of 7 to10 percent; I would hope that it will be at 10 percent tomorrow andthat that would be the maximum we'd tolerate on the up side. I had asimilar question.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or lower.MR. GUFFEY. Well, that's all right. We'll be theretomorrow. But the point is that the 7 percent is also an importantfigure to me. I would hate to see interest rates drop quickly if, forexample, we get very slow growth in M2--if that's what we aretargeting on or trying to use as the target. But 7 percent is equallyimportant.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Following up on what Roger isimplying, I think the chief advantage of having a sentence on the-67-10/5/82range is that if--and I say if--the market reacts to this with greatuncertainty, this gives some sense of reassurance that we are notthinking of simply an all-out drop. I don't see that it's importantotherwise; I don't think it's much of a guide. But there is someadvantage of having it in, if we get an unfortunate interpretation. Idon't think, though, that we'd want to have 7 to 10-1/2 percent; Ithink we'd want 7 to 10 percent. I don't see what the problem is.MR. PARTEE. I still fail to follow the logic. In the pastwe've said to the Manager, in effect, if in following the reserve pathconsistent with these aggregates, the funds rate moves enough so thatit gets to the ends of these bounds, then the Chairman will decidewhether to have a conference. Now you are suggesting that we seteverything so that it won't get beyond those bounds.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right. It has no substantivefunction whatsoever now, under this [approach]. It's only a questionof whether it reassures or limits somewhat the degree of uncertaintyin some quarters.MR. WALLICH. I think that might mislead the market.Following our past practice, we aimed at the middle of the range and,therefore, if we said 7 to 10-1/2 percent, we really meant 8-3/4percent as the starting point.MS. TEETERS. But the Chairman is going to be asked torelease some of this when he meets with the Business Council, and Ibet somebody asks him what the interest rate--SPEAKER(?). You wouldn't answer.SPEAKER(?). You won't tell them?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I really--MR. PARTEE. It says now "somewhat reduced pressures inprivate markets." It seems to me that "somewhat reduced pressures"could convey [our meaning] just as well as a range would. Indeed, 7percent might seem surprisingly low.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't think we're going to fool anybodyone way or another; when this press conference occurs, they are goingto know what we did. They will just look at money market conditionsand it will be abundantly evident by what happens in the intervalbetween now and the time the directive is released.MR. MARTIN. There may be a confetti parade.SPEAKER(?). I don't know about confetti!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are arguments on both sides.I don't feel strongly at all. Leave it out?SPEAKER(?). Put it in.SPEAKER(?). Leave it out.MR. BALLES. Put it in.-68-10/5/82MS. TEETERS. Which is more useful to the Desk?MR. STERNLIGHT. Operationally, I don't see it as having afunction during the period. When it is published and people look atit, seeing that there was a range would give them more of a sense ofcontinuity with past procedures. If the Committee values that, Ithink there's an argument for keeping it in. Frankly, to leave it outI think gives more weight to the view that a change is being made.MR. WALLICH. We are at a time when we are softening themoney supply aspect of the directive; it would be a fair balance if wealso soften the interest rate aspect of it.MS. TEETERS. But on the other hand, it seems to me that wedon't want to upset the market totally. The main question would bewhy it isn't in.MR. CORRIGAN. I think the continuity argument has some realweight.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There may be some people in themarket who, if they see interest rates declining, would wonder if weare going to let them decline, or push them down even, by a very large[amount].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They won't know. By the time this comesout, we may have the same level or a different level.MR. PARTEE. They will look at the way the Manager operates,as they always have, and try to conclude where the limits are.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, why don't you take a show ofhands? I don't think it's that important.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many want it in? How many want itout? A lot of people are indifferent.MR. BLACK. Ask how many are indifferent. You might get amajority!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many are indifferent?MR. MARTIN. The indifferents have it.SPEAKER(?). Flip a coin.MR. GRAMLEY. We've left it up to you, Mr. Chairman. Do whatyou want.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I'd prefer slightly to leave itin. No big deal. Okay, I guess that's it. Any other comments?MR. FORD. Just out of curiosity, what are you leaving in--7to 10-1/2 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I guess is in.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. With the half on the 10?-69-10/5/82MR. RICE. I would go for 7 to 10. What does the half pointdo for us?MR. PARTEE. That's where the rate is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's where it is; that's all. We willhave a consultation if it goes above where it is now. That is what weare saying.MR. WALLICH. It would mean that we would be on the phonetomorrow if we say 10 percent.MR. BLACK. It just says that the Chairman may call for aconsultation; it doesn't say he has to.MR. RICE. We have a month to get down to 10 percent.MR. WALLICH. Well, I hope there's a strong presumption--SPEAKER(?). That's too long.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Let's vote.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black NoPresident Ford NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn NoGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, is that the end of our business?MR. ALTMANN. The date of the next meeting, which everyoneknows, is November 16.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. November 16 is the next meeting date.END OF MEETING-70-