Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 20, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee washeld in the offices of the Board of Governors of the FederalReserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 20, 1980,at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMr. SolomonMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of San Francisco andRichmond, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Altmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselMannion, Assistant General CounselAxilrod, EconomistHolmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ettin,Henry, Keir, Kichline, and Zeisel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for DomesticOperations, System Open Market Account5/20/80Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board ofGovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Divisionof International Finance, Board ofGovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Forrestal, Gainor, and McIntosh,First Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, andBoston, respectivelyMessrs. Brandt, Burns, Fousek, Keran, andScheld, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, NewYork, San Francisco, and Chicago,respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Danforth, and Mullineaux,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Richmond, Minneapolis, andPhiladelphia, respectivelyMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a list of individuals present at a meeting. It does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 2.
 Levin, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 20, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us proceed, ladies and gentlemen. Weneed to approve the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the need to approve the minutes of a meeting.


Passage number 3.
MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: "So moved" is a statement that indicates agreement or approval, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is a second person available.


Passage number 5.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions someone named Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, the minutes areapproved. Foreign currency operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "Without objection, the minutes are approved" indicates that there was no contention or disagreement regarding the approval of the minutes.


Passage number 7.
MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest disagreement or contention. It appears to be a statement or response from Mr. Pardee, but without further context, it is difficult to determine the specific nature of the statement.


Passage number 8.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
MR. WALLICH. Scott, I was struck by your emphasis on thegood cooperation we have had. That certainly has been true in manyinstances. But wouldn't you say that the whole episode of the rise ofthe dollar several months back and the [subsequent] decline was aninstance of different rate intentions and different preferences for upor down on the part of the two central banks and that, therefore, wealways had operations in one market but not in the other. On the wayup, the Bundesbank held the dollar down in their market and we didlittle in our own. On the way down, we held the dollar up in ourmarket and the Bundesbank did little to keep it from going down. So,I draw the lesson from this experience that we ought to move towardsomewhat more comprehensive coverage of the markets; each of thecentral banks should be potentially present in both markets at the[same] time. I think that could probably be worked out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Wallich is suggesting a different approach to cooperation between the central banks, while emphasizing the differences in rate intentions and preferences in the past. This suggests a disagreement in strategy and the need for more comprehensive coverage of the markets.


Passage number 10.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That doesn't solve the question of[how] we reach agreement between the two central banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is discussing the question of reaching agreement between two central banks, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 11.
MR. WALLICH. What we would do, Tony, is to agree that thecentral bank that wants the bigger intervention prevails. If we arewilling to put money on the line to hold the dollar up, the Bundesbank[operates] in Europe. It has to be done for our account, but theywould do it. We would have to agree on a method of communicating withthem. And if the Bundesbank wants to have the bigger intervention,then they would prevail and we would do [the intervention] for them inNew York if necessary, or they could do it directly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a method of coordinating and agreeing on interventions with the Bundesbank.


Passage number 12.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that means we would have amechanistic formula whereby whichever side is more anxious to hold thecurrency up prevails. Even though there are departures from time totime between the Bundesbank's thinking and ours, if the dollar weretoo strong by their standards, during that period of time there wouldbe some divergence between us, which would have to be combated withtelephone calls and that sort of thing. But the more typicalcondition is one where the dollar is on the weaker side and, as wehave seen in the last few weeks, we get relatively good cooperationfrom the Bundesbank. I have the feeling that would continue to workbetter than to switch to the kind of approach you are outlining,Henry. I also am reluctant to have the main burden for supporting the5/20/80dollar put on the United States more than it has been. We have beenplaying our role and doing our share in the last year or two. It'snot benign neglect. But I think it is important that other keycentral banks also play a major role, and I am afraid that theimplication of your suggestion is that the United States would end upbeing the sole supporter of the dollar. I would rather live with thedifference of view between us and the Bundesbank during periods ofstrong dollar activity than start a whole chain of events movingwhereby we end up being the sole supporter of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their reluctance to switch to a different approach and their preference for other key central banks to play a major role in supporting the dollar. However, they also mention that they would rather have a difference of view with the Bundesbank during periods of strong dollar activity than be the sole supporter of the dollar.


Passage number 13.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I don't think that would be the result ofwhat I suggest. But perhaps we should examine this--we can't debateit here--and see if we can make some progress with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply suggests examining something further in order to make progress with it.


Passage number 14.
MR. PARDEE. I have seriously considered putting in a doubleshift--that is, having people in the trading room at the Desk duringthe night hours when the European markets are open. We alreadymonitor the Far Eastern markets, but there have been occasions whenthere was a slippage between the time operations ended in the Far Eastand the Bundesbank picked up its operations in Europe. But for usthat's a major expenditure of personnel and other resources, and I'drather do that only if I felt it would be worthwhile for our people tostay up during those hours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 15.
MR. WALLICH. By worthwhile do you mean in terms of likelyoperations or in terms of a special emergency that might happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question and does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a simple inquiry about the meaning of the term "worthwhile."


Passage number 16.
MR. PARDEE. [I'm talking about monitoring] operations andwhatever feedback we might get from the European markets. We would bemonitoring their intervention as well as what is going on in themarket at the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the need to monitor operations, feedback from European markets, and interventions in the market.


Passage number 17.
MR. WALLICH. I don't know how much that would cost but itseems like a good idea to me because what [happens now], as we see, isthat we sometimes wake up here and the dollar is down 1 percent andthe Bundesbank has done nothing. And by that time it is too late topush the dollar back up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing an opinion and a belief about the current situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We can explore that more. There aresome disadvantages. It will become known that the Fed is stayingawake and is willing to intervene in the Far East markets. The keypoint is that it will be known that the Fed is willing to intervene inthe Far East markets and is doing 24-hour intervention. A 24-hourmonitoring may make sense, but I don't think we want to accustom theFar Eastern markets [to our] playing too big a role; that view wouldtend to be encouraged if they begin to see more and more Fedintervention in those markets. On the other hand, whenever we havethought instability was likely, Scott or Gretchen have put people onto monitor [developments]. And we have where necessary, and a bitreluctantly, [unintelligible] role in Singapore as compared to NewYork and to some degree Europe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "A 24-hour monitoring may make sense, but I don't think we want to accustom the Far Eastern markets [to our] playing too big a role; that view would tend to be encouraged if they begin to see more and more Fed intervention in those markets" suggests a disagreement or conflict of views between the speaker and potentially other members of the Fed regarding the extent of intervention in the Far Eastern markets.


Passage number 19.
MR. PARDEE. There is no one more reluctant than I am. A 24-hour day is unthinkable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Pardee, is very reluctant about something and finds it unthinkable.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
MS. TEETERS. I am a little surprised that you say there wasequal intervention going up and coming down. I got the impressionthat there was massive intervention by the Germans and the Swiss when5/20/80the dollar was rising and that they haven't done anything on the waydown--and we've done relatively little. Is that right or wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, expresses surprise and disagreement with the statement that there was equal intervention going up and coming down. She suggests that there was significant intervention by the Germans and the Swiss when the dollar was rising but relatively little intervention on the way down, and questions whether this is correct or incorrect.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 21.
MR. PARDEE. They've done more on the way down in recentweeks as a result of these mutual concerns. They're afraid that thedollar will start declining and [the monetary authorities will] haveto intervene and undercut their monetary policy, and they want tomaintain a certain policy restraint. And we have this other risk thatwe are running with a sharp decline in interest rates and that asudden decline in the dollar will trigger a speculative crisis againstthe dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement mentions that "they" (referring to a group of people or organizations) are afraid that the dollar will start declining and the monetary authorities will have to intervene. This suggests a potential disagreement or contention between the group and the monetary authorities regarding the appropriate response to a potential decline in the dollar.


Passage number 22.
MS. TEETERS. But the amount of intervention since we startedout is nowhere near what it was on the way up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is simply stating that the amount of intervention since they started out is much less than before.


Passage number 23.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, I agree with you. They sat very heavily onthe dollar when it was rising, and ferociously so. And they didn'thelp very much at first when the dollar began to decline. But again,in more recent weeks with this convergence of interests, they havebeen very helpful. We haven't had to intervene much, partly becauseof this atmosphere we are in. And I still feel that the environmentwe've had since October 6 has been conducive to effectiveness ofintervention because exchange traders are nervous; they are concernedthat if they take a short position in dollars, interest rates mightall of a sudden back up and it would become a very expensivespeculative bet for them. So, since October 6 we have not yet had todo the type of massive intervention in support of the dollar that wehad to do before, even with the environment we have had in the lastmonth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the previous person's statement and explaining their reasoning behind it.


Passage number 24.
MR. AXILROD. Governor Teeters, it wasn't only the foreigncentral banks that were supporting their own currencies. We wereintervening substantially to find the marks to cover the Treasury'sintermediate-term debts. We may not even have done enough in thatregard. So we, too, were trying to take advantage of the improvingdollar availability to pick up the marks that would cover theTreasury's debts. We did it in substantial size.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of fact or explanation.


Passage number 25.
MR. PARDEE. We didn't show up in the market until the dollarwas around 190.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 26.
MR. WALLICH. That is another aspect of this two-partysystem. We had different reserve objectives. We would have liked topick up some more D-marks. The Bundesbank was very unwilling to losedollars because they were running a current account deficit [and were]worried. Nevertheless, the Bundesbank sold a great many dollars andwe picked up as many marks as we would have liked. We could havearranged this the other way; had we done the D-mark support we wouldhave gotten the marks and the Bundesbank would not have spent thedollars. So we did this to some extent by sharing the interventionproceeds, but not fully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating the different reserve objectives of Mr. Wallich and the Bundesbank, as well as a potential alternative arrangement that could have been made.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a motion to ratify the foreignexchange transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply asking if there is a motion to ratify foreign exchange transactions. There is no mention of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 28.
MR. WALLICH. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" indicates agreement or approval with a previous statement or motion, so there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 29.
MR. PARTEE. Seconded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement of someone seconding a motion or proposal. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 30.
5/20/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Without] objection they are ratified. Doyou have a recommendation, Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question and request for a recommendation.


Passage number 31.
MR. PARDEE. Yes. The Swedish Riksbank has asked if theFederal Reserve would increase its swap line by $200 million to $500million. You received last night two memoranda on the Swedishsituation--one by me and one by Mr. Caprio of the Board's staff. As Iindicated, the Swedish authorities expect a financing problem on theorder of $4 billion, which this year they plan to cover largelythrough official borrowings abroad. Of this, some $2-1/4 billion hasalready been arranged and additional loans are in the early stages ofdiscussion. In requesting an increase in the swap arrangement withthe Federal Reserve, Governor Wohlin of the Riksbank expressed concernthat the Riksbank needs more backstop in the form of short-term bridgefinancing than it currently has. The Riksbank uses an interventionapproach based on a currency basket and finances its intervention outof the proceeds of the official borrowing. In light of the currenteconomic and political uncertainties, the krona is vulnerable to asudden burst of selling pressure, and the Riksbank may be obliged to[obtain] dollars in the market at a faster pace than they are raisingthem through financing. In their view, the increase in the FederalReserve line would give them an added cushion in addition to theirdollar reserves and their other short-term facilities. GovernorWohlin has stressed that the Riksbank has no immediate need to draw onthe Federal Reserve, but he does not wish to rule out the possibilitythat they may come in for a drawing at some point.Now, as you can see from the memo, the Swedes are passingthrough a difficult time. But under Governor Wohlin the Riksbank hasacted to firm up short- and long-term interest rates and is pressingwith some success for a reduction in the fiscal deficit. The FederalReserve's agreement to increase the swap line could strengthen hishand in some of those negotiations at home. On the basis of thesevarious considerations, I recommend that the Committee agree to the$200 million increase. But given that we are living in a world inwhich we haven't had many changes in swap lines in recent years andhaven't had much experience with drawings on those lines, I would liketo introduce one wrinkle: That we make the increase for one year andthat we review the whole matter at the end of the year when weconsider the renewal of the whole [array of] swap lines and decidethen whether we want to put it on a permanent basis or not. So, Iwould recommend a 1-year increase from $300 million to $500 million,with a review at the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 32.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are your reactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 33.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I support the recommendation. Ispoke with the Swedish Governor when he called me and he emphasizedthat they would only be drawing [on the line] as bridge financing forperiods of up to about two months. And if we approve Scott'srecommendation, I think we should tell them not only that the increaseis only for one year but that each time they want to draw, they wouldhave to check with us and tell us what actions they intend to take andgive us a firm indication of the time period in which they intend to[repay the drawing], probably up to a maximum of about two months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of support and a suggestion for additional conditions.


Passage number 34.
 Ithink there is a larger reason for going along with this, which isbasically that Sweden dropped out of the snake; it is not a member ofthe EMS. And to some extent their request to increase their swap with5/20/80the United States tends to symbolize something we haven't seen inrecent years, namely that the United States is the pivot and plays acritical role in the international monetary system. I think there isvirtually no cost for us. And not only would we be cooperating with aG-10 country, but in a subtle way [the swap line iincrease] would tendto underline the fact that the United States has a critical role. Iwould recommend it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and recommending a course of action.


Passage number 35.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are they making any arrangements with theBundesbank or anybody else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 36.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I asked them that. They haveThey do not havethe ordinary kind of swap line with the Bundesbank. Scott, do youwant to explain what that arrangement with the Bundesbank is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification about a specific arrangement with the Bundesbank.


Passage number 37.
MR. PARDEE. Well, I'm not fully clear myself [but] theBundesbank does allow other central banks to accumulate marks up to acertain amount before they ask those banks to cash them. So, it ismore of a facility on the reserve currency side. The Swedes areborrowing marks quite frequently and they might want to keep some ofthem for a while. That's the arrangement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the policy of the Bundesbank and the practice of the Swedes borrowing and keeping marks.


Passage number 38.
MR. SCHULTZ. Do we have any other arrangements on our swaplines with a takeout arrangement similar to what you are suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question to inquire about any other swapline arrangements.


Passage number 39.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For most of them, each time a centralbank wants to [draw on] a swap line we have some discussion as to whatthe conditions would be and what the period would be. Normally in thepast, though, swap drawings have been made for six months or a year.This would be somewhat unusual. Our conditions would be tighter inthat this is bridge financing and would probably not be for more thantwo months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the usual process for swap drawings and stating that the conditions for this particular situation would be tighter and shorter in duration than usual.


Passage number 40.
MR. WALLICH. I do think we should have that very firmly setdown. It could be done in two ways: Either we set down all theconditions when we take action now to raise the line; or we do what wesometimes have done in the past, which is to treat an existing line asa framework for discussion, not as a commitment on our part to lend.For example, Mexico has a line--what is it, $700 million. Italy has$3 billion and England has $3 billion. We take this as a frameworkfor discussion of both the terms and the amounts. I don't know whatlends itself better in this case. They many want to draw very soonand it might make more sense to lay down all the conditions at thestart. But we shouldn't let it slide and then find that they areabout to draw without our having had the chance to make clear what theframe of reference is, as Tony specified. I very much agree with himthat we need a firm takeout; they have to say that they will go to theEuromarket [even] if conditions in that market are not very propitiouswhen the drawing matures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is evident from the use of phrases such as "I do think we should have that very firmly set down" and "I very much agree with him." These indicate agreement and a desire for clarity and firmness in establishing conditions.


Passage number 41.
MR. RICE. What are the risks of not applying conditions tothe swap line. Everybody seems to be in agreement. I don't knowwhat--. Isn't Sweden a good credit risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that "Everybody seems to be in agreement," indicating that there is consensus among the people being referred to. The question about Sweden's credit risk is unrelated and does not involve contention.


Passage number 42.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, Sweden is a good credit risk. Ithink the only risk, if you want to use that word, is that it becomes5/20/80awkward later on with other countries if we do apply conditions andthey ask why we didn't apply them to Sweden. Our posture always hasbeen, even if the country is a good risk, that we want to be in aposition of applying reasonable conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that Sweden is a good credit risk but raises the possibility of it becoming awkward in the future if conditions are not applied equally to other countries. However, the speaker still maintains the stance of applying reasonable conditions regardless of the country's risk level.


Passage number 43.
 Now, in the case of somecountries--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So long as they don't apply them to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a condition or circumstance related to certain countries.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 44.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's an asymmetrical relationship.We don't exactly play the IMF role, but it is true that in the case ofsome countries that are less creditworthy--take Mexico--we would wantto know what their stabilization program was and what the policiesintended to get them out of trouble were going to look like before wewould let them make a [large] drawing on the swap. In the case ofSweden, we can't say that this should be bridge financing [until theycould get funds from] the IMF because they have only, I think, $4billion in external debt; it's not a country that one would push tothe Fund. We have to give them some direction. But there is somedanger, if we don't have some sense of the conditions, that we willhave more difficulty with other countries in applying conditions whenthey are really needed. I think that's the reason for having someunderstandings, rather than the risk of not being repaid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there should be some understanding of the conditions before providing financing to certain countries like Mexico, but argues against providing such conditions to countries like Sweden because of their low external debt. This implies a disagreement or conflict of opinion on whether conditions should be applied universally or on a case-by-case basis.


Passage number 45.
MR. PARTEE. They take the exchange risk, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. Mr. Partee is just seeking clarification or confirmation about a certain point.


Passage number 46.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: It is not stated in the prompt which passage is being referred to. Without the passage or any further context, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 47.
MR. PARTEE. And the interest rate is the U.S. bill rate.And you are proposing 60 days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a proposal regarding the interest rate and duration.


Passage number 48.
MR. PARDEE. Roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that Mr. Pardee is rough.


Passage number 49.
MR. PARTEE. Ninety days is so conventional. I don't muchlike saying 60 days. It sounds as if we have some particular problemwith Sweden.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his personal opinion about the conventional nature of the 90-day time frame and his preference for not using a different time frame like 60 days. There is no mention of anyone opposing or disagreeing with this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
 I would think a 90-day maturity--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was a little concerned on reading thosememoranda that Sweden isn't in very good shape.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about Sweden's current situation, implying that it is not in very good shape. However, the phrase "I would think a 90-day maturity" suggests that the speaker has a different perspective or opinion on the matter.


Passage number 51.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, no, it isn't. They just had a long strike,you know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply providing information about a long strike that recently occurred.


Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any further context or information that would suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 53.
 It raises the question in my mind why theyaren't borrowing in Europe, and whether we are to some degreeconceivably--MR. PARDEE. They are borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and raising a question.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Officially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "officially" refers to something that is accepted or recognized as true by an authority or organization. It does not suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 55.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, they are making official borrowings in theEuromarkets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the Eurodollar. I mean from Europeanofficial sources.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply refers to the Eurodollar and the source of the information, without indicating any conflicting opinions or contradictory views.


Passage number 57.
MR. TRUMAN. Are you asking why they want to raise the short-term swap lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply posing a question about the reason for raising the short-term swap lines.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 58.
-6-5/20/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The symbols and mathematical operations (+, -, /) indicate that there are conflicting elements or differing perspectives within the equation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, remember, there is politicalimportance to their not being in the European Monetary System. TheGermans were furious when [Sweden] dropped out of the snake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The statement suggests that the Germans were furious when Sweden dropped out of the snake, indicating a disagreement or contention between the Germans and Sweden regarding Sweden's decision to leave the European Monetary System.


Passage number 60.
 That[furor] has died down and there's reasonable cooperation, but I thinkthey would look to the supplier of the currency in which they keeptheir reserves since they are not members of the EMS. Now, we couldalways make it a condition, but I would advise against it, that theyask for a similar swap line with the Bundesbank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is sharing their opinion and advice without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 61.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why are they having trouble with the BIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 62.
MR. PARDEE(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as there is only one phrase provided ("MR. PARDEE"). Without any context or additional information, it is impossible to analyze the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 63.
 Because that's the seat of the EuropeanMonetary System and the members of the Board there are--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sweden is a member of the BIS, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking for confirmation about Sweden's membership in the BIS (Bank for International Settlements).


Passage number 64.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, and it has a swap line with theBIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply indicates that there is a swap line between two parties, and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 65.
MR. PARDEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 66.
 They have a swap line they just--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They have drawn on it, with BISagreement, but they have not gotten agreement from the BIS to increasethe swap line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. It simply states the action of drawing on a swap line and the lack of agreement from the BIS to increase it.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How big is their swap line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for the size of the swap line without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 68.
MR. PARDEE. It's million. On the point of when weimpose conditions, I would rather wait and see what the circumstancesare when they come in for a drawing. We can then review it with the[Foreign Currency] Subcommittee and put on the conditions that aremore or less specific to the circumstances at the time. That is why Ithink this review procedure and a 1-year limit on [the increase in theswap line] gives us a little more control. They are not in goodshape, but this all relates to 1980. We don't know what 1981 willbring. But I think our side will be better able to monitor it if wedo it this way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of the speaker's opinion and rationale for wanting to wait and see the circumstances before imposing conditions.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we do this, we have to announce itright away--meaning within three or four days--right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is stating a condition ("If we do this") and then further providing a specific requirement ("we have to announce it right away--meaning within three or four days--right"). There is no indication of disagreement or contention within the statement.


Passage number 70.
MR. ALTMANN. Yes. It should be included in the SelectedList of Actions that would be available for inspection [this comingFriday]. We don't need to make a public announcement as such. Itwould also be in the Policy Record, and any conditions attached to theincrease in the line would presumably appear in the Policy Record,which might be somewhat counterproductive from their point of view.May I just add simply that the Procedural Instructions with Respect toForeign Currency Operations require that there be advance approval bythe Subcommittee of any drawing up to a certain amount and by the fullCommittee beyond that amount. So [approval of a drawing] is notautomatic under our procedures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Altmann is offering clarification and additional information regarding the approval process for a drawing.


Passage number 71.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are they going to say when this isannounced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is simply posing a question about what someone will say when something is announced.


Passage number 72.
5/20/80MR. PARDEE(.). As little as possible. We were discussinghaving it come out on a Friday afternoon. It's coming very shortlyafter this strike, and they did not want the market to think that theywere acting in response to the adverse publicity of the strike.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we are going to have to saysomething, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the need to say something.


Passage number 74.
MR. PARDEE. Well, we can say that the Federal Reserve andthe Riksbank agreed on an increase in the swap line from $300 millionto $500 million. Full stop, unless we want to add that this shows acooperation between the two central banks--or some language like thatwhich we have worked up in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply explaining an agreement between the Federal Reserve and the Riksbank to increase a swap line.


Passage number 75.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's no problem for us, but it is a bit ofa problem for them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is not a problem for one group of people, but it is a bit of a problem for another group.


Passage number 76.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They are aware that we would have topublish this increase within a very short period of time and also thatwe would have to publish any operations under the swap line with theusual lag of one month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating a fact about the awareness of a certain situation.


Passage number 77.
MR. BLACK. It will be a little longer this time because wedon't have a June meeting, won't it.SPEAKER(.). This comes out earlier [than the Policy Record].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This coming Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "This coming Friday" does not contain any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply states a specific day of the week.


Passage number 79.
MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems to me that in terms ofconditions we shouldn't discriminate between the Swedes and others. Ithink 90 days is reasonable and renewal for another 90 days isreasonable. I'm mainly concerned about a takeout because even thoughSweden may be a good risk--it certainly still has a very high ratingin the Euromarkets in terms of the spread at which it can borrow--theymay for that reason decide to let it go. So [the drawing may extend]to 6 months, to 9 months, and to a year. That is where we want to besure that they can't overrun. And it can be done very simply byagreeing that they will go to the market to pay it off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing his concerns and suggestions regarding the conditions for borrowing from Sweden, but there is no opposition or argument present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this doesn't strike me as perfectionin terms of a precedent, but at the same time I see no strong reasonto turn it down. I do think we need an understanding now that theyare going to pay it off. I don't have any problems between 60 daysand 90 days or whatever and we can even exclude a renewal. But Ithink they ought to be told that this is a temporary increase; we arejust talking about a 1-year increase at the moment. We can have afurther discussion when they draw, but I think it has to be againstthe background of a clear understanding now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that while they don't see the proposal as perfect, they also don't see a strong reason to reject it. However, they do state the need for the debt to be paid off and express concern about the duration and potential for renewal of the increase. This indicates a disagreement or conflict regarding the terms and conditions of the proposal.


Passage number 81.
MR. PARTEE. I thought it was 90 days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement because it only includes a statement made by Mr. Partee regarding his belief that it was 90 days. There is no conflicting opinion or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 90 days for the drawing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement in the passage, "It's 90 days for the drawing," does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states the length of time for the drawing without any opposing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 83.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The increase in the line from $300million to $500 million would only be for one year. As for an actualdrawing, they would advise us ahead of time that they would be drawingon it and there would be a 3-month limit to the bridge financing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. It simply states the conditions and limits of the increase in funding.


Passage number 84.
5/20/80MR. PARTEE. I think that's reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion, stating that they believe something is reasonable.


Passage number 85.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that understanding, are thereany objections. It just looks to me as if Sweden may be in troublebefore the end of the year on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a concern about Sweden potentially facing trouble before the end of the year.


Passage number 86.
MS. TEETERS. How dependent are they on foreign oil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It presents a simple question without providing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 87.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They are terribly dependent. Theyhave the highest per capita consumption of gasoline--imported gasoline--in the world. We happen to have some domestic [production]. Also,this recent wage settlement of 11 percent does not improve theircompetitive position, although it doesn't worsen it. If you look atthe weighted basket of currencies against which they keep theirexchange rate, the wage increases in those countries on a weightedbasis also work out to [an average of] around 11 percent. There's amajor rethinking going on in Sweden; I think they are at a pivotaltime. About 65 percent of their GDP goes through the public sectorand there is an increasing reaction against that. There is a feelingthat they've got to come up with a tough energy policy and that theyhave to shrink public sector expenditures. A whole new debate isbeginning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the current account deficit is $750per Swede.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 89.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. They have probably the higheststandard of living in the world and they owe only $4 billion. Thecurrent account deficit, they believe, will be between $3-1/2 to $4billion; I noticed that the Board's staff thinks it will be closer to$5 billion. They do not have any creditworthiness problem. Butunless they change their policy, I think they will be in trouble intwo to three years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The information presented is just stating different estimates and opinions.


Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I hear any objections. [Hearing none],that is approved and we can go to Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking confirmation and agreement before proceeding.


Passage number 91.
MR. PARDEE. I'm sorry, I have some other comments. I'd justnote that there will be some first renewals of swap drawings in thedays subsequent to the next FOMC meeting. Normally, in our renewalcycle we report on these at this time. [Each] is just a firstrenewal, so no action by the Committee is needed. We have swapdrawings of $141 million worth of German marks and $74 million worthof French francs that are up in July. I would hope that we would havepaid them by that time, but for the record I am mentioning them now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about upcoming renewals of swap drawings and stating that no action is needed from the Committee.


Passage number 92.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 93.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement from the speaker, Mr. Sternlight, and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 94.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Questions do not create contention or disagreement. They are simply inquiries seeking information or clarification.


Passage number 95.
MR. ROOS. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Peter, I'm a little confusedabout your April operations. You attempt to achieve our aggregategrowth targets, as I understand it, through the establishment andachievement of certain reserve paths--either for total reserves or thebase. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a statement of confusion and a request for clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
5/20/80MR. STERNLIGHT. We are trying to achieve nonborrowed reservelevels that have been associated with the Committee's targets. Idon't think we are able to achieve, on a month-to-month basis, theCommittee's monetary growth targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing doubt about being able to achieve the Committee's monetary growth targets.


Passage number 97.
MR. ROOS. Well, I noticed [in] the Bluebook that [thestaff], as I assumed the Committee as a whole would be, again wastrying to understand the reason for the rather substantial drop in therate of money growth during [April]. Now, during that month actualreserve growth was 2.7 percent for total reserves and 1.9 percent forthe monetary base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Roos noticed the staff's efforts to understand the reason for the drop in money growth, as well as the actual growth percentages during that month. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 98.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only provides a statement by Mr. Sternlight, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 99.
MR. ROOS. Let me ask you this: Do you have specific figuresin terms of the monetary base, for example, that you try to achieve asa guide for your operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question being asked by Mr. Roos.


Passage number 100.
MR. STERNLIGHT. No, not in terms of the monetary base. Butwe do have specific figures for nonborrowed reserves that we aretrying to achieve--in this case for both the 4-week interval and weekby week. We have an objective that can be modified from one week tothe next because of technical factors. On one occasion we added someto the nonborrowed [path] because we were so far below on totalreserves going through this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that there is no disagreement regarding the monetary base but there are specific figures for nonborrowed reserves that can be modified based on technical factors.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
MR. ROOS. These figures--the 2.7 percent, say, on totalreserves and the nonborrowed part of that--I assume are significantlylower than the path that you sought. Is that a fair statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or contention as Mr. Roos assumes that the figures mentioned are significantly lower than what was originally desired. This implies a difference in expectations or goals.


Passage number 102.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Total reserves are certainly lower. Thenonborrowed figure, as I mentioned, is coming out about on track.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the total reserves and the nonborrowed figure, without any conflicting information or opinions.


Passage number 103.
MR. ROOS. Let me just ask this, pursuing this line ofquestioning: Isn't it possible for you to achieve or at least to getcloser to your path objectives than these two figures. It'smechanically possible to do, is it not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 104.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I say, on nonborrowed we are comingout about on track for this period. For the total reserves, I thinkone can get a different view depending on what intervals one takes. Itend to think of this as the four-week block of time between Committeemeetings. And total reserves are coming out well below the path, bysome $850 million, on our estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply providing his own perspective and estimation of the total reserves.


Passage number 105.
MR. ROOS. What adjustments can you make, or do you make, ifyou see that we are coming out below the desired path, to supplyreserves so they come out to a higher level. I thought you almostautomatically try to adjust for that situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks about adjustments that can be made if reserves come out below the desired level.


Passage number 106.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, part of the whole procedure that weare on now involves an almost automatic adjustment, because if totalreserves are coming in weak and money supply is coming in weak, aimingfor nonborrowed reserves means that there is going to be less demandfor borrowing. I described how the borrowing had fallen off and withthat [interest] rates had dropped off quite sharply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a procedure and describing the relationship between weak total reserves, weak money supply, and reduced demand for borrowing. They also mention the decrease in interest rates that occurred as a result.


Passage number 107.
-10-5/20/80MR. ROOS. When you observe that, Peter, can't you takecompensating actions to inject reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a statement or question posed to Peter about his ability to take compensating actions to inject reserves.


Passage number 108.
MR. STERNLIGHT. In part what happens is that it is an almostautomatic response because as we aim for the path of nonborrowedreserves it calls for less borrowings, and conditions ease. And overtime--not within a month's time but over some longer time--this issupposed to generate greater monetary growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It explains a process and its intended outcome.


Passage number 109.
MR. ROOS. Couldn't you achieve a base path objective if youwanted to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply asks if it is possible to achieve a base path objective.


Passage number 110.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure we could achieve it; I think wecould come closer than we did if there were no federal funds rateconstraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states Mr. Sternlight's uncertainty about achieving something and his belief that it could be improved under certain conditions.


Passage number 111.
MR. ROOS. In other words, within the family, to be candid,is it the federal funds constraint that really causes us to miss thesepaths occasionally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a question and seeking a candid response.


Passage number 112.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not entirely. Over a period of time thatmay be true. But we are running into precisely that problem now, andthat's what the debate will be this morning, I presume. But the Deskprovided nonborrowed reserves more or less on path. It could havespeeded that up, and we would have run into our federal fundsconstraint, and we will run into it now. That doesn't mean that the[level of] reserves would have come up to the path right away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply discusses potential problems and considerations related to reserves and borrowing.


Passage number 113.
MR. PARTEE. It's somewhat like a freight train, you know.There's the engine and the caboose. And what happened is that we'venow jerked forward and the borrowings have gone down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" provides information about a person's title or role, but it does not present any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


Passage number 115.
 We went right through all the borrowings,so we are face to face with--MR. ROOS. If you have an engine where both ends of thattrain are going in opposite directions, you have a very strangesituation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a situational scenario.


Passage number 116.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Partee that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 117.
 I think there is a certain amount of loosenessin the relationship, and the looseness that has been used up thismonth--MR. STERNLIGHT. We did run into the funds rate constraintduring the period, and the Committee acted on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there has been a certain amount of looseness in the relationship, and that the funds rate constraint was encountered and addressed by the Committee.


Passage number 118.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are now in the rarified atmosphere--onewe haven't operated in before--where we have no borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 119.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask a question. Aside fromany constraint that may arise in the lower end of the fed funds raterange, isn't it the directive of the Committee to the Manager toachieve the target on nonborrowed reserves, given the Committee'sborrowing assumption. If the actual borrowing level comes in lowerthan the assumed borrowing level, is he supposed to take additionalcompensatory action to go higher than the target on nonborrowedreserves in order to compensate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and seeking information.


Passage number 120.
 I didn't assume---11-5/20/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I didn't assume" simply implies that the speaker did not make a particular assumption. The subsequent phrase "It's possible" suggests that there is potential for something to occur or be true, without contradicting the initial statement.


Passage number 121.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 122.
 It's possible, but there's no clear--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a matter of judgment in betweenmeetings; Mr. Axilrod sits there and scratches his head and Mr.Sternlight does and occasionally I do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about how different individuals sit and think during meetings.


Passage number 123.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, isn't this the dilemma that plaguedus over the pre-October period, though, where we had incompatibilitybetween our fed funds objective and other objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have run short on total reserves,and certainly the monetary base in any [case], even this time. But wedon't escape, I suspect, all the dilemmas of the real world bywhatever we said in October. And we are there right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a suspicion that even with certain measures taken, they will not be able to avoid all the challenges and difficulties of the real world.


Passage number 125.
MR. ROOS. A lot of people in the real world--and I'm sorryto [belabor this] but I know we have them in the real world where Ilive--are hoping desperately that when this incompatibility occurs wewill do what we said we were going to do: Keep our eye on the reservegrowth targets and let interest rates fluctuate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that a lot of people in the real world hope that when an incompatibility occurs, the system will stick to its plan of keeping an eye on reserve growth targets and allowing interest rates to fluctuate. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 126.
 That really is thefundamental issue that we face, and I think our credibility--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Interest rates] had a lot of flux in thelast month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence only mentions a fact about interest rates experiencing fluctuations, without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 127.
MR. WALLICH. This is attributing to the money supply asignificance that I see hardly any economists attributing to it. Themoney supply is a means of getting [desired] interest rates. Peoplewho want a stable rate of money growth want wide fluctuations ininterest rates. So we can always decide how much interest ratefluctuation we want to have and go from there without subordinatingour decisions to the money supply. [If] we say that we don't wantinterest rates to move outside a certain range, then it seems to methat we've made the judgement that interest rates are to prevail up toa certain point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 128.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we've announced our targets to theCongress not in terms of interest rates but in terms of aggregates.We've never mentioned interest rates in our targets to Congress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee states that they have announced targets to Congress in terms of aggregates, not interest rates, which suggests that interest rates are not a point of contention in this context.


Passage number 129.
MR. WALLICH. But if the money supply is a means ofcontrolling interest rates, it is a better means than for us to set[interest rates] arbitrarily low, as we have in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Wallich, does not express disagreement or contention in the passage. Instead, he presents his opinion that controlling the money supply is a better means of controlling interest rates than setting them arbitrarily low. There is no indication of any disagreement or opposing views in the passage.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the interest of facilitating thediscussion, I think these issues will arise in a more practical way alittle later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that certain issues will come up later in the discussion. There is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 131.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, may I ask Peter a question. Isthere any reason to expect a further back-up in short-term interestrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is asking a question to clarify a point.


Passage number 132.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Not from what I see here, particularly. Ifmonetary growth should speed up, certainly it would be possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only presents a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 133.
-12-5/20/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon why it speeds up. Short-term interest rates are down this morning. That's the long-term trendthrough 10 o'clock this morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 134.
MR. RICE. There was a time when we used to think an increasein the money supply would cause interest rates to fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends. If the economy gets strongerand credit demands increase and the money supply rises, interest rateswould rise. If we're pushing up the money supply, then presumablythey would fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
MR. RICE. But, if the economy remains weak, with an increasein the money supply one would expect them to fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But, if the economy remains weak" suggests a contrasting viewpoint or a potential disagreement with the statement that follows.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They might, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 138.
MR. GUFFEY. All of this discussion does point up theimportance of the discount rate, however. That's because we couldhave moderated the fall in the funds rate, the [final] standard, ifborrowings had been above zero. That is something we are going toface in the period ahead, and thus the Board [should] giveconsiderable [thought to] what to do with the discount rate. So longas borrowings remain at zero, we have nothing to operate against butthe funds rate--the fall of the funds rate itself--if we try toachieve these targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is discussing the importance of the discount rate and the potential challenges they may face in the future. They are not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 139.
MR. PARTEE. That's all we have anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
The passage is a direct quotation from someone named Mr. Partee, and it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the domestictransactions. Without objection, they are ratified. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Without objection, they are ratified" suggests that there is consensus and agreement among the parties involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 141.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "see Appendix" indicates that the statement being referenced is likely not in agreement with what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 142.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder whether we shouldn't pause for alittle discussion of the economic situation. [I hope] it doesn't goon too long because there are particular technical issues on thefinancial side that will need some discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a desire to have a discussion about the economic situation and hoping that it won't be too long. They also mention specific technical issues on the financial side that will require discussion, suggesting a cooperative approach rather than disagreement.


Passage number 143.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If you assume that we have a mortgagerate of around 12 to 13 percent for the rest of the year, do you haveany projections as to what the level of housing starts would be laterin the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply asking for projections based on a given assumption.


Passage number 144.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we have housing starts rising to a littleover 1 million units by the end of this year and continuing on up toabout 1-1/2 million units next year. Our forecast for the remainingmonths of the current quarter is for a bit further decline on average.But starts would average 900,000 for the current quarter and thenbegin drifting up next quarter so that they are at an annual rate ofover a million by the time we hit the end of the year. That'sessentially what we have built into our forecast currently. I mightnote that for mortgage rates to get to that level they would have todecline further in conventional markets. They are not there yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a forecast and notes that mortgage rates would need to decline further for the forecast to be realized.


Passage number 145.
MS. TEETERS. May I ask: In your projection of personalincome did you anticipate the number that came out yesterday, whichwas essentially zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question about whether a particular event was anticipated in a projection of personal income.


Passage number 146.
-13-5/20/80MR. KICHLINE. Yes. In fact that was largely based upon thelabor market developments in April, which we had available. Wages andsalaries declined at about a $7-1/2 billion annual rate. And that'sone of the principal ingredients giving us for the second quarter avirtually unchanged saving rate even though consumption spending isdeclining very rapidly. So, we think we've roughly captured that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts and providing an explanation for the saving rate.


Passage number 147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage provided. Please provide the relevant passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 148.
MR. PARTEE. I wonder if you would talk a little about yourprojections on the saving rate, Jim. What bothers me is that you havesuch a small rise in the saving rate over the next year when oneconsiders that it has been abnormally low and that we seem to seeevery evidence that people are trying to pay down debt and improvetheir financial position. And, of course, if that saving rate were tocome in significantly higher than you have projected, it would imply aconsiderably weaker economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply a statement expressing concern about the projected saving rate and its potential impact on the economy.


Passage number 149.
MR. KICHLINE. That's quite correct in terms of the forecastthat we have, in which the saving rate really never gets to 5 percentand then drifts lower. That is at least a percentage point below whatone might have expected on the basis of experience prior to the lasttwo or three years. There are a number of factors involved.Essentially, one is that we believe individuals will attempt to retaintheir standard of living. And when one looks at the composition ofprice changes, relative price changes have been extremely large fornecessities such as food, energy, and housing. So, our view is thatone of the elements driving the saving rate down recently has been thesurge in the relative prices of necessities; and individuals have beenwilling to let the savings side slip as an attempt to maintain theirstandard of living. We expect that to persist. We also tend tobelieve that the saving rate may have been adjusted lower as a resultof the inflationary experience [and will remain low] through thisforecast horizon, even though the rate of inflation is declining.It's still very high by historical standards, and there clearly hasbeen a change toward spending as opposed to saving. And I think itwill be hard to get consumers around to the view that they want tosave substantially larger portions of their income once they haveadjusted in this fashion. Admittedly, it is a very difficult part ofthe forecast. It often comes out as a residual. To go about this, weuse the saving rate as a check and then begin asking questions aboutit and whether we believe it's appropriate. If consumers' attitudeschange quite differently and in the aggregate they feel squeezed interms of their financial positions, as they ought to, then the savingrate might tend to be higher. And if it were, of course, other thingsunchanged, activity would be weaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It describes the factors that have led to a decrease in the saving rate and presents the forecast for its future trajectory.


Passage number 150.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 151.
MR. EASTBURN. I tend to be at least as pessimistic as theprojections. There's one other factor that could enter in and Iwonder if you have explored it, Jim. And that is the [potential]catastrophic aspects of this, with large numbers of bankruptcies bothin the nonfinancial and financial side--in municipal finances and soon if they accumulate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with the projections while raising another factor for consideration.


Passage number 152.
MR. KICHLINE. That's one of the major risks in a forecastlike this because [the downturn] is deep enough and it also started5/20/80with many sectors being in what we would perceive at least to be avulnerable position. [So], even though one is looking for that kindof evidence, those developments tend to be unpredictable and couldpose serious downside risks for the forecast. We have been lookingvery carefully, for example, at the corporate sector, and theaggregate numbers there do not provide any comfort at all. There hasbeen a great increase in downgradings of corporations and cutbacks incapital expenditure plans, some of which seem to be stemming from thefinancial side. You mentioned also the government sector, and we areclearly getting a squeeze there with real expenditures declining; butwith the Administration's effort to curtail the rate of growth infederal expenditures, a good chunk of that [spending] falls on thestate and local sector. So there are sufficient concerns in thenonfinancial sectors as well as the financial sectors to be aware thatsomething may go wrong, and that could very easily set offexpectations in an adverse [direction]. That is one of the risks thatwould argue for the possibility of seeing even lower numbers. Theymay not materialize, but we are at the point where there are [enough]warning signs to be cautious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concerns and risks associated with the forecast.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
MR. SCHULTZ. Individual bankruptcies are already up verysubstantially, but there is a real question as to whether that'srelated to the new bankruptcy law--how much effect one can assign tothat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or contention regarding whether the increase in individual bankruptcies is related to the new bankruptcy law or if other factors are involved. The speaker mentions that there is a "real question" about assigning the effect to the law.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided is incomplete. It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without further context or information.


Passage number 155.
MR. MAYO. What about the $20 billion budget deficit that youhave for fiscal '81. Do I understand that that would be even largerif the import fee were cut out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a budget deficit and a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 156.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, that includes $10 billion, roughly, inreceipts. So if nothing else changed, the deficit would be in theneighborhood of $30 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the deficit without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 157.
MR. MAYO. So from your standpoint this is a swing from a $16billion or so surplus projected by the Administration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or opinion without any opposition or argument.


Passage number 158.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, some of the developments in Congresshave lowered that, though, so the numbers coming out of the Senateside were a small surplus. But the numbers are all on the plus side.I might note that we have not assumed passage of the withholding oninterest and dividends and that's worth something like $3-1/2 billion.We've assumed that some of the expenditure cuts won't materialize,given the much weaker economic forecast that we have. That's worth $4or $5 billion more in direct expenditures than we have assumed. Andthe remainder is accounted for principally by weaker receipts, higherunemployment insurance compensation, higher interest rates, and thatsort of thing. So, we've [made some assumptions] on the expenditureand tax sides, but the bulk of it is the different view of theeconomic outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation of the different factors that contribute to the budget numbers, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 159.
MR. MAYO. I think's it's a very reasonable assumption, butit is a very important ingredient in the Greenbook presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, expresses their personal opinion about the assumption being reasonable and important, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments or questions. We willturn to Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply requests for any additional comments or questions and states that the conversation will now involve Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 161.
-15-5/20/80MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage is just a sequence of characters and does not contain any statements or information that can be argued or disagreed upon.


Passage number 162.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I [am tempted] to suggest that you mightget into the more technical problems. But maybe we will defer thatand get whatever reactions we have at the moment to as far as you havegone. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It discusses the potential of addressing technical problems and seeking reactions to certain progress made.


Passage number 163.
MR. PARTEE. Well, on this question of strategy for dealingwith a shortfall, I just don't know; I have a feeling of discomfortabout it. I suppose what it amounts to is that having suffered anunprecedented decline we ought to be prepared for an unprecedentedincrease to make it up, should it occur. Therefore, if we had asudden surge, restoring us closer to the trendline, that would be allright; that should be permitted without any difficulty. If we don'thave that, the question is: How hard should we push to get [moneygrowth] turned around. As a matter of procedure, I feel it'sincorrect in May to use the whole rest of the year to try to get backwithin the range because we may well continue to have adversity inreaching the numbers desired. And if we do, the shortfall will getworse and worse and harder and harder to adjust to. So, withoutspeaking to the policy issue, I just think that procedurally it isbetter to have a fairly moderate period in which we plan to recoup ourlosses rather than a long period. Therefore, [aiming to get] back topath by September strikes me as much sounder than [getting] back topath by December, which is the alternative given.As long as I have the floor, I might just go on. I thinkthere is a fair possibility that something big--really big--is goingon out there in the economy and that in fact we may not get a reboundin money supply or credit demand for some while. If that is so, thedecline in final demand that is occurring will destroy income; and thedestruction of income will result in a further weakening in finaldemand. And if that's the situation, that is a classic depressionsituation developing in the economy. The worst possible thing thatcould happen would be to continue to see credit and money contractbecause that would perpetuate and deepen the decline and really get usto the point that Dave was raising. Nobody ever projects what wouldhappen if we had a wave of bankruptcies because there is no way toproject it. We so seldom have a wave of bankruptcies that we justcan't see how bad things might be if that occurred. The last real bigwave was in the 1930s. And, of course, it created grave effects onexpectations and attitudes and the willingness to spend and so forth.So, if there is something big going on, it's terribly important thatwe stop the decline in money and credit. If there isn't somethingvery big going on, we will get a turnaround without doing an awfullot, in which case it won't turn out to be such a big problem. So itseems to me that the risks are all on the one side, and we ought tostructure our operations and our policy to recognize those risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions, without directly addressing or opposing anyone else's point of view.


Passage number 164.
MR. SCHULTZ. May I ask a question of Steve. Steve, what youhave done is [to present] two alternatives here, both of which aregeared to reaching the midpoint of the range. Now, Governor Parteefeels that structurally it is better to do it by September. Butdoesn't it leave us a lot of flexibility if we attempt at this pointto target the midpoint of the range by December. It gives us theflexibility, if we have a substantial shortfall, to look at the lowerend of the range as an alternative if money growth is not very rapidover that period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked and a suggestion being discussed.


Passage number 165.
5/20/80MR. PARTEE. That's precisely why I suggested September,because in fact we might continue to have a shortfall relative to ourexpectations, in which case having targeted on December we will haveno more room. I think we will be lucky if we are within the ranges atall this year. But it's just a question of how quickly we try to getback [within them].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a possible solution, but there is no conflicting viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It makes a big difference which M onelooks at. It may be true of Ml; M2 and M3 don't look so bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that there is a difference between the different "M's" being referred to, specifically M1 and M2/M3. However, it does not imply any disagreement or argument between these different perspectives.


Passage number 167.
MR. SCHULTZ. And maybe L is even; as Steve points out, thoseT-bills may be pretty high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 168.
MR. PARTEE. The analytic significance of L escapes me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing his lack of understanding or confusion about the analytic significance of L.


Passage number 169.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's pretty good when you have a declinein M2 and M3 simply because people bought Treasury bills.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 170.
MR. PARTEE. It always happens; in every credit crunch it hashappened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. PARTEE is stating a general observation or fact.


Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's why the analytic significance ishigh. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any points of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the high analytic significance.


Passage number 172.
MR. WALLICH. I'd like to make the opposite case, and in factexpress some concern about getting back on track even in December.There is at least a good chance that we have had a demand shift andthat we would just be pouring in money when [instead] we should havetaken account of the diminished demand for money. Nobody can say howlikely that is at this time. There are some indications--and I thinkit has a rather fair probability--so I'd give it weight. Certainlythe situation seems to be rather similar to what we had from the fallof '78 through the winter of '79. There was an unexplained shortfall,though not as drastically concentrated in one month; I think we hadclose to four or five months of negative M1 growth. Then, in thespring and summer the aggregates took off. For a while we said thatwas just compensating for the shortfall of the previous six months.Suddenly, in August-September we realized what was happening: Thatthe aggregates were running away, that it was not a compensatorymovement, and that we were going into an accelerated inflation. Andwe took the strong measures of October of last year; even that wasn'tenough and we had to do it again. So I think the pattern of having ashortfall and then trying to catch up--or allowing the aggregatesthemselves to catch up--has existed in the past. And it seems that itcan be very dangerous.Furthermore, under alternative B, M-lA would be growing at9.5 percent and under alternative A it would be growing at 7.6percent. Even if these very high rates of money growth didn't lead toan inflationary situation, which is not likely given that we probablyare going into a substantial recession, it nevertheless would be anuncomfortable situatuion to be moving at those rates of speed and thensuddenly either in October or January have to turn off the faucet andget back on track [to a path that] would be more consistent withmoderate growth. In other words, at that time, when the recessionwould probably be at its deepest, we would be confronted with turningoff the faucet and raising interest rates if we were to move as fastas these alternatives imply. I would not like to be confronted with-17-5/20/80that calamity. We can handle all of this, I think, within ourexisting target ranges, if we aim at the lower edge. I have a roughsense that we should aim [for growth in M-1A] by December at 1-1/4percentage points lower than the midpoint. We would be savingourselves about 2 percent growth or a little more. And taking downthe aggregates by that much, [as I've] proposed here, would not get usto very rapid rates of expansion. We would not incur the danger ofovershooting and would not run the risk of having to confront a suddenchange of pace that would raise interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the possibility of pouring in money when there may be a diminished demand for money. They also discuss the potential dangers of allowing the aggregates to catch up too quickly and the need to aim for lower growth. There is no mention of opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 174.
MR. EASTBURN. Well, I would like to shift the argument backto what Chuck started with. We really are dealing with probabilitieshere, and that's what makes it so very difficult. There is apossibility that we have had a fundamental shift in the demand formoney. There is a possibility that we are in for something bigger,perhaps bigger even than the staff has projected. It's very temptingto say: Let's avoid that kind of decision and just deal with theimmediate problem and face this issue later. I don't think we can[wait] because there's too much at risk. So we have to cast our loton [one side or the other]. And I cast my lot on the side that saysthe probability is that we will have a persistent shortfall in moneygrowth. My reason for this is historical experience. A shortfall hastended to happen when we have had recessions and probably will happeneven more in a recession of serious magnitude, which is the kind Ibelieve we are going to have. I think we should anticipate that andget back to the [money growth] path as soon as we can; that to mewould require us to try to shoot for [a return to path by] Septemberrather than wait until December. I think Chuck is absolutely rightthat if the other [scenario] turns out to be the case and we findourselves with rather large increases in the money stock, we can pullback from that. But I believe the risk is more on the other side, andI would prefer to move more rapidly to get back to path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing his own viewpoint and providing reasons for his beliefs, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage without the passage itself. Please provide the passage for further analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 176.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I recognize the possibilities thatGovernor Wallich has outlined, and he outlined them very well. But Ifeel that if we don't [do something to] be on target before long, wemay get almost impossible pressures against us to ease later on [bymore than is desirable], at about the time the economy is recovering.And that's the time when we usually make our mistakes. So I come outabout where Governor Partee and Mr. Eastburn did, and I would alignmyself very closely with the remarks they made. I have some specific[recommendations to make] later on regarding the federal funds rateranges, the level and width of the ranges, and also the wording of theoperational paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses his concern about possible pressures to ease the economy later on, while Governor Wallich outlines the possibilities and reasons for addressing the issue. This suggests a difference in opinion on the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 178.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, one major problem I have with thefunds range of alternative A is that if we were to vote for a 10percent floor, after having given the Manager a 10-1/2 percent floorin our last telephone conference, I don't think we could honestly orwith a straight face say that we are trying to control bank reserves.Quite clearly, de facto, we would be moving back to controllinginterest rates. Now, if we are faced with a foreign exchange crisis,-18-5/20/80then we ought to be honest and say that we are going to keep thefederal funds rate where it is for the next month, hoping that thefundamentals of our balance of payments will improve and that,therefore, we are temporarily abandoning our policy to control therate of growth of bank reserves. As far as I can see, alternative Ais out for that reason unless we are willing to admit that we aregoing back to controlling interest rates, as we have done before,though the results of that [operating procedure] were not terriblysatisfactory. So I would like alternative B, but I would like a fundsrate range of 8-1/2 to 12-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with alternative A because he believes it would lead to controlling interest rates instead of bank reserves, which he does not think would be effective. He expresses a preference for alternative B and suggests a funds rate range of 8-1/2 to 12-1/2 percent.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: On its own, the passage "Mr. Balles" does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The passage seems to be a statement or introduction, so without more context, it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement or contention involved.


Passage number 180.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, before we try to make a decisionon "B" or something else, I'd like to ask a question of the staff. Doyou, Steve, or any of your colleagues, have a judgment as to theextent to which the special credit restraint program of March 14--otherwise known in some sections of the country as "Jaws II"--might bea very inhibiting factor in getting back to path. We have scared offa lot of bankers around the country [by] having them appear beforeVice Chairman Schultz with their boards of directors and submit dailyreports and all sorts of other things. Unless we "unscare" thempretty quickly, I'm concerned that, while it's always hard to push onthe string, in this case it will be impossible. I've given you myview. I was really asking for yours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any explicit contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is simply expressing his concern and asking for the opinion of others.


Passage number 181.
MR. AXILROD. I have a judgment; perhaps Jim also has one. Iwould say that it probably did have some effect on bankers' attitudes,or at least it seems so from the data. But perhaps even moreimportantly, it seems to have had some effect on consumers' attitudes.Spending has been very weak and I think that weakness is associatedwith a reluctance to use credit. There have been reports all over thepapers and it [is evident] even in one's personal experience thatpeople have some reluctance to use credit. Going along with thatthere has been some shift, apparently, to using cash and a shift topaying off debt and reducing spending. Whether the end of theseprograms would change those attitudes is an open question, of course,because once a person finally decides something is right, for whateverreason, I simply don't know whether the ending of a program is goingto change his mind substantially. That's particularly so if we're inthe middle of a recession when the program ends and people have somedoubts about future income prospects. But those are subjectivejudgments and we have precious little evidence other than to note thatthe sharp declines in bank credit and consumer debt are verycoincidentally related to the imposition of the program. Thatsuggests a change in attitudes, and I think it's the attitudes of boththe lenders and the borrowers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own judgment and acknowledging that there may be another perspective, but there is no conflicting point of view presented.


Passage number 182.
MR. SCHULTZ. May I comment on that from an anecdotal pointof view on the basis of talking to bankers and others all over thecountry who are involved in credit extensions. I think Nancy[Teeters] would corroborate what I say. Well, I don't know that forsure but I think so. It's clear that [the credit restraint program]was a real shock to the consumer. If the credit controls are removed,the people I talk to do not believe there will be a resurgence of thesame attitudes the consumer had before. They believe this effect isnot reversible. So I think it's important to get them off becausethey are having a serious effect on the economy at this point. I just-19-5/20/80worry about how we are going to get them off if we're going to have aneasy money policy, too. It could be pretty difficult to do both atthe same time, and I would hope that we would keep that in mind as weare talking here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the opinion of the speaker, Mr. Schultz, based on anecdotal evidence. He expresses concern about the potential difficulties of removing the credit controls while also implementing an easy money policy.


Passage number 183.
MS. TEETERS. Of course, Fred, if we take credit controls offand it has no impact--if people don't go back to spending--then we cando both simultaneously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. Teeters agrees with the idea of taking credit controls off and believes that it can be done simultaneously with increased spending.


Passage number 184.
MR. MORRIS. [We would say] we're taking them off because ourprior tight money policy was successful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they are taking something off (presumably referring to a policy) because their prior tight money policy was successful. There is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 185.
MR. RICE. We'd say that we're not really using it. We'd tryto ease our target growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion or viewpoint without any conflicting ideas or opposition.


Passage number 186.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no specific passage or context provided in the question. It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without any information.


Passage number 187.
 Certainly we'd say monetary growth is lower thanever--MS. TEETERS. Let me comment further on what Fred was saying.The reports I've been getting are that credit sales have justplummeted. And it shows up on the profit reports of Penneys and Searsthat came out this morning. Another aspect that people seem to beworried about is that purchases of household durables were so strongin the second half of last year that [that sector] is not going torebound. Everybody has a new refrigerator. The other aspect of thisis that consumer debt is unbelievably high; and with a very low savingrate the chances of a rebound in consumer spending such as we've hadin previous recessions are much lower this time. I think that isalready built into the staff's forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their observations and opinions on the current state of monetary growth, credit sales, household durables purchases, consumer debt, and consumer spending.


Passage number 188.
MR. BALLES. If I can end my comment, Mr. Chairman: Isuspect the March 14th programs--this is just an intuitive feeling onmy part--have done the job that we hoped they would do, and that wasessentially to break the back of inflationary psychology. Therefore,I think those programs have outlived their usefulness and they willsimply get in our way if we try to restore monetary growth, whether tothe lower end of the range or the middle of the range by September orDecember. I hope some very serious consideration will be given to howquickly [the economy] can unwind from those programs. My instinctsare to go along with the alternative B target and to get thatrestoration done more quickly than by the end of the year. That'sabout the way I would come out. But I fear that the credit restraintprograms, unless visibly relaxed--I know you alluded to thatpossibility in public--are simply going to be one more inhibitingfactor getting in our way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and concerns about the March 14th programs and their potential impact on restoring monetary growth. They also mention considering the alternative B target and expressing a desire for a quicker restoration process. However, there is no mention of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments within the passage.


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a great vacuum of volunteerspeakers here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this statement. The phrase "vacuum of volunteerspeakers" simply suggests a lack or shortage of volunteers, rather than any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 190.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I think this is a time when we needto go back and restudy some of our history on these things. Theproblems of our undershoots and overshoots are a little sobering itseems to me. It's a problem, really, of the gaps that occur in thisprocess. It's not just [a question of] when we get back on target,because the gaps are never corrected. I think our [undershoot]problem is something to be concerned about. I share some of Henry'sconcern as to what we do [later], but it seems to me that we have aneven more important problem as to what we do now. Consequently, I'm-20-5/20/80in favor of making an effort to get back on path by September. But Idoubt that even the funds range specified in alternative B is going todo that. I think we have to have a wider funds range if we're goingto be serious about our efforts, and I'd be inclined to consider a 7to 14 percent range--not knowing what is happening on that score--as abasis of approaching our target by September rather than December.One reason is because the gap between now and December is going to bea painful thing for you to have to testify about in January orFebruary because I think [the members of the Congressional Committees]are loaded for bear. Others have studied the misses we have had inthe past, and it seems to me that we ought to learn a little fromhistory in our approach to the current problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns, but there is no indication of any disagreement with others.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or further information.


Passage number 192.
MR. MAYO. First, on the credit restraint program: I, too,think it should be dismantled, but in parts. The time is already ripefor getting rid of the consumer part. I don't see any particulardamage in taking it off piece by piece if only because, based on someof our traditional observances, the bank credit hangs on afteractivity starts down. But also as a counterbalance, I feel we shouldkeep at least the special deposit on the money market mutual funds forperhaps a little longer than some others have suggested simply becauseof the public perception. If we take the special deposit off, peoplemight feel the Fed is out of its mind to do that if we really believedin limiting their growth in the first [place]. We know the reasoning,tying it to what the mutual funds invest in, but I think the publicperception would give us a black eye. And phasing out the equity[requirement] on the bank side too soon would give us a black eye.But I think a case can be made for dumping the consumer credit [part]pretty fast.Moving on to our policy question, I lean the way Willis does.We should be getting back on target or we will have a credibilityproblem again. I don't think [our recent adoption of] a 10-1/2percent lower limit has strained our credibility but [adopting] anylower limit higher than 8 percent would tend to strain the credibilityof our decisionmaking today when it comes out because, for better orfor worse, we have announced that we're going to concentrate mostly on[achieving] our targets for the aggregates. Sure, we can change thosetargets in July if we wish, but for the moment we haven't given anyindication--and I think properly so--that we have any desire to changethose targets. So I, too, would prefer "B" or almost a "B-" to get usback [on path] by September--we can always have a consultation inbetween [meetings]--and I'd pick figures of 8 to 14 percent [for thefederal funds range]. I consider the 10-1/2 percent [lower limit],which could become a sore point, something like a temporaryintervention point, if I may draw the analogy from our foreignexchange side. I would like to consider it that rather than as a realconstraint that might upset our credibility on what we said in Octoberand again in March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It includes the speaker's opinions and preferences, but these are not in conflict with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 193.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 194.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I don't feel that I can dispelany of the uncertainty that has been cited here today. It is a veryuncertain situation. On the credit restraint program, I think itwould be desirable to announce that it seems to have achieved its-21-5/20/80objective for the time being at least and, consequently, all requiredreporting under it will be discontinued with, say, the May reports.But [I'd say] the program itself is being put in cold storage forreactivation if and when it is needed. That latter part is simply onthe assumption that it would be politically expedient to say thatforthrightly [rather than imply] it at this point in time. But itdoes seem to me inappropriate to continue a fairly comprehensivereporting program in an environment where it's not doing anythinguseful for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty and discussing a proposed course of action.


Passage number 195.
 I think it will look rather foolish to the people whoare reporting under the program and not--MR. PARTEE. You'd [take] off the special deposits too--notjust the reporting but also the special deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about how something might look to others.


Passage number 196.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, yes. But we're not getting any of thoseanyhow, are we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement acknowledging a fact.


Passage number 197.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know; we got some from the mutual funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Partee received some funds from mutual funds.


Passage number 198.
MR. BAUGHMAN. On the monetary policy issue, it seems to methat the risks are on the side of a fairly extended period of [moneygrowth] running well below target and that, therefore, we should movefairly quickly and fairly decisively to try to get back within ourannounced target ranges. So between alternatives A and B, that wouldlead me to favor "B" and it would lead me also to suggest that thebottom of the funds rate range should be reduced probably to 8 percentfrom 9 percent or, if not that far, I could go with Frank's 8-1/2percent. That's all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, is expressing his opinion on the monetary policy issue and stating his preference for alternative B.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "Mrs. Teeters" without providing any conflict or differing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
MS. TEETERS. Well, all the news has been consistently bad.Every day brings in another indication of greater depth of the slump.And it seems to me that the risks are all on the down side at thispoint. If we look at the staff forecast, they have made the recessiondeeper but somewhat shorter. And the total recession isn't muchgreater [before] some upturn. Probably it will be both deep and long,the worst of all possible combinations. As a result, I think weshould get back to our targets or we should be providing to theeconomy the sort of support that it needs at this particular point intime. So I would support alternative B, moving back by September, anda lower range on the funds rate. This does raise problems on theinternational side. If we move to where the interest rates aredropping to the 7-1/2 or 8 percent range, we may encounter some heavydrains [of funds to abroad] and heavy pressures on the dollar. Ithink we have to face up to the fact that if we move to accommodateour domestic policies, it will have some international implications.It seems to me that we should openly face the fact that we're probablygoing to have to intervene rather heavily to keep the dollar where wewant it to be in terms of international exchange rates. So thedirective today should not only focus on domestic monetary policy buton how we are going to cope with the pressures, as they develop, inthe international market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker supports alternative B, which is moving back by September and lowering the range on the funds rate. However, they acknowledge that this may have international implications and may require intervention to keep the dollar where they want it to be in terms of exchange rates. This suggests that there is disagreement or potential tension between domestic monetary policy and international market pressures.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided is incomplete, and there is no specific content present to determine if there is any contention or disagreement. More information is needed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 202.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I think it is important tounderstand fully the nature of the decision we made on October 6 and5/20/80the potential or lack of potential for accomplishing what we said wewere going to accomplish. As I understood the meaning of what we saidin October, it was that we were going to set fairly long-range targetsfor the growth of money. By law we have to do that. We haveannounced those targets to Congress and we've announced them publiclyas targets for a span of one year. [We said] that in any targeting ofmonetary growth there are inevitably going to be some overshoots andsome shortfalls. That is a part of the process. And if our objectiveis to achieve longer-range targets, when we have a significantshortfall such as we have [now] we will take steps to compensate forthat shortfall by expanding the rate of money growth in order to bringus back into the target range. I've always seen it as similar to theprocess of steering a large ship. If the ship swings off course, youattempt gradually to bring it back onto course. And in my opinion,these overshoots and shortfalls are not totally beyond our control.If they were, then we would be making better use of our time to beback in our various Districts trying to administer the variousprograms of a local nature. We do have the ability at least toinfluence the growth of money in a very significant manner. I thinknot only is the credibility of our October 6 program at stake, but thevery credibility of the Open Market Committee is at stake in terms ofwhether or not we perform what we've said we were going to accomplish.I wish there were an alternative C that could get us back tothe range even before September, but being a realist I guessalternative B is the best we can accomplish. But also being arealist, I would bet a Christmas turkey--although I'm not a bettingman--that there's no way of accomplishing alternative B and getting usback within the range by September with the constraint of a 9 to 14percent federal funds target. I see no reason why, after we'vefinally gotten into better habits than in the past by having a broaderfed funds range, we're all of a sudden [talking about] narrowing itagain. I think we should have a 5 to 15 percent fed funds range onalternative B, and I would certainly prefer alternative B toalternative A.Let me just close by making one further observation: As ourChairman has said repeatedly, as have others among us, accepting areduction in interest rates in times like this should not be construedas an easing of monetary policy. As for concern about the adverseeffect that a further reduction in interest rates would have on theinternational exchange markets, the day that any of us says thatpublicly, [people will say]: "Look, the Fed is retreating to its oldpractice of concentrating on the stabilization of interest rates." Ifthat is said or if that is perceived, I think we'll have a catastrophein terms of the value of the dollar on international exchange marketsthat will far overshadow the effects of seeing interest rates continueto drop gradually, if that is a necessary adjunct to achieving theobjectives that were stated in October. I feel very strongly thatit's a critical time [for us to persist] in what we're doing. I'vefelt a great deal of pride in taking to the hustings with the messagethat we are serious in what we're doing and we're going to stick withit. If we vacillate now, Mr. Chairman, I think the game will be over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of narrowing the fed funds range and argues for a broader range. They also express concern about the potential negative effects of further reducing interest rates.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
MR. SCHULTZ. I am amazed, and I must admit disturbed, at thefact that I haven't heard the word inflation mentioned around this-23-5/20/80table this morning. My word, it was only two months ago that we werewild about the subject and terribly concerned about it. I admit thatwe're in an unusual period. Things have moved exceptionally fast.But I don't think we can seriously say that we're out of the woods oninflation. And it seems to me that at least we ought to continue tothink about it a little. We do have evidence that things are gettingsomewhat better and are likely to get better in the future, but thatcertainly is not in the bag. And the perception out there isabsolutely crucial. There aren't very many people around the countrywho understand our change from a federal funds operating target to areserves operating target. But a lot of people understand that whatthe Fed does is crucial in the fight against inflation. And there arepeople who still do worry about inflation. If we move too rapidly,that could have some very serious attitudinal effects [on the]psychology of inflationary expectations and could subvert [anyprogress we've made in that area].The other side is that I think the economy is weakening veryrapidly and will turn down very sharply, and I want interest rates tocome down. But if they come down too fast, the result can becounterproductive. If we want mortgage rates to stop coming down [sorapidly] we have to let them back up a little. There is volatility.We gave up some things when we went to this reserves operating targetand one of those things was some stability in interest rates. Thevolatility in interest rates does have an impact on people. They seeinterest rates jumping up and down and they say: "What is happeningin the country." Those interest rate risks get greater and lenderswant to protect themselves against them so they don't bring interestrates down as rapidly. We need to think about the rapidity with whichwe're [lowering the funds rate]. I don't know if we [should] takethese lower targets of alternative A; I do believe we need lower fundsrates targets than we have in that alternative. But if we [implementthem], are we really going to [reduce] the interest rates that have animpact on people any more rapidly than we would if we proceeded alittle more slowly or had a little steadier approach. I think [aslower steadier approach] would avoid a lot of risks. So, I'dcertainly like to argue for alternative A, but I do admit that thefunds rate target would have to be widened some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement or contention by expressing two different views - one that inflation is still a concern and should be thought about, and another that interest rates should come down but not too quickly. The speaker is discussing different approaches and weighing the risks and benefits of each.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide an answer to that question.


Passage number 206.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, we share the [view thatthere are substantial] uncertainties in the present situation but Imust confess that we don't share the pessimism about the economy thatI've heard around the table this morning. We certainly would not wantto minimize the extent of the downturn that has occurred. On theother hand, we don't view the recession as overly severe at thepresent time, nor do we think it's going to be as severe as it was in,say, 1973 and 1974. We have some things operating in our favor itseems to me. For example, inventories are in much better shape thenthey were. The construction sector of the economy is not as importantas it once was. There are other sectors that provide a cushion forus. We have a fairly prevalent underground economy, which seems to befunctioning pretty well. There are also some built-in structural[elements] in the economy in our favor: We have the food stampprogram, the trade assistance program, supplemental benefits,unemployment compensation, and so on. Moreover, at the present timeinterest rates are coming down, particularly on mortgages, which I-24-5/20/80think is going to foster a rebound in that sector of the economy andalso perhaps in the auto industry as we get lower rates there. Sothere are [developments] in the economy that are going to help us inthe long run, and my concern is with the long run and not the shortrun. We have had a couple of months with very low monetary aggregategrowth or a decline, but only a few months. And I don't think weought to be bullied into acting too quickly because inflationcertainly is still a problem.Now, if the credit restraint program comes off, that's goingto [provide] greater impetus to consumer expectations. And inflationis still going to be with us. I think we're going to get a rebound inthe monetary aggregates in June and July. So for those reasons I hopethat the Committee will not overreact to the declines that haveoccurred and that we will take a more gradual approach to bringing thetargets back to their paths. Also, I don't interpret alternative A asa departure from our October 6 strategy. I think it does reflect thedesire to get back to our [monetary growth] paths but over a moregradual period of time. So I feel that alternative A is the betterapproach. Whether the 10 to 14 percent federal funds target is theway to achieve that, I don't know. I think a number a little lowerthan 10 percent might be in order. But we do have the option oflooking at that between meetings, as we have done in the past, andthat might be a desirable way to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly presents the perspective and views of Mr. Forrestal regarding the economy and possible actions to take.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Governor Rice" simply identifies a person without expressing any controversial opinion or conflicting views.


Passage number 208.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr.Chairman, I favor alternative B for thereasons that have been given by a number of people. I'd like toassure Governor Schultz that I'm still very much worried aboutinflation and hope that we will bring it under control. But at thistime I believe the risks of undershooting our targets are greater thanthe risks of overshooting. And I feel that if we adopt alternative Aand find in September or October that we are far short of our targets,then we will be in a position--if we take our targets seriously and Icertainly hope we do--of having to pump in reserves at a very rapidrate, thereby running the risk of giving the wrong impression againthat we're panicking and that we are moving too rapidly towardmonetary ease. For that reason, it makes much more sense to try toget back on target as early as possible. In this case, the earliestpractical time is September and I would hope that we could do it [bythen]. I'm also, at the same time, comfortable with the federal fundsconstraint of alternative B. I'm perfectly prepared to stay with a 9percent lower limit for the time being. And if that constraintprevents our reaching our targets as we move toward September, then Iwould be prepared to lower that 9 percent at the right time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is expressing his support for alternative B and explaining his reasoning behind it. He acknowledges the concerns about inflation but believes that the risks of undershooting the targets are greater. He also discusses the federal funds constraint and his willingness to lower it if necessary. Overall, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Solomon," without providing any additional information or indicating any conflicting opinions or differing views. Therefore, it does not present any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 210.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As a relative newcomer to this OpenMarket Committee, I've been struck by the very frequent reference tolosing our credibility if we don't stick to the targets. It seems tome, first of all, that the target is a range and that it's perfectlyappropriate to come in at any part of that range, if we can, ratherthan to zero in always on the midpoint. But the larger issue is thatwe seem to have a misunderstanding of what the Committee's October 6decision was. I thought the Chairman said publicly that there wouldbe somewhat more emphasis on targeting monetary aggregates and less on-25-5/20/80the.fed funds rate and that judgment would be used; there was not amechanistic formula. If that is a correct understanding of what hesaid, and if he was reflecting the decision of the Committee at thattime, then quite clearly some people in this Committee are not on linewith the public articulation of [that decision].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker disagrees with the frequent reference to sticking to the targets and suggests that coming in at any part of the range is appropriate. They also argue that there is a misunderstanding of the Committee's October 6 decision and suggest that some people in the Committee are not on the same page.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to be accurate the phrase used in therelease was "more emphasis," not "somewhat more emphasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply clarifies the phrase used in a release, without introducing any contradictory information or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 212.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, I stand corrected but I thinkmy point is still a correct one. You did say that it was not amechanistic formula and that judgment would be used. Now, in a worldwhere there is so much uncertainty, I recognize that there is a goodpossibility that we will undershoot but there's also a goodpossibility that we will overshoot. I don't believe the FederalReserve System is so different from any person or institution in thepolicymaking arena that they should ignore the importance [of themaxim] that in a world where there is great uncertainty the prudentthing to do is to move gradually.Larry Roos said that our commitment was to gradual changes inthe money supply, although his recommendation was to use the fasterpath to get [back on track] by September. It seems to me that we needto consider the public's perception of us as central bankers, with aworld of great uncertainty on both sides. We need to maintain acertain public perception and level of confidence in what we are doingrather than make what others see as very major changes. We may thinkthat we are being consistent. But as Fred Schultz said, the outsideworld does not [understand] what we are doing in terms of this verysharp volatility. For us to move to supplying nonborrowed reserves--particularly since there's an assumption of virtually no borrowing ifalternative B is accepted--at roughly a 9 percent rate is completelyinconsistent with any responsibilities we have toward the long-runobjective on the money supply, which is our principal objective ascentral bankers. And, hopefully, there is a connection in terms ofthe rate of inflation. My understanding was that the Committee had asits long-run target a desire to edge down the money aggregate targetsas occasion permitted in order to achieve a long-run reduction in therate of inflation. I am concerned about our terms of reference in ourdiscussions here where everybody's position is completely predictable,including mine. And I frankly don't know how we break out of thissituation. But if there's no room for judgment--if it's going to beget back on path even [if reserves have to] increase at a rate of 9percent over the next few months, then it means with an assumption ofno borrowing that the Manager will be committed to achieving thenonborrowed reserve target. And he probably will achieve that. Thatwould not necessarily result in the aggregates behaving exactly inline, in proportion, but they will certainly go in that direction.The second point I want to make is: How can we expect to maintaininterest rates at lower than everybody's expectations regarding thelowest likely pace of inflation. There is nobody who assumes that therate of inflation is going to be below 10 percent even by the end ofthe year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and concerns about the Federal Reserve's actions and decision-making process, but there is no explicit disagreement with another party.


Passage number 213.
MR. PARTEE. I think it will be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements that could be interpreted as contention or disagreement.


Passage number 214.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, then I take it back. There isone person. Even Bill Miller said that he would hope to get it down-26-5/20/80to 10 percent by the end of the year. And we're talking aboutmaintaining short-term rates at lower than the rate of inflation.What is going to be the reaction of long rates, which have the biggestimpact on the real economy, if there's no confidence in the Fed as theguardian of monetary prudence and a strong anti-inflationary effort.We're going to get a perverse reaction. When we raised short-termrates as part of the November 1st package, there was a greaterconfidence that the Fed was coming to grips with the problem ofinflation, and long rates actually declined. If there is a widespreadperception that we are running a short-term interest rate policy withrates significantly below the rate of inflation, I think we're goingto have a perverse reaction in the long markets. And that will have amore damaging effect on the real economy. So, I would hope that theCommittee would opt for a more gradual approach in this area of greatuncertainty. Therefore, I would urge that we adopt alternative A orsomething lower than the midpoint area. And I would hope that wewould not endorse a fed funds rate floor which is significantly belowthe rate of inflation, as some people here have suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and hopes for a more gradual approach and a rate that is not significantly below the rate of inflation.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey, are you the last one here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Mr. Guffey if he is the last person to arrive.


Passage number 216.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, it's fortunate, I think, because TonySolomon just synthesized my feelings both for moving somewhatgradually and for building stability. I would also point out only asan addendum to what he said that if we [adopt] alternative A andshorten the horizon to September, if the estimates are right, by theend of September we would be above the lower bands of M-1A and M-1B,and that to me is an acceptable performance. I also feel ratherstrongly--and the argument has already been made--about people'sperceptions if the federal funds rate is allowed to go much below theperceived rate of inflation for the remainder of the year. But itpoints up again what I believe to be the operating reality: If wehave no borrowings whatever, the bottom of the funds range that we settoday will be a constraint if at any time within the next week or twothe staff finds that the projections are not quite as strong as thoseput forth in the Bluebook. So, we'd really almost be choosing a lowerfederal funds constraint wherever we set that. I would opt to set itnot much below the 10 percent level. Thus, I would like to adoptalternative A--and maybe it will [get us] back to path by September--recognizing that if the staff is right we'll be within the rangeestablished for the year as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with a previous statement and offering additional points to support their position.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gainor, do you have two words you wantto say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking Mr. Gainor if he has two words he wants to say.


Passage number 218.
MR. GAINOR. Mount St. Helens has covered the Ninth Districtwith [inorganic] ash but it hasn't wiped us out yet, Mr. Chairman. Wefavor adherence, as closely as possible, to the money supply targetsset by this Committee previously. We think they were reasonabletargets in the long-range [plan to reduce] inflation, and we'd like tosee them followed. We would favor alternative A as a means of gettingthere and we would widen the range for the funds rate. We would favordissolution of the credit restraint program as early as it canreasonably be done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the opinions and preferences of Mr. Gainor.


Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, let's drink coffee quickly. I won'tdeprive you completely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to drink coffee quickly and reassuring the listener that they will not be completely deprived of it.


Passage number 220.
-27-5/20/80[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me see if I can sort this out abit. We've done a lot of talking about the risks in the situation,and they undoubtedly exist. The obvious risk is the presence ofrecession, and when that [occurs] one always has the feeling of beingin a bottomless period. Indeed, there is a certain degree of riskthat we are in a more bottomless period than we would expect or liketo be in. We have the risks of the exchange market situation. I willonly mention that; those risks are fairly obvious. I don't think wecan deal with them. I don't have any confidence that we can deal withthem through intervention anyway. I have nothing against intervention[in principle], but I have no confidence that we can sit here andescape responsibility or concern by saying that we can intervenebecause intervention is not going to take care of the situation fullyif it really develops in an adverse way. I repeat: That is not aprejudice against intervention, particularly at the right point, whichis probably about now--before [the situation] deteriorates, or earlierrather than later in an effort to maintain a feeling of stability [inthe foreign exchange markets]. And we have the risk of inflation thatFred Schultz talked of eloquently. That's not a risk; it's here. Itaffects psychology. I think [the psychology] has improved somewhat,and it will affect how well we're going to do in coming out of thisrecession.I think we ought to recognize that we're in a situation thathas impossible aspects to it. There is nothing we can do here byfiddling around with either interest rates or the money supply, forinstance, to reduce consumer indebtedness, which is very high. Andthat is undoubtedly affecting consumer behavior at the moment, apartfrom all the [credit control] programs that we have. And there isnothing we can do about the fact that the saving rate is very low andthat there may be efforts to move it higher, and that's related to theindebtedness situation. I'm not even sure in some longer-rangeperspective that there's anything we should do about it because we'vebeen complaining about the saving rate being too low. The carindustry has problems of its own. They couldn't sell rear-wheel drivecars even when credit was available and people wanted to buy cars.All I'm saying is that we're not going to solve the world's problemsby what we do here. It doesn't mean our judgments are not important,but we're living in a difficult period with problems on all sides ofus. We have to evaluate how those various risks impinge upon eachother. When I look at all these risks, what impresses me is that thegreatest risk in the world is not whether we miss our targets or not.I don't want to miss our targets, but we have to put that inperspective of what is going on in the rest of the world. I don'tthink we can avoid some judgment about what we should do to minimizethose risks. We can't escape them. But I don't consider it a fullanswer to say we set down a target some time ago and we've got to hitthe midpoint of that target, as much as I would like to do that ingeneral.There has been a certain amount of discussion of the creditrestraint program. I think that program probably is having someeffect; it's very hard to [quantify]. I want to get out of it myself.I've spoken to that point publicly. It's a question of how to do itboth substantively and, in terms of our general posture, gracefully.I would expect some movement on that very shortly. I would make one-28-5/20/80other general point: I get comments sometimes from outsiders and frominsiders that if we take some action--let's say we remove all of thecredit restraint program tomorrow and we drive the interest rate downto 5 percent--and if we explain to the market that that's really atight money policy, then all the psychological implications will begone. I want to tell you that it just isn't possible. I'm not goingto cure in a speech what we do in substance. There are concerns aboutthe direction of policy and there's a lot of confusion. I'm notsaying speeches aren't important or statements aren't important. Butpeople who want to believe black aren't going to believe white when wemake a speech. A sense that we're giving up will contribute to higherinterest rates rather than lower interest rates in the long-term area.And what happens to the monetary aggregates may have something to dowith that, too. I'll just give you a case in point. I did make aspeech last week in which I said the money supply, I hoped, would goup. I had expected it to go up; I had in mind that we probably wouldbe pushing it up if nothing else happened. And interest ratespromptly went up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 221.
MS. TEETERS. So did the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "So did the money supply."


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I knew the money supply was going togo up for a week when I made the speech. But I thought the reactionwe were going to get from that increase in the money supply was goingto be an increase in interest rates in the short run. That's partlywhy I said it. [I figured] we might as well get it in reaction to thespeech instead of in reaction to the number. All I'm saying is thatthe market is going to react in its own way to some extent regardlessof what we say, however important what we say is. Just don't be underany illusions that we can reverse attitudes by making a statement.When we look at the more specific decisions we have to make,I would just make a couple of comments that I think perhaps were notadequately reflected in the earlier comments. Presumably these rangesthat are set down and their accompanying federal funds rate rangesreflect our best professional judgment--I'm speaking in a corporate"we" now--as to what a consistent relationship is. I have expressedbefore my underlying skepticism about the accuracy of these kinds ofprojections. I have not lost my skepticism. All I say is that wedon't have much to go on in this area and this presumably is the bestjudgment that Mr. Axilrod and his cohorts have made about what levelof the federal funds rate is consistent with the targets that he'spresented.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and skepticism, but there is no disagreement with anyone else's viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 223.
 Secondly,--MR. PARTEE. Following up on April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

This is evident from the interruption by "MR. PARTEE" after the word "Secondly" and the phrase "Following up on April." This suggests that MR. PARTEE has a different perspective or opinion on the matter being discussed, which indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Having made the best judgment, that'sexactly right. I yield to nobody in my skepticism about these things.I am equally skeptical of anyone else's projections--maybe even moreso, if that's possible. The point has been made by several peoplethat the ranges are in fact ranges. Nobody has ever committed, at theextreme, to meeting the midpoint of a range. The thing thatpreoccupies me a little here--and I recognize that this is also thestaff's best professional judgment--is that the M2 and M3 figures arenot as bad, in the sense of a decline, as are the M1 figures. We'vebeen putting an awful lot of weight on M1 because we get it weekly andit's a more immediate operating variable. But we used to do an awfullot of talking about how important M2 and M3 were; and a lot of people-29-5/20/80thought they were more significant [than Ml]. I suspect, if we arerelaying suspicions, that if have growth in M1 of the magnitudeindicated in the Bluebook for either of the [alternatives], thatgrowth of M2 is going to be higher than growth of Ml. But they're[projected to be] practically the same. I suspect, particularly if itdoes turn out that interest rates are lower, that there could be quitean inflow into savings forms that would produce a somewhat higherfigure for M2 than for Ml. And we don't have to do all that muchbetter on M2 and M3 to be within our ranges. In fact, M3 is projectedto be within its range in May.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their skepticism about projections and discussing the importance of different monetary figures. They are discussing their own thoughts and suspicions, but there is no disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 225.
MR. AXILROD. I should add, Mr. Chairman, that our long-runforecast, of course, is for interest rates not to be lower butactually to edge up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of disagreement or contention. It simply states the long-run forecast for interest rates to edge up, which does not suggest any conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. So, these may well be consistentunder that kind of projection of interest rates. But if interestrates in fact turned out to be lower, which is the gut instinct of anumber of people around the table and a gut instinct that I canunderstand, I think we're going to find that M2 and M3 are runningbetter than shown in the projection. We could clearly end up in asituation where M2 and M3 are pretty much, let's say, around themidpoints of their ranges and M1 is running quite soft. I don't knowhow one reconciles that even if our targeting allows for [differing]weights and all we look at is the targets. We have to balance thedesirability of meeting these targets against some sense of what theattitudes are toward what we're doing in the short run and over time.That has been amply discussed by various people already, and we havecome out with somewhat conflicting views about what that means forpolicy.I'm told that you have a revised first-quarter GNP figure,Mr. Kichline, which you might as well throw into the conversation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions conflicting views about what certain projections mean for policy, indicating a disagreement or contention among the individuals involved.


Passage number 227.
MR. KICHLINE. The revisions came out this morning. TheCommerce Department had previously indicated that real GNP rose 1.1percent in the first quarter; they now indicate the rise was 0.6percent. Final purchases are roughly the same at a 1-1/2 percent rateof increase. And now there is indicated to have been a smallliquidation of inventories in contrast to a small accumulation. Iwould only note that the composition has changed a fair amount, but ingeneral final purchases are where we thought and inventories are a bitlower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting revised data and providing a summary of the changes.


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure that that really changesanything. Maybe it's good that inventories are a little lower. I dothink, in making a specific decision, that we have a technical problemin the sense that we are in unknown territory when we are dealing withthe possibility at least that we're not going to have any borrowings,which is about where we are at the moment. In one sense, I supposethat could be an advantage. If we don't have any borrowing, we knowthat the nonborrowed reserves are going to be the reserves. And if weput out the reserves, presumably the money supply should follow--overlooking a few multiplier difficulties and all the rest--in time.But it also creates the problem that we may have a vacuum in themarket for the federal funds rate between wherever we are and zero.And the question arises as to whether we really want a vacuum between10 percent and zero. Nobody [has proposed] going quite that far.5/20/80Well, Mr. Roos came pretty close; we could at least split thedifference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of potential advantages and disadvantages of a specific decision, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 229.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't specify [a fed funds range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. More than one may not have specified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 231.
MR. PARTEE. I think zero is a bit of a possibility, unlesswe constrain the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a personal opinion expressed by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The point of this is that there is a goodchance that at least in some weeks--for more than an isolated week assome of you [have suggested]--the lower end of the federal funds rangewill become a constraining influence on the speed with whichnonborrowed reserves are provided.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 233.
 That depends in part, of course,on precisely where the path is set in the short run, and these tableson page 7 aren't very enlightening in that respect because the--MR. MAYO. I suppose also we could cut the discount rate, Mr.Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It discusses the potential factors that could influence the path and acknowledges the lack of information provided in the tables. The mention of cutting the discount rate is more of a suggestion or addition to the discussion rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, I'm not even sure how relevantthat becomes in these circumstances. We just don't know. I don'tknow whether or not $1 billion of excess reserves and a 13 percentdiscount rate will give us a federal funds rate of 7 percent insteadof zero. We really are in an area of unknown relationships at themoment. I would judge that nobody is going to be very concerned if M1or any of the Ms increased quite rapidly in the short run. I'mthinking of the situation where we have a higher increase in the moneysupply than currently projected over the next few weeks and it mightbe incorporated in a path that ran through September or December,whatever point we picked. If we began in the short run to run abovethat path and we mechanically applied [our procedures], we would drivethe federal funds rate up in the short run. As I interpret thediscussion, [we would not want our decision] to lead to that kind ofconclusion. That is, if we can pick up some money supply in the shortrun without raising interest rates, nobody is going to be very sadabout that. I'm not sure that's going to happen, but if it does, Idon't think people want [to see rates rising]. I don't know what thatsays about the top end of the funds range. But in that event I don'tthink people are contemplating that the federal funds rate would go upto 14 percent, the top of the range as set forth here, even though avery literal path approach might produce that result. Maybe I justought to pause and see whether that's a common agreement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is the speaker's own analysis and speculation about the potential effects of certain factors on the federal funds rate.


Passage number 235.
MR. PARTEE. The question is: What do we do with that $850million shortfall in reserves. That's money in the bank, I might say.Do we first permit an $850 million increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about what to do with a $850 million shortfall in reserves.


Passage number 236.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's one way of putting it. In asense, that would make up [for] April and nobody would be muchdisturbed about it. Putting it extremely, I would begin to getdisturbed by an 18 percent increase in the money supply in one month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is expressing different perspectives or ways of looking at a situation, but there is no direct contradiction or conflict between them.


Passage number 237.
MR. WALLICH. And the associated move in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is simply stating a fact about the associated move in the funds rate.


Passage number 238.
 Ifwe put in the $850 million regardless---31-5/20/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm not saying put it in regardless.I'm just saying if it happens to arise now. I don't think that'sgoing to happen and perhaps we don't have to look at that extreme.But in essence what I'm saying is that we would permit some of that$850 million to be made up without any concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion on a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 239.
MR. AXILROD. I would interpret that operationally, Mr.Chairman, as meaning that if it so happens that required reserves inthe first two or three weeks of this forthcoming period come insignificantly higher than these paths call for, that we should adjustthe nonborrowed path up, given that [earlier] shortfall, in order toavert a rise in the funds rate immediately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their interpretation of a situation and suggesting that a certain action should be taken to avoid a rise in the funds rate.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A rise in the funds rate of realsignificance anyway. I'm talking about it going up to 13 or 14percent or probably even 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is made without any conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 241.
 That's a--MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, are we as a Committee accepting theconclusion that we really see great dangers in freely rising andfreely falling interest rates. When interest rates went way up, didthat cause disorderly markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The use of phrases like "are we as a Committee" and "did that cause disorderly markets" suggests that there is disagreement or differing opinions among committee members regarding the dangers of freely rising and falling interest rates.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:
Based on what is provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually having the passage itself.


Passage number 243.
MR. ROOS. Did it really. Didn't the markets adjust to it.I hate to see the stock market go down or up. But why is thatdifferent than the interest rate markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a dislike for the stock market fluctuation and questioning the difference between the stock market and interest rate markets.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure I have to argue thatpoint at great length. What I'm saying, approaching it from adifferent direction, is that we don't have to resist some recoveryfrom the shortfall in the aggregates that we've already had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their perspective and stating that they don't need to argue the point extensively. They are discussing a potential recovery from a shortfall in aggregates.


Passage number 245.
MR. WALLICH. With all the concerns I have, I wouldn't wantto see interest rates jump up now. I think people, at least peopleabroad, would think that we've really gone haywire.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich expresses his concern about interest rates jumping up, indicating that he would not want to see this happen. He also mentions that people, especially those abroad, might perceive such a situation as going haywire. There is no counter-argument or opposing viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd have a different situation if we werewithin the target range or high in the range and the funds rate jumpedup. That's not the situation I'm talking about. Then we might wellsay okay, interest rates have to rise. But we've had a big shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage discusses a hypothetical situation and does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 247.
MR. ROOS. Do you feel in your contact with the public, Paul,that nobody out there knows that we are no longer trying to control orstabilize interest rates. Hasn't that message reached anyone overseasor here or anywhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 248.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it has reached quite a few people.But we have a skeptical audience out there. Some people would say, ifthey saw the money supply going up and interest rates went up: "Oh,your policy has gotten easier." They will pick whatever variable theywant to pick at the moment to attack us if they're skeptical to startwith. I don't think we can completely win in this game. I supposenobody attaches a very high probability to the contingency I justdescribed, but we constantly are surprised. And I think Steve'sconclusion from my general comment is probably what we would domechanically. We would just in effect start from a higher base,-32-5/20/80feeding out reserves within some limit--in a sense within the $850million that we're behind--should that happen.Before we get to the precise numbers, this does imply that ifwe operate on a path--let's say "A" or "B" at this point--and we don'thave any borrowings, our [instinct] is that if the actual Ms come inbelow whatever path is set, we may have some excess reserves and maybe pushing down the funds rate. The question then becomes: How fardo we want the funds rate pushed down. The differences between "A"and "B" are not all that great in terms of the short-term fluctuationswe [typically] have, or could easily be exceeded by randomfluctuations. The funds rate constraint may become much moreimportant than which precise path is chosen in the short run. But weare biasing the chances of meeting the bottom end of the funds range.I myself would not want to bias it strongly toward constantly runninginto excess reserves of big amounts if we can avoid it at this point,so that we're constantly operating on a funds rate constraint. Giventhat we're not forsworn to meet the midpoint of a range--and certainlygiven a feeling that if the funds rate goes down, M2 and M3 probablywill be stronger than projected and they are not all that far belowthe ranges now--I would not set the short-run M1 and M-1B targets ashigh as in "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing various scenarios and potential actions, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 249.
"MR. PARTEE. For the two months, for May-June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage is a fragment of a sentence and does not include any content that indicates contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 250.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just talking about May-June at thispoint. As everybody has indicated, the critical point is going to bethat funds rate constraint. We have the opportunity for consulting onthat as time passes but I want to get some general sense of what seemsappropriate at the moment. We've been operating at 10-1/2 percent;that's being threatened now. Given a balance of all the risks andforces, I think we're talking clearly about something below thepresent constraint. I feel that 10 percent is rather close to thepresent constraint and that we can live with a constraint lower thanthat. Whether we want to go all the way to 9 percent is a question ofhow much we want to consult. I would be concerned at the moment aboutgoing below 9 percent. I'd feel a little more comfortable, at leastfor an interim period, if we could adopt a technique [similar to what]we used at the last meeting by putting in 9 percent or something likethat with some understanding that if it went below the 9-1/2 to 10percent area, let's say, we could have a telephone check to discusswhether, or at least how promptly, we wanted to go to 9 percent. Ninepercent doesn't bother me particularly, and we have six weeks untilthe next meeting. That's a long period of time, and maybe we willwant the funds rate to go below 9 percent before that next meeting.But as a judgment sitting here at the moment, recognizing that we'reat 10-1/2 percent, I think 9 percent would be a pretty big move in themarket's perception. It may not be too big in terms of the objectivesfor the aggregates that we want to reach over a period of time. Thatmay be a reasonable answer: Putting in 9 percent now, recognizingthat it can always be changed with some check in the form of aconsultation when it's [somewhat] above 9 percent. Every time we'vehad these consultations we have withdrawn the funds rate constraint.I would think that is likely at these levels in the future, too, butit may be useful just to have the opportunity to check. We reallyhaven't had any [occasion] since last October where we have let thefederal funds constraint persist for any period of time. But thatdoes not mean that there isn't a certain amount of comfort, I suspect5/20/80to all of us, in taking a look at it when it passes some point that isconsidered significant to some of us or to all of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is discussing the appropriate level of the funds rate constraint, with some individuals indicating a preference for a lower rate and others expressing concerns about going below a certain threshold.


Passage number 251.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I interpret what you're recommendingto mean that we will take a look at it when it reaches 9-1/2 percentbefore a decision would be made to move down to 9 percent. Is thatwhat you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply seeking clarification and confirmation of a statement made.


Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. That is what I'm suggesting on thefunds rate. On the aggregates target, you now have a projection forMay and June of what specifically, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement about suggesting something regarding the funds rate and asking for specific projections for May and June.


Passage number 253.
MR. AXILROD. Of essentially 4 percent for May and 10 percentfor June--an average of 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That comes close, in one sense, toalternative A. That could be biased up a bit, but that's the actualprojection now. It may be consistent to bias that up a little interms of the federal funds constraint that we're talking about--tohave a higher federal funds constraint for a slightly higher targetthrough December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing different options and possibilities, without expressing any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 255.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman. Could I raise a question about thetarget range and the target itself. It's my understanding that whilewe set these targets in terms of ranges, we set our objective towardthe midpoint of the range, the implication being that if it got abovethe midpoint we'd be a little nervous and if it got below the midpointwe'd be nervous. I sense now some fudging of this objective of tryingto hit the midpoint of the range. I hear people say it's not themidpoint that's so important as long as we're within the range.That's not my understanding [of what we decided earlier].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is expressing his understanding and questioning a potential change in objective but does not encounter any opposition or disagreement from others.


Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can only answer for myself.Everybody probably has his own opinion; that's how we get agreement onranges. That midpoint is the central tendency of what we're lookingfor when we set the range. That doesn't say, now that it's fivemonths later--and, of course, we'll look at these ranges again inJuly--how individual members of the Committee may feel in the light ofwhat has happened in those five months. They could feel morecomfortable being in the upper half or the lower half or whatever.There is no feeling, certainly in my mind, that there is somethingmagic about keeping a precise midpoint as an absolute targetthroughout the year. Otherwise, we might as well just set a pointtarget and not even look at it in the middle of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their own opinion and acknowledging that others may have their own opinions as well. They also mention that there is no set rule or requirement to keep a precise midpoint as an absolute target throughout the year.


Passage number 257.
MR. RICE. I'd say it's a matter of the point at which onebegins to get nervous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Rice regarding the point at which one begins to get nervous.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say that, certainly, the monthafter we set the target almost any deviation would make one "a littlenervous," in your terms. But I don't think that's inconsistent withsomeone saying six months or eight months later that in the light ofeverything that has happened over those months, he might be nervousabout hitting the midpoint. He might prefer to be above it or hemight prefer to be below it. I don't remember the exact circumstancesbut I do remember that in October we said we wanted to come within therange. At that point we had in mind the upper end of the range, butnine months had passed [since we set the target for 1979]. And I-34-5/20/80don't think anybody, if they felt nervous at all, felt that being inthe upper part of the range was too high, even though it was the upperpart and not the midpoint of the range that had been set nine monthsearlier. I think that's natural.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 259.
MR. RICE. I was thinking about what we decided within thelast two or three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply mentioning that they have been thinking about a decision made in the past.


Passage number 260.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's true that in the last two or threemonths we've consistently thought the midpoint of the range remainedabout appropriate. There is a question now, after the big shortfallin April--a much bigger shortfall in M1 than M2 or M3. I don't viewit as a betrayal for somebody to say that under all the circumstanceshe'd now feel more comfortable with growth in the lower part of therange. Indeed, next month we get an opportunity to change the rangeentirely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions but there is no direct contradiction or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 261.
MR. WALLICH. This is the practice of most other centralbanks. They typically, though not always, state ranges; sometimesthey aim at the upper end and sometimes they aim at the lower end.The Swiss do it differently, but the British, the Canadians, and[unintelligible] use a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the practices of central banks and providing examples to support their statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
MR. PARTEE. It's done partly so there is a chance of beingwithin the range. If we have a point target, we're going to miss it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "If we have a point target, we're going to miss it" contradicts the assumption made by Mr. Partee that there is a chance of being within range when something is done partly.


Passage number 263.
MR. RICE. I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is presented as a statement of understanding without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 264.
MR. PARTEE. But it's also true that we can say that itdepends on circumstances where within the range we want to fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee is presenting a statement that is not subject to disagreement or contention. He is suggesting that the answer to a question depends on the specific circumstances, indicating a sense of variability rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 265.
MR. RICE. It's a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Rice has a question, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm saying that it's more than givingourselves a safety margin. We may change our emphasis as the yearpasses. Let me try to be more specific, just for operating purposes.I'm proposing setting a short-term range that is probably moreconsistent with "A" than with "B" for the next six weeks, but with acaveat which is more consistent with "B" than with "A." That is, ifthings developed in a way that Ml began exceeding that short-termrange, we would not resist it. We'd even go beyond the implied "B" inthe short run without forcing a significant level of borrowing underthose circumstances. It's an upwardly biased "A," so to speak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 267.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is that what you call being specific.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 268.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the presence of the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 269.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, doesn't the Desk have to know whatwe're shooting for in order to [operate]. Do they just sit there andsee what happens out in the wild blue yonder and then try to dosomething cosmetically to make it appear we've achieved that. Don'twe have to give the Desk certain specific instructions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos is questioning how the Desk operates and suggesting that they may not have clear instructions or goals.


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod will now interpret theinstructions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that Mr. Axilrod will now interpret the instructions.


Passage number 271.
5/20/80MR. AXILROD. Well, if I understood the Chairman correctly--and taking a number for purposes of an example--if the Committee saidto focus on May-June at something like a 7 percent growth for M-1A buttolerate higher growth in view of the [April] shortfall, we would seta total reserve path consistent with that 7 percent and a nonborrowedpath roughly equal to the total reserve path because borrowings are atminimal levels. If in the very short run deposits turned out to bestronger, we would raise the path because the Committee said it iswilling to tolerate stronger deposit growth. We wouldn't try to keepto this original path set on 7 percent if higher growth, within theCommittee's own tolerance ranges, suddenly began to develop. So, wewould raise the reserve path in order to [accommodate] that. On theother hand, if the aggregates turned out to be significantly weaker,we would not lower the reserve path. We'd still shoot at thenonborrowed and total reserve paths but that might then call thebottom of the funds rate range into question fairly promptly, whichwould require Committee [consultation].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 272.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may have constraints that areinconsistent when we complete the story, and Mr. Axilrod has justcompleted it in effect. We're saying: Provide enough reserves, whichwe can do reasonably accurately now because we don't have anyborrowings, to meet the base objective; we will tolerate an overshootof that. When we get to the undershoot question, we're going to beconstrained, potentially. If the actual level falls below that path,the question is whether we're going to be constrained by the [lowerlimit of the] federal funds range. On that I'm suggesting 9 percentwith a check at 9-1/2 percent. And it may well be that either anovershoot or an undershoot is going to run into a constraint that theCommittee will want to resolve. We do not have a set ofspecifications that permits the Manager to operate freely between themeetings without potentially running into an inconsistency. I expectwe will be better equipped to resolve an inconsistency later ratherthan now, should one arise. And one could quite well arise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 273.
MR. PARTEE. I think we're going to hit the funds rateconstraint this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal belief or opinion, without any indication of opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean by this statement week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This question is seeking clarification or confirmation of a statement rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 275.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, this coming week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in the coming week we might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or differing viewpoints.


Passage number 277.
MR. PARTEE. We'll be right down on 9 percent and we'll bebelow the target growth and will immediately face the problem. Wejust don't have any room, given the weakness in the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're making a guess about what isgoing to happen. That's not Mr. Axilrod's conclusion but you may beright. I won't say you're not right; it could well happen that way.If it does happen that first week, we have the constraint andpresumably at the end of the week we will have to face it. If weoperated a full week under the constraint, then we'd have to considerwhether we wanted to operate another week under the constraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that the guess made by the other person may be correct and expresses a willingness to consider the situation at hand.


Passage number 279.
MS. TEETERS. Wouldn't it be wiser to make the funds raterange wider, but with the idea that if it hit certain points we would-36-5/20/80consult before it goes down. Make it 8 to 14 percent so we'd have afull range of 6 percentage points. The presumption is that it's goingto go lower, not higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement from MS. TEETERS suggesting a possible course of action regarding widening the range of funds and consulting if it reaches certain points. There is no opposing viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, again, that's your presumption. Andit is the presumption of a lot of people around the table. It doesn'thappen to be the presumption of the people who [constructed] the table[in the Bluebook].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that others may hold a different view or presumption, but does not explicitly disagree or argue against it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 281.
 I tend to agree that it might happen at least in anumber of weeks, but I--MR. PARTEE. Paul, it seems to me that the whole idea ofmoving toward aggregates was to create a situation where we wouldn'thave to depend on presumptions. I'm not saying that Steve is wrongbut the whole idea of having a wider range is to make it possible toflex as developments occur, without depending on a staff forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Party disagrees with Steve's idea of moving toward aggregates in order to avoid depending on presumptions.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" is simply stating a title or position.


Passage number 283.
 Yes, but we've just--MR. PARTEE. I guess what you're saying is that you don'twant to flex below 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention because the speaker starts their response with "Yes, but", which implies a contrasting opinion or viewpoint.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That, I think, is the substantive issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply stating an opinion or belief without indicating any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 285.
MR. PARTEE. And I'm saying I do; so we're in fundamentaldisagreement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, states that he disagrees with someone else's viewpoint, indicating a fundamental disagreement between the two parties.


Passage number 286.
MR. MORRIS. But you also don't want to flex above 12 percentdo you, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply asking a question and seeking clarification from Paul.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not expressing any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It is providing a statement or information without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 288.
MR. MORRIS. So why have a band higher than 12 percent if wewouldn't tend to implement it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing curiosity about the topic.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a visual matter of which we want toput in. It's implicit in what I said earlier: Unless we have reallyexplosive growth in the money supply, we're not going to resist it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is stating a matter of personal preference and making a conditional statement based on a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 290.
MR. BLACK. We have very little basis for knowing where thelower level ought to be, or the upper level really. The problem islikely to be on the lower end, but it could be on the upper end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the lack of knowledge regarding the lower and upper level. It acknowledges the possibility of the problem being on either end.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's going to be a while before it's theupper end if we adopt the bias that I suggested. It has to be severalweeks anyway, I suspect. It would take a couple of weeks of $5billion increases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating a timeframe and potential amount of increase.


Passage number 292.
MR. BLACK. That's probably right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black seems to agree with the statement made.


Passage number 293.
 I'd hate to see us narrowthat, though, while we had an 8-1/2 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The substantive issue is how low one isprepared to see the funds rate go, or how high--though [not] manypeople think the latter is a real problem--in the particularcircumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The author simply mentions that they would hate to see a narrow approach to the issue of the funds rate, and acknowledges that there are differing opinions on how low or high the rate should be. However, this is not presented as a disagreement or argument.


Passage number 294.
MR. MORRIS. The advantage of your [proposed] checkpoint isthat we will have a chance to observe how the foreign exchange markets-37-5/20/80are responding and how the data are coming in. And we do have a longperiod between meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply highlights the advantage of having a proposed checkpoint to observe foreign exchange markets and data.


Passage number 295.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, in that one week that might elapseprior to our consulting, couldn't a lot of potentially damaging workbe done by the Desk. In other words, if they're bumping against thebottom end [of the funds range], couldn't they be pulling out reservesand couldn't that exacerbate the recession and make us look bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a concern about the potential negative consequences of a certain action, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented or contradicted.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon your view--whether youthink we're going to look bad if the federal funds rate drops to 6percent one week and goes up to 9 percent the next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It depends upon your view" indicates that there are differing perspectives on the potential consequences of the federal funds rate dropping to 6 percent and then increasing to 9 percent. Some may think that it would make the situation look bad, while others may disagree.


Passage number 297.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we have had a run of minus numbers on theaggregates. I'm inclined to agree with Larry. Adding another week tothe extreme rate of decline will make us look much more like the OpenMarket Committee of 1930.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. MR. PARTEE agrees with Larry's idea of adding another week to the extreme rate of decline.


Passage number 298.
MR. WALLICH. I think Tony Solomon's point about not gettingthe interest rate below the rate of inflation is relevant, even thoughwe are talking about the funds rate. Also, even though I realize allof us don't have a vote on this [Committee], I think you should beaware that the International Monetary Fund in its consultations withthe U.S. [representatives] criticized us for the rapid declines ininterest rates and also for going to rates that, as they said, are inall probability no longer positive in real terms. They said thatwould seem inappropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich agrees with Tony Solomon's point about not lowering the interest rate below the rate of inflation and also shares information about the International Monetary Fund's criticism of the rapid declines in interest rates.


Passage number 299.
 So that is a judgment of technicallyoriented people who believe that we should not go--MR. PARTEE. Come on, you mean [unintelligible] said it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention in the passage. The speaker is merely questioning the validity of the statement made by technically-oriented people, but there is no direct disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 300.
MR. WALLICH. We are members of this institution, and theyapply the same rules to everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the application of rules to everyone in a particular institution.


Passage number 301.
MR. PARTEE. I understand they also told us that we shouldcertainly achieve our aggregates objectives. They're just like theJoint Economic Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "they" (referring to an unspecified group or organization) informed "us" (referring to the listener) about the achievement of objectives.


Passage number 302.
MR. WALLICH. We can't ignore completely what others say ofus because there are two sides to every exchange rate--our side andthe others. This was a judgment that these people made, just as itcould be the judgment of other people abroad, [because there are]consequences for the dollar and consequences for inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the importance of considering what others say about the exchange rate and recognizes that different judgments can be made.


Passage number 303.
MR. SCHULTZ. Amazingly enough, I find myself somewhere inbetween Governor Partee and Governor Wallich.SPEAKER(.). You could still be wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only expresses a personal opinion and a potential counterargument without any conflict or confrontation.


Passage number 304.
MR. SCHULTZ. I really am in the morass. They're on themountain tops and I'm down in the swamp. What is the big differenceamong us if we're going to consult at 9-1/2 or 9 percent. I don'tunderstand what the big deal is on whether we set the lower constraintat 9-1/2 or 9 or 8 percent. If we're going to consult each time, whycan't we change it to 9 or 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion about why there is a big debate over whether to set the lower constraint at 9-1/2, 9, or 8 percent. They are unsure why this is a significant issue if they will be consulting each time anyway.


Passage number 305.
MS. TEETERS. There's a six-week [intermeeting] period. Andit seems to me of great value to keep that range fairly wide because-38-5/20/80then the unanticipated things will be automatically caught by themarket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 306.
MR. SCHULTZ. If you use that argument, you're not acceptingthe consultation part. If you accept the consultation part, I don'tknow why it makes such a difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement of logical reasoning and questioning the reason behind a certain difference in behavior.


Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I'm talking with historicalaccuracy when I say that since October it has not made any differencewhat the federal funds range was, in fact, except that it triggeredconsultation. Consultation has been triggered either by informalunderstanding or by the actual range put in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is expressing an opinion or belief without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 308.
MR. ROOS. May we ask Mr. [Sternlight] whether that's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for clarification, therefore there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 309.
I'm not questioning what--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying that it couldn't [make adifference] in the future, but historically it has not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something may make a difference in the future, but it has not made a difference historically.


Passage number 310.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It seems to me that when we had a 20 percenttop, we were a little eager at times to put some reserves in when wewere getting very close to that top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Sternlight's observation.


Passage number 311.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think at the 20 percent top it had someinfluence. No consultation was called at one point. [The directive]called for putting the funds rate up to 20 percent and we just left itthere. That's the clearest case, at the top, when [a consultation]was not called.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a statement about the influence and lack of consultation regarding a specific directive. It does not involve conflicting viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 312.
MR. PARTEE. Well, [we stopped] at 10-1/2 percent. Over thelast two weeks we were way short on reserves and we stopped [supplyingadditional reserves] on account of the 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts about reserves and interest rates.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were [not] short of the path at thattime, I don't think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 314.
MR. AXILROD. Well, clearly, we would have had to call aconsultation on Thursday or Friday if a meeting weren't scheduled fortoday. We had a consultation the week before and that range thenbecame a limiting factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean to suggest that these rangesnever were a limiting factor for a few days. I'm saying that as soonas they became a limiting factor for a few days we had a consultationand we changed [the range], with the possible exception of that 20percent situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a series of events or actions that were taken.


Passage number 316.
 We would have had a consultation if the 20 percentrate had lasted for another few days, I think, but the rate turned[down] before--MS. TEETERS. Yes, but at 13 percent we raised it last time[from] 11 to 13 percent and went a couple of days with the 13 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a scenario and discusses a change in interest rates.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I say, we've gone a couple of days--three or four days at times or maybe a whole week--where the range hashad some influence. Eventually we've had a consultation and the rangehas been changed. I don't mean to suggest it hasn't had someinfluence in the short run. All I'm saying is that when it has had aconstraining influence long enough to [trigger] a consultation, we-39-5/20/80have changed it. It may well have an influence this time, but whatwe're talking about is an influence for a week and then having aconsultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the range has had some influence in the short run, but when it has had a constraining influence for a longer period of time, they have changed it through a consultation.


Passage number 318.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I don't know if this would behelpful to Governor Teeters, but perhaps she's worrying that if thebottom of the range were stipulated at 9 percent rather than 8 percentit might be an inhibiting factor in the speed with which we approachthe bottom of the range. I don't think it would affect operations.That is, we wouldn't try to hold the rate at 9-1/2 percent because thebottom of the range was 9 as compared with 8 percent. We'd go aheadand provide reserves until we hit the bottom and we'd have aconsultation. It wouldn't inhibit the process of getting there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their view and understanding of the situation, but there is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean to suggest at all that theselimits, if we ran into them, would not be effective for some daysuntil we consult. I'm just saying that every time we've had aconsultation we have in fact changed the range. The history is one ofnot sticking to these ranges between meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing opinions or conflicting views. It simply states the history of changing ranges after consultations without any contention.


Passage number 320.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I'm reacting to Frank's point that if wevote [for a lower limit] too close to the 10-1/2 percent, we would begoing back too rigidly to setting interest rate targets. I thinkmarket conditions are such that the market is more or less going tooverride us at some point, so we might as well have the leeway to ridewith the market even if we consult on every half point as the rategoes down on whether we want it to move down that next half point. Ijust think we would look better with a wider range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a wider range for interest rate targets, but there is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 321.
MR. BLACK. The range is being narrowed from [6 points] toeither 5 or 4 points, which is a whale of narrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is an observation or statement of fact about narrowing the range from 6 points to either 5 or 4 points. It does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're talking pure cosmetics--whatappears in the record of this meeting. We're not talking about purecosmetics when we're talking about what the bottom of the range shouldbe because that may become the effective rate and we're going to havea consultation to see whether we want to change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are discussing what appears in the record of the meeting and clarifying that they are not discussing cosmetics when talking about the bottom of the range. They mention a future consultation to determine if any changes are desired.


Passage number 323.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I'd rather have the cosmetics look rightand have a wider range and have an understanding that there is a touchpoint that we wouldn't go through without a consultation, if Murraywill let us do that short of recording it in the Policy Record.SPEAKER(.). Somebody tells me this is being tape recorded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 324.
MR. ALTMANN. We have in the past had some reference [in thePolicy Record] to the notion of a consultation but I think if [theunderstanding] were so specific as to be a checkpoint, it probablyought to be in the Policy Record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Altmann's opinion about the inclusion of a specific understanding as a checkpoint in the Policy Record.


Passage number 325.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We actually did specifically have that.Was it for the last meeting or the previous meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification on which meeting was being referred to.


Passage number 326.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given excerpt does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 327.
 We didn't have a figure in the last--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't remember [if it was] this lastmeeting or the meeting before, but we were rather specific about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they cannot recall whether the specific figure was discussed in the last meeting or the meeting before.


Passage number 328.
-40-5/20/80MR. ALTMANN. Yes.SPEAKER(.). We did it differently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 329.
MR. PARTEE. Let me retract the word checkpoint. Can we saythere's a zone through which we would not wish to pass withoutconsidering together the implications of such a passage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a change in wording and proposing a collaborative approach towards discussing the implications of passing through a certain zone.


Passage number 330.
MR. SCHULTZ. Would you refer to this as the twilight zone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question and does not involve any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 331.
MR. AXILROD. I think if the Committee indicates as it passesthrough that zone that it doesn't see a need to change the fundamentalrange, Mr. Altmann might not view it as a vote that needs to bereported.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod is expressing a hypothetical situation and suggesting a possible interpretation of someone named Mr. Altmann's viewpoint.


Passage number 332.
MR. ALTMANN. That has been the practice. I think if it getsto be regular, it probably should be a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It is simply stating a practice and expressing a personal opinion about a potential future action.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that is the difference. When wedid it the other time, we did not vote. We had a consultation withouta vote, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a difference between two situations without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 334.
MR. ALTMANN. It was April 29th, wasn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about a specific date without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 335.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, [when the funds rate was] at 16 percentthe Committee met and, though it met, it decided [to retain the rangein] the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the Committee met and decided to retain the range in the directive.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, we didn't have a vote. Ithink that is the difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states a fact and then expresses an opinion about it. There is no contention or disagreement conveyed.


Passage number 337.
MR. PARTEE. And there was no vote on the 16 percent, as amatter of fact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that there was no vote on the 16 percent.


Passage number 338.
 It was just an understanding that at 15 or 16percent, whatever it was--MS. TEETERS. 16.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 339.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the provided excerpt "MR. ALTMANN" does not provide sufficient context to make a judgment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 340.
 The point at which the consultation--MR. WALLICH. Why don't you let individual members of theCommittee call you when they think that Chuck's zone is beingapproached. And when more than half have called, you can call aconsultation.SPEAKER(.). What if he can't be reached, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. MR. WALLICH suggests that individual members of the Committee call when they think a certain zone is being approached, while the SPEAKER raises a question about what to do if MR. WALLICH cannot be reached.


Passage number 341.
MR. ALTMANN. The rules of procedure provide that threemembers can request that a meeting be called.SPEAKER(.). Three members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a provision in the rules of procedure.


Passage number 342.
MR. SCHULTZ. He'll spend all his time on the phone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Schultz will spend all his time on the phone. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention between two or more parties.


Passage number 343.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, if I understand the way we haveoperated in the past, if we have a consultation and the rate is withinthe range established by the Committee, then no vote is taken at thatconsultation. Isn't that correct, Murray.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Guffey is seeking clarification on a procedural matter and not expressing disagreement or contention with anyone.


Passage number 344.
5/20/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's what it amounts to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think that's what it amounts to" indicates that the speaker is expressing their own personal opinion or summary of something without any indication of disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 345.
MR. ALTMANN. There doesn't need to be a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Altmann is stating that a vote is not necessary.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 346.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I don't believe there ever has been one.There has only been a vote when we've lowered or raised the range fromwhat the Committee set at the meeting. Therefore, I would be opposedto setting a range now with a lower limit below 9 percent. And Iwould also like the caveat the Chairman has put forth that there beconsultation at 9-1/2 percent. At this point I feel fairly stronglythat a federal funds rate below 9 percent would not be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is opposed to setting a range with a lower limit below 9 percent and states that a federal funds rate below 9 percent would not be acceptable. This contrasts with any potential arguments for setting a lower limit below 9 percent or considering a federal funds rate below 9 percent.


Passage number 347.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I think it's more than the process.There is a very fundamental issue at this stage. The way this meetingis going and the way opinion is apparently evolving, we are gettingright back to setting interest rate ranges and the stabilization ofinterest rates, and I could not go along with that. I think we'returning the corner, all for the worse, to right back where we were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion on the direction of the meeting and their disagreement with it.


Passage number 348.
MR. GUFFEY. There is no compromise, either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey simply states that there is no compromise, without any opposing viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 349.
MR. ROOS. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos is simply agreeing with or acknowledging whatever was said before this statement.


Passage number 350.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will unquestionably have a differenceof opinion at that end of the table, anyway. But I think we've got toresolve it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely states that there will be a difference of opinion, but it is necessary to resolve it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 351.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, there's another question we need todeal with, and that is whether we mention specific short-run numericaltargets in the directive. If we narrow the ranges and don't mentionany targets, it's going to be viewed as more than cosmetic when peoplefind that out. I think they will conclude essentially what Larry hasstated. I would urge us to put down whatever we agree to in the wayof numerical targets rather than leave that blank and specify merelythe federal funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Black is advocating for the inclusion of specific numerical targets in the directive, while others may have a different opinion on the matter.


Passage number 352.
MR. PARTEE. We have been doing that, haven't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement acknowledging the actions that have been taken.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 353.
MR. BLACK. Yes we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 354.
MR. MORRIS. [I thought] 7 percent growth in M-1A was thetarget.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a thought or assumption, and there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a [draft] directive that iswritten in more general language. I'm not sure I'm completely happywith it but I can't think of an alternative. Mr. Axilrod could notthink of an alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of satisfaction with the current draft directive but is not stating or opposing any alternative options.


Passage number 356.
 If someone has a bright idea, we can--MR. AXILROD. The alternative was to put down 7 percent, say,if that's what you voted for. It would be stated in the Policy Recordvery clearly that 7 percent was the target but that you would permitsome overshoot. Our thought behind not putting specifically in thedirective a number for growth over a two- or three-month period wasthat it would be better understood in the Policy Record where it wouldbe surrounded by the analysis of the shortfall and all that. So wetried to phrase the directive to reflect what we thought the Committeemight be trying to do in general, which was to [foster an increase]back into its range, and leave the specificity to the Policy Record.5/20/80We could put the specifics back in there, and they'd appear at thesame time [as the directive was released as part of the PolicyRecord.].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the thought process behind not including specific numbers in the directive and instead leaving them to be included in the Policy Record.


Passage number 357.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The presumption was that the specificsthat Steve had in mind would be in the Policy Record. The alternativewas putting in at least 7 to 7-1/2 percent [in the directive] and somelanguage saying that we'd tolerate some growth above that. Now, we'retalking about the period before the next meeting only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two options without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 358.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's the other thing that bothered me alittle because [that would cover] only two months and that seemed likea very short period to focus on particular aggregates. It gives asense of short-run control over the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal concern or hesitation about a specific topic, but there is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 359.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose we could say just what you havehere: "In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion of reserveaggregates consistent with growth of M-1A...." Maybe we should leaveout the "over a period of months." And then we can say that in theperiod before the next meeting, or over the two months, the aim willbe to achieve growth of at least 7 to 7-1/2 percent with sometolerance for growth above that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a suggested course of action for the Committee and proposes a specific goal for growth.


Passage number 360.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's a bad precedent to startbeing that specific in the public record. I'm not arguing now for anyparticular policy. I'm just talking in terms of the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion on keeping records specific in the long run.


Passage number 361.
MR. PARTEE. We're going to miss it, you know, one way or theother.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement as it only expresses a shared sentiment or concern about missing something.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker, without providing any information about his statements or actions that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 363.
 We might miss it and, of course--MR. PARTEE. We could say: "...seeks expansion over the nexttwo months of M-1A, M-1B and M2 at rates high enough to promoteachievement of the Committee's long-run objectives." It implieshigher growth than the long-run targets without being at all specificabout it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing a potential statement that could be made regarding the expansion of M-1A, M-1B, and M2, but they do not express any disagreement or contention with the statement.


Passage number 364.
MR. BLACK. We can say "growth over the first nine months of1980" or something like that, essentially what we've done in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement from Mr. Black about a suggested phrase or approach, without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 365.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I vote for keeping Steve's language.I think we'll get into less trouble later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their personal opinion and supports keeping Steve's language, believing it will help avoid trouble in the future.


Passage number 366.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it's really not at all specific.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the topic being discussed is not specific.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was your language, Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a straightforward question asking about the language Governor Partee speaks.


Passage number 368.
MR. PARTEE. "Seeks growth in these aggregates over the nexttwo months at rates high enough to promote achievement of theCommittee's longer run objectives." Then we could [cite] the monetarygrowth over the first nine months of the year, or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a possible way to support the achievement of the Committee's longer-term objectives by citing the monetary growth over the first nine months of the year.


Passage number 369.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without further context. The term "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" by itself does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 370.
 We'd have to put in some modifier aboutover what period of time, because otherwise it would sound as if inthe next two months we are going to---43-5/20/80MR. AXILROD. Well, to seek growth over the next two monthsat a rate high enough to promote achievement of the Committee's long-run objectives implies the whole year. Or you could go to a nine-month [figure]. We were trying to avoid deciding at this pointwhether you were getting back in the range by September or December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod suggests considering a longer time period (the whole year or nine months) to seek growth, while the speaker wants to avoid deciding when the range will be reached by September or December.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe it ought to be modified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any conflicting or contrasting ideas. It suggests a possible change or adjustment, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 372.
MR. PARTEE. I think we ought to be specific and say "promoteits longer-run objectives for the year" or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a specific wording for stating the longer-run objectives for the year.


Passage number 373.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's what we had in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply confirming that the statement mentioned aligns with their intentions.


Passage number 374.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody has a gut feeling. My gutfeeling is that we're going to find M2 and M3 coming up better than Mlin terms of the targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 375.
MS. TEETERS. Well, they did when the money supply wasrunning so fast last summer. They've been within their targets allalong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the money supply being within its targets.


Passage number 376.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M3 has touched the upper end and the lowerend, but has remained well within the [band] on average, which is morethan M1 has done. Well, we have a substantive question to decidehere. I take it that wording of the directive is reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about M3 and M1 and then mentioning that there is a question to decide regarding the wording of the directive. There is no clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 377.
MR. PARTEE. But we have to have point estimates for ourgrowth targets for May-June in order to establish some reserve[objectives]. You never specified what you wanted those to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking for clarification on what specific growth targets should be set for May-June in order to establish reserve objectives.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, no I didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they did not do something.


Passage number 379.
MR. AXILROD. Those point estimates would appear in thePolicy Record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the point estimates would be included in the Policy Record.


Passage number 380.
MR. PARTEE. No, for voting purposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states Mr. Partee's response without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm saying 7 to 7-1/2 percent, I suppose,but with tolerance on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or estimate, followed by the clarification that there is some room for tolerance on the higher end.


Passage number 382.
MR. PARTEE. What about M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply quotes Mr. Partee asking a question without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just working off Steve's numbers. Youhad what--a little less than 8 percent for M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is using Steve's numbers and then asks for clarification on another number.


Passage number 384.
MR. AXILROD. Well, 7-1/2 to 8 percent [for M-1B] would beconsistent with 7 to 7-1/2 percent for M-1A. And for M2 I would say7-3/4 to 8-1/4 percent would be consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing a range of percentages that they believe would be consistent for different variables.


Passage number 385.
MR. PARTEE. So you are going the alternative A route.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 386.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is broadly consistent withalternative A, with a willingness to overshoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing that something is broadly consistent with alternative A and also mentioning a willingness to overshoot.


Passage number 387.
MR. PARTEE. If fortune should smile on us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a hypothetical scenario where they might potentially benefit from good fortune.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no argument or conflicting viewpoints presented in the given passage as it only states the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER."


Passage number 389.
 At this point I don't know what fortune-44-5/20/80MS. TEETERS. What is the M2 consistent with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of fragmented phrases or sentences without a clear context or subject.


Passage number 390.
MR. AXILROD. Around 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement mentioning a percentage.


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're talking about figures for the actualpath. That's not quite the equivalent of the figures [mentionedhere], which are for a longer period. We're just talking about nowthrough the meeting date in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage explains that the figures being discussed are for a shorter period of time compared to the figures mentioned earlier, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 392.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is agreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is agreeing with something previously mentioned or stated.


Passage number 393.
MS. TEETERS. Logic would have [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 394.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a completely symmetrical world, but I'mnot playing in a symmetrical world right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses the speaker's current situation, which is not a symmetrical world, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 395.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, you have taken the fed fundsrange that is consistent with the staff's alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that the speaker has taken a certain action.


Passage number 396.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With "B." That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That is correct" indicates agreement with the previous statement, suggesting a consensus rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 397.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, if you want to make theswitch, I think we could do it the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting an alternative option without indicating any disagreement with the previous suggestion.


Passage number 398.
MR. PARTEE. And you want to put in a 9 percent funds ratewith consultation at 9-1/2 percent, did you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. Mr. Partee is simply repeating and confirming the information given without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinion.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, [we'd consult] before we get there,figuring that that's more than a full [percentage point] drop in thefederal funds rate. It may well come next week. I don't know forsure whether it will. It will depend on what our money supply figuresshow, so we don't know yet. And the significance of what rate we putin there is probably what Roger said--it [determines] when we need aformal vote of the Committee to lower the rate as opposed to aconsultation. Well, let's just try it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that they need to consult before making a decision, and that the rate put in will determine whether a formal vote or consultation is needed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
MR. PARTEE. A show of hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement or contention in the passage. The mention of "a show of hands" suggests that there is some form of voting or decision-making process occurring, which typically involves differing opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 401.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, a show of hands on acceptability iswhat we're looking for at this point. Are the specifications clear.These do not appear in the directive, [except] the one for the federalfunds range. On the others, we have the general language in thedirective. We have a reserve target which we expect is almostcertainly consistent with no borrowing, with tolerance on the up sidebecause if some borrowing developed, we presumably would raise thepath. So unless we have an extremely strong rebound in the moneysupply, we're talking about no significant borrowing during thisperiod--only frictional levels of borrowing. Let me just try the 9percent [lower limit for the] funds rate. I don't think the 14 percent[upper limit] is real, but let's maintain it for visual [purposes].What is the range now. I don't even know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a show of hands to determine if the specifications are clear and discussing their interpretation of the directive.


Passage number 402.
MS. TEETERS. It's 10-1/2 to 19 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a numerical percentage.


Passage number 403.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We still have 19.SPEAKER(.). We lowered that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. There are no explicit statements indicating disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 404.
-45-5/20/80MR. PARTEE. No we didn't; it was only [lowered from] 20 to19 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No we didn't; it was only [lowered from] 20 to 19 percent" is simply correcting a misunderstanding and providing the correct information.


Passage number 405.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're making this tremendous 5percentage point drop in interest rates, Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about a decrease in interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 406.
 It's an enormoustolerance, which we really--MR. ROOS. In other words, we're narrowing the rangesignificantly, Mr. Chairman.SPEAKER(.). We're back to where we started out in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "which we really--MR. ROOS" suggests an interruption or disagreement by Mr. Roos. However, without further context, it is not clear what the disagreement is about.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many find that acceptable. One, two,three, four, five. I thought it was you who proposed it, Emmett.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement. The passage is simply asking for the number of people who find something acceptable and clarifying that the speaker thought it was Emmett who proposed it.


Passage number 408.
MR. RICE. No. The funds rate range is what I proposed, butnot the money growth target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the funds rate range is what they proposed, but not the money growth target.


Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want a higher path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "You want a higher path" is a simple assertion or suggestion, without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting elements.


Passage number 410.
MR. RICE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The [problem] is that [a higher path] isinconsistent with this funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is stating a problem or issue without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 412.
MR. RICE. I want alternative B both with respect to theaggregates and the funds range. I have accepted the funds rangespecified here as consistent with the [higher] growth ranges [ofalternative B].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement indicates that Mr. Rice wants alternative B for both the aggregates and the funds range. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not talking about this September/December question. We're talking about the rest of May, June, and theearly part of July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that the focus of discussion is on a specific time period, excluding September/December, in order to clarify the period being discussed. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 414.
MR. RICE. I know, but that relates to whether we're going toget back [to the target range] in September or in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Rice is simply expressing knowledge about the timing of getting back to the target range.


Passage number 415.
MR. PARTEE. You're taking it off of alternative A ratherthan alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that "You" (the unidentified person being addressed) are selecting or choosing option A over option B.


Passage number 416.
MR. MORRIS. Also, an implication is that if the numbers comein higher, we are not going to push the funds rate up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a potential implication if certain numbers come in higher.


Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. Well, who has analternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that something is correct and asks a question about an alternative.


Passage number 418.
MR. PARTEE. My alternative would be to raise the point[targets] for M-1A, M-1B, and M2 to make them essentially themidpoints between alternative A and alternative B for the 2-monthperiod and to establish an 8 percent lower end on the funds raterather than 9 percent. That would be my suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply suggesting an alternative plan and sharing his suggestion.


Passage number 419.
MS. TEETERS. Quick consultation, say, at 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions a "quick consultation" at a specific interest rate. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 420.
MR. PARTEE. We would be reviewing it. The Chairman couldcall for a telephone conference as we got down into the lower end ofthe funds range, yes. I wouldn't want to be too specific becauseMurray might make us put it in the Policy Record. But the Chairman-465/20/80could have a call at 9-1/2 percent, as the rate was moving from 9-1/2to 9 percent, with an 8 percent limit on the published range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 421.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think that represents areasonable compromise. I am sympathetic with the Chairman's need toform some kind of consensus, given the difference in views. That tipsit very heavily toward the view you expressed earlier, Chuck; it's nota reasonable compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, the speaker is expressing disagreement with the idea of a reasonable compromise and believes that it heavily leans towards another person's view.


Passage number 422.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I'd compromise between alternative A andalternative B. I spoke in terms of alternative B. I would ratherhave a funds rate of 7 percent; I just specified a funds rate of 8percent. I compromised compared with what I would otherwise havedone. He asked if there were any suggestions and that was mysuggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is suggesting a compromise between two alternatives but acknowledges his personal preference for a different funds rate.


Passage number 423.
MS. TEETERS. Another thing we can do to compromise furtheris to take your specifications of 7 to 7-1/2 percent and so on for theMs and to make [the funds range] 8-1/2 to 14 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents a suggestion or proposal to compromise by adjusting the specifications for the Ms to a different range.


Passage number 424.
MR. SCHULTZ. With consultation at 9-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement or a conversation involving Mr. Schultz and a consultation that took place at 9-1/2.


Passage number 425.
MS. TEETERS. With consultation at 9-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states a fact (that Ms. Teeters had a consultation at 9-1/2), there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 426.
MR. SCHULTZ. I could go that far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 427.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Your proposal, Nancy, says what aboutthe aggregate targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply asks for clarification or information about Nancy's proposal.


Passage number 428.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 429.
 The aggregate targets would be 7 to 7-1/2percent for M1, 7-1/2 to 8--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everything is the same with an 8-1/2percent [lower limit on the funds range] instead of 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents different options for aggregate targets without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 430.
MR. PARTEE. I couldn't accept that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. They are simply stating that they couldn't accept something.


Passage number 431.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think that's good; I would go with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 432.
MR. ROOS. I can accept Chuck's, but I couldn't accept 8-1/2percent. It looks like fine-tuning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, expresses disagreement with the proposed 8-1/2 percent, stating that he cannot accept it.


Passage number 433.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd go along with that in theinterest of a consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is agreeing to go along with something for the sake of reaching a consensus, indicating a willingness to collaborate and avoid any potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's about as far as I can go.Let's try that one.SPEAKER(.). Chuck's was 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 435.
MR. PARTEE. We're voting on Paul's specifications [with a]drop in [the lower limit on] the funds rate to 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Partee stating that they are voting on Paul's specifications regarding the drop in the lower limit on the funds rate to 8-1/2 percent.


Passage number 436.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Should we put that one to a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is asking for a vote on something, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply suggesting a democratic method of decision-making.


Passage number 437.
MR. GUFFEY. This is with consultation as we approach 9-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Guffey without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 438.
-47-5/20/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll see whether Mr. Axilrod's judgmenthere is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that the judgment of Mr. Axilrod will be observed to determine its accuracy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 439.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee NoGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos NoGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesPresident Winn YesIt's 9 for, 2 against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is contention or disagreement as there are two individuals who voted against the majority. Governor Partee and President Roos voted against the majority position.


