
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

[Laughter] But it also reflects the fact that 2005 came in largely as expected
<START>—after allowance for hurricanes and an energy shock last year that elevated core inflation and damped growth somewhat compared with our forecasts last January.<END>
This is encouraging in that it suggests that we are not looking at major unexplained and unanticipated forces acting on the economy.
At this point, our focus appropriately is on keeping inflation contained.
I see several reasons for optimism in this regard.
One is the performance of core consumer prices and price measures, which continue to suggest that the pass-through of higher energy prices will be limited.
Core inflation was roughly stable last year.
It picked up a bit in the fourth quarter, but that was from unusually low readings in the third quarter.
<START>Declining consumer inflation expectations in the most recent Michigan survey, along with the failure of market-based inflation compensation readings to respond significantly to the substantial run-up in oil prices and higher core readings over the intermeeting period, just reinforce my assessment that any pass-through should be small and limited in duration.<END>
As we noted at the last meeting, perhaps the greater threat to sustained good inflation performance comes from possible increases in pressures on resources.
<START>The critical question is whether growth in output close to trend is a reasonable expectation with only modest further policy firming, given the low level of long-term rates, reduced drag from energy prices, and a boost from rebuilding.<END>
I thought it was a reasonable expectation, for a number of reasons.
<START>First, after smoothing through the fluctuations caused by auto incentives and hurricanes, private domestic final January 31, 200662 of 106demand already showed signs of moderation last year.<END>
Growth in private domestic final sales slowed from 4¼ percent in the first half of the year to 3 percent in the second half of the year, with every element
—consumption, business fixed investment, residential housing investment
—moderating.
The staff estimates that about 0.3 of this was due to hurricane effects, but that still leaves underlying private demand slowing to an annual rate of about 3¼ or 3½ percent.
This moderation did not reflect the full effects of our policy tightening, especially on the housing market.
Even well-anticipated increases in the short-term rates seem to be having a significant effect on housing markets, which have become more dependent on adjustable rate mortgages to maintain affordability.
We are just beginning to see the anticipated slowdown in this sector.
With growth in consumption and sales constrained by a leveling-out of housing wealth, businesses are unlikely to see the need to step up the pace at which they are adding to their capital stock.
As a consequence, investment growth could slow, at least slightly, over the next few years, reflecting reduced impetus from the accelerator.
<START>Finally, although foreign economies are strengthening some, foreign investment and consumption remain subdued relative to income.<END>
And given our continuing outsized appetite for imports, net exports are unlikely to be putting added impetus to demands on domestic production.
I think there are several upside and downside risks around this picture of growth near potential, as a number of you pointed out.
I agree that the housing market is the most likely source of a shortfall in demand.
I don’t think we can have much confidence about how the dynamics of this market will play out now that it has begun to soften.
My suspicion is that, as little bubbles in the froth are popped, the risks are tilted more toward quite a sharp cooling off than toward a very gradual ebbing of price increases and building activity.
<START>On the other side, it seems to me global demand would be a major upside risk to growth and to price stability.<END>
The extraordinarily rapid rise January 31, 200663 of 106in commodity prices and upward movement in global equity prices may indicate a very fundamental turnaround in foreign demand and attitudes beyond just a stepwise strengthening of growth.
For now, these remain risks that we’ll need to monitor.
<START>In making my forecast, I assumed we would tighten at this meeting, and likely at the next as well, to gain greater assurance that inflation will remain contained over time, consistent with my forecast of a 1¾ percent increase in core prices in 2007.<END>
However, I do see action in March as dependent on the readings we get in coming months.
<START>There is, as usual, considerable uncertainty about the precise nature and magnitude of the risk to the outlook, but we’re dealing with an economic picture that overall is remarkably good and expected to remain that way for the foreseeable future.<END>
<START>Reflecting on this situation, among many, many aspects of the past, I end my remarks as I began them:<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>When I was preparing for this meeting early last week, I was feeling very comfortable with the forecast of good growth in 2006, in the mid-3 percent range near potential, and a modest uptick in core inflation above 2 percent.<END>
<START>As many of you have already remarked, the GDP numbers on Friday made me slightly more pessimistic, both on growth and on inflation.<END>
<START>The surprise drop in government spending, I have full confidence will turn around.<END>
Final sales fell, however, so that all the growth that occurred in the fourth quarter came from inventory growth.
Given that inventory–sales ratios continue to run at historically low levels, though, inventories should continue to be a source of growth going forward.
As many of you also have noted, other indicators show much stronger performance.
<START>Initial unemployment claims, goods orders, capacity utilization, and strong corporate balance sheets<END>
—all of them effectively say that we January 31, 200664 of 106have a strong foundation underneath this growth.
The inflation numbers ticking up to 2.2 percent gave me a bit of pause.
<START>We came through two good quarters, the second and third quarters, with very low inflation;<END>
but again, the uptick shows how much variability we see around the inflation numbers quarter to quarter and warrants attention.
The one area
—and I want to second Dave Stockton’s remark
—of main concern is the housing market.
Let me talk about it a little differently from some previous comments today.
<START>When we look at the aggregate levels of debt that households have and relative prices, one of the things as an old lender I worry about is the ability to service the debt and the discretionary spending that households have.<END>
While 80 percent of mortgages are fixed rate, 20 percent are variable.
Starting in 2002, we saw a jump in ARMs, taking advantage of the very steep yield curve at the time.
<START>We now are in a period when not only the fancy option ARMs, the exotic products of the past eighteen months, but also the 3/1 ARMs and the five-year ARMS that became very popular in 2002 and 2003 are repricing.<END>
<START>If interest rates just hold where they are right now, we estimate that the monthly debt service cost is going to go up by at least 50 percent on that 20 percent of mortgage portfolios.<END>
If you look at the Greenbook, you’ll notice that the financial obligation ratio rose quite substantially in the past six months.
It is now back to the peaks of 2001 and 2002, and we have a lot of mortgages still to reprice.
<START>We also know that some of these exotic mortgages don’t amortize, but they will kick in and start amortization and that will also pull cash out of discretionary spending.<END>
In an overall look at consumers, with housing and the cost of heating this winter rising, you’re beginning to see a little caution in the borrowing numbers.
The drop in home equity lines of credit that I mentioned a meeting or two ago now has been sustained through the whole quarter.
<START>So we have actually seen that home equity lines outstanding that have been drawn on have dropped.<END>
<START>January 31, 200665 of 106Consumer credit as a whole dropped, excluding mortgage credit, and mortgage growth as a whole slowed to just over 10 percent.<END>
So households are signaling that they’re pulling back on new borrowing, not just in housing but in general.
When you look at the ability of consumers to spend discretionarily out of their monthly take-home pay, these are signals we need to look at.
And the rising fixed payments that they have is something, in looking at the tail of the distribution on housing market risk, that I think is important for that segment of the population going forward.
The other sad thing is that this is our last meeting with the Chairman, and I just personally also want to echo some of the comments of my colleagues around the table to thank you for your leadership.
I’ve been very impressed with the kind of atmosphere that I found when I joined during your tenure as leader of this institution.
The integrity with which everything is done, your emphasis on the quality of ideas, and your continuing to search for new ways to look at information
—because the economy is dynamic
—remind us that we have to watch for new things always evolving.
The collegiality with which you have led this organization has made it enjoyable for all of us to be here.
And finally, as an old risk manager, I was glad to feel right at home with your approach to monetary policy.
[Laughter] So thank you for your leadership.
It has been a pleasure to have served with you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you so much.
Vincent.
MR.
REINHART.33The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll be referring to the material that Carol Low handed out during the coffee break.
Judging by the information derived from money market futures plotted in the top panels of your first exhibit, this seems likely to be another of those meetings in which the important part of the discussion is about words, not the upcoming deed.
As can be seen from the bars in the top left panel, market participants put near a 100 percent probability on a ¼ point firming today and high odds on a like-sized move at the March meeting.
<START>Both those probabilities were marked up over the past seven weeks, partly on apparent increased pressures on costs, what with oil and other commodity prices surging and the foreign exchange value of the dollar weakening, and<END>
—unfortunately
—on market commentary that was taken as having an inside track on your policy choices.
The January 31, 200666 of 106expected federal funds rate, plotted in black in the top right side, now moves modestly above 4½ percent this spring before turning down late this year.
<START>Market participants apparently have bought into the notion that, with inflation impetus a bit more intense, the Committee will want the real federal funds rate, the solid black line in the middle panel, more assuredly in a range that is not associated with policy accommodation.<END>
What market participants do not seem to have bought into is the idea that you’ll act like the hypothetical policymakers described in the Bluebook.
The paths for the nominal and real federal funds rates, derived from an optimal control exercise using the version of the FRB/US model endowing policymakers and financial market participants with perfect foresight, are shown in the bottom panels.
<START>The solid and dotted lines are the policy prescriptions under inflation goals of 1½ percent and 2 percent, respectively.<END>
<START>With actual inflation and the FRB/US measure of long-run expected inflation now running around 2 percent, policymakers can hold the nominal funds rate steady and allow the real funds rate to drift lower to achieve 2 percent core PCE inflation in the long run.<END>
To induce enough resource slack to work toward a 1½ percent inflation goal, however, policymakers would have to raise the nominal funds rate to about 5 percent.
Market participants see you steering between those two paths for a while
—probably for some combination of three reasons.
The first two explain why
<START>—even if your goal for inflation is 1½ percent<END>
—you might be less aggressive than in the corresponding simulation.
For one, market participants may see less near-term pressures on inflation than in the Greenbook and its extension.
For another, they may believe you’d tolerate inflation toward the high end of that range, in part because of the perception that you would be unwilling to create economic slack deliberately to achieve a different outcome.
<START>Instead, they may think you are willing to wait for some opportunity in the future, when a negative shock pulls inflation down.<END>
And the third is a reason that
—even if you were aiming for inflation of 2 percent
—you might be tighter than the corresponding simulation.
In particular, market participants may believe that your policy choice will be shaped by considerations about risks that deterministic simulations cannot capture.
<START>For example, you might be satisfied with inflation around current levels, if it were ensured, but be asymmetrically concerned with regard to its being higher rather than lower.<END>
<START>Thus, you might tighten more than the 2 percent goal simulation as insurance that inflation does not move higher.<END>
If, like market participants, you see yourselves operating in the range between the two paths called for by the optimal control exercises, you most likely would be willing to tighten ¼ point today and place high odds of doing so again in March.
The two chief wording issues that follow from that decision are listed at the top of exhibit 2.
First, how high are the odds you place on tightening at the March meeting?
In writing the Bluebook, we thought you’d want to preserve the current configuration of financial market prices, which appears to be based on a 70–30 split on tightening versus no action in six weeks.
Thus, in the portion of the statement language of alternative B listed in the bottom left, we offered the sentence, “The Committee judges that some further policy firming may be needed to keep well the risks to the January 31, 200667 of 106attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance.” We thought that this wording gives a strong presumption that policy will tighten once more but not the certainty that makes many of you uncomfortable.
From what I’ve heard today, I would suggest tweaking that verb phrase to dial down the market’s perception of future action by removing the word “well.” The second question is, How strongly do you want to underscore that coming decisions depend on incoming economic data?
We thought that the last sentence of the December statement, also repeated in the bottom left panel, provided sufficient assurance on that score.
Indeed, this layout seemed to have the attraction of expressing a back-up strategy in which you would deviate from the anticipated policy path if events dictate.
We also thought that you’d want to make as few changes to the language as possible today.
An alternative is to reverse the order of the last two sentences, as is done at the bottom right.
“The Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to foster the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability.
In these circumstances, the Committee judges that some further policy firming may be needed to keep well the risks to those objectives roughly in balance.” Note that the first sentence now describes the baseline assumption, not a contingency plan.
This wording is similar, but not identical, to language circulated by President Poole.
It shares his reordering of the sentences but does not repeat the “measured policy firming” phrase on the logic that the Committee may want to free up expectations about action in March.
During the policy discussion, it would be helpful if you would focus some of your remarks on the two questions I have raised.
With the help of exhibit 3, I now turn to my standard procedure in closing to hector the Committee on some point of governance.
The issue, as I explained in my memo of January 25, is that the statement released this afternoon will likely be only partly covered by the Committee’s vote.
The responses to the survey I sent around earlier indicated significant support for voting on the entire statement but that a minority was decidedly opposed.
Those opposed are primarily concerned that requiring members to agree on all the words in the statement may make it more difficult to reach a consensus.
In addition, the public may be confused if a member dissents, not because of disapproval of the policy action but because of distaste for the words characterizing the action.
<START>Moreover, FOMC participants arguably have more leeway now to offer views to the public differing from those in the statement than would be the case if the entire document had the Committee’s seal of approval.<END>
Those favoring a formal vote on the entire statement hold that all its aspects, including the description of the economy, are important in shaping market expectations about the future path of policy.
In that view, it may be a good thing that the formal vote constrains how members subsequently describe the rationale for policy action to the public, as it would send a more consistent message about the prospects for policy.
January 31, 200668 of 106These arguments suggest that FOMC participants may want to consider three alternatives listed in the exhibit:
(1) Vote on the entire statement and the directive.
(2) Vote on the directive and assessment of risks, as now.
But to clarify ownership of the remaining portions of the statement, the Committee could also vote to authorize the Chairman to provide a rationale for that action.
(3) Retain the status quo, perhaps with the issue to be raised again at a later date under the next Chairman.
The two bottom panels present the formal vote for alternative B should you prefer, respectively, option 1 or option 2.
(The language for option 3, as always, is in the Bluebook.) Students of this institution probably believe that the statement is partly owned by the Committee and partly by the Chairman.
For the rest, what is issued at 2:15 p.m.
on the day of decision is a Committee document.
Thus, some people would view option 1 as delimiting the Chairman’s authority, while others would view option 2 as rolling back the Committee’s authority.
<START>It would seem best that such suspicions not be harbored about the new Chairman by resolving this governance issue today if option 2 appeals to you<END>
—that is, voting only on the interest rate, not the rationale, portion of the statement and granting the Chairman an explicit authority to craft the rest.
If, instead, you prefer to vote on the entire statement, then I would suggest putting off option 1 to another day
—so as not to risk creating a misimpression about your intent.
One such opportunity might be the March meeting.
Ben Bernanke has asked me to relay that he prefers that the next meeting run for two days
—Monday and Tuesday, March 27 and 28
—so that you can discuss the best way to organize future Committee discussions.
The Secretariat will send around formal notice about the logistics of this meeting as soon as possible, subject to a notation vote by this Committee naming a new Chairman.
Some supporting documents for the two-day meeting will then circulate during the intermeeting period.
Your last exhibit repeats table 1.
I should note that we changed the “smoothing” language that few of you favored.
Instead, the rationale portion opens, “Although recent economic data have been uneven.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Questions for Vincent?
MR.
LACKER.
How do your inflation expectations evolve in your two simulations, and in particular, how are they affected by policy?
Is it just through the effect of resource slack on actual inflation?
MR.
REINHART.
In these simulations, long-run inflation expectations evolve very gradually based on the path of actual inflation.
So what happens is in the 1½ percent simulation you January 31, 200669 of 106start off with inflation expectations of 2 percent, and you have to experience inflation below that to work it down.
MR.
LACKER.
Thanks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Anybody else?
Do we have copies of the statement?
Could you circulate them, please?
I will be rather brief for a number of reasons, not the least of which is I mostly agree with what has been said around this table and I just don’t want to duplicate it.
I do think that this is an extraordinary economy.
If you look at the world data, the balances out there in Europe and Asia and Japan
—remember Japan is the second largest economy in the world, and we used to forget that because it never moved and hence did not contribute to either expansion or contraction.
<START>But it’s clearly now moved beyond its very serious difficulties and is likely to be a positive force, as indeed much of Asia and now, more recently, Europe is beginning to be.<END>
So the outlook out there is benevolent, but benevolence is not something that goes on forever.
So far I think it’s fairly clear that there’s consensus around the table that we’ll move 25 basis points today.
And I think that there is an awareness that we’re probably not all that far from where we want to be, considering that our major focus was the removal of accommodation, which we had purposefully put in place to bring the funds rate down to 1 percent over a protracted period.
I think that, at this particular point, whatever the Federal Reserve does henceforth, it is going to become increasingly dependent on the data because we’re not in the position in which we had been for quite a period of time of essentially saying what it is we plan to do and then proceeding to do it.
We have run the string.
We have gotten to where we wanted to be, and now the data are going to determine what largely is going to happen.
I don’t think there’s much debate on this particular statement relevant to what the March actual action is going to be.
I suspect that whatever the Committee does in March will depend very January 31, 200670 of 106marginally on what we say today and very significantly on the whole series of events that have to work their way through over the next six weeks.
And since we’re not very far from where we would like to be, there’s no real problem here.
<START>Therefore, I would venture that we move 25 basis points and that we adopt the language, the critical part being “further policy firming may be needed.” This language in my judgment is essentially consistent with the outlook as we can best evaluate it, and I would move, in the context of what Vincent has been saying, both the statement and the action and would request that our Secretary read the appropriate language.<END>
MR.
FERGUSON.
Do you want to go around first?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’m sorry.
I’m trying to cut the discussion short.
[Laughter] MR. POOLE.
Do you have someplace to go?
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
No, but I’m looking at the clock.
MS.
MINEHAN.
The clock, I mean, it has stopped.
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Let the record reflect that the Committee has thwarted the attempt by the Chairman to change the process in a way that
— [Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Actually I thought it was elegantly done.
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Mr. Chairman, I, too, think that we should move by 25 today, and I’m comfortable with the language as it’s modified here.
I do think that it’s important to note that the market judges the odds of March as probable.
The Greenbook assumption is more consistent with that and, as Janet said, some of the Bluebook filters we can use to look at things are slightly more in that direction.
<START>But having said that, I think it’s fine to leave the statement with “may,” and I don’t really know whether the market’s reaction to that statement would take out some of the pricing now built in or leave it where it is.<END>
It’s hard to know.
January 31, 200671 of 106I want to say one thing in response to Vince’s second question, although I’m not sure that we need to spend much time on it.
I think we should defer this decision until March.
My own view is that the actions the Committee takes are really not principally the changes in the fed funds rate we announce or don’t announce at the meeting.
They have a lot to do with how we characterize our view of the path of output and inflation relative to our objectives, the risks around that, and what we signal, if anything, about the monetary policy implications of that judgment.
Having said that, I think it is hard not to argue that the Committee needs to express a view when it votes on that basic set of signals.
I think it’s worth deferring that judgment, though, simply because we should talk through a little more what it really means for our process and how we’re going to manage the preparation and the discussion in a world where we’re more explicitly deciding what we’re going to vote on.
So my compliments to Vince for framing it the way he did, and I suggest we defer the vote.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I agree on the second point that we should postpone consideration of what we vote on for the reasons that the Vice Chairman just noted.<END>
I support the increase in the federal funds rate today.
I’m a little concerned, like the Vice Chairman, that this “may” language could cause a bit of a rally in financial markets, but I think it reflects the general tone around the table and is certainly close to my thinking.
I think we’re more likely to have to firm than not at the next meeting
—the odds are 50–50 or greater
—and this puts the market on notice that that’s approximately what our thinking is.
So I agree with that one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I support the recommendation in terms of the 25 basis points and also the wording.
I actually like “may” rather than “may well.” I think the data will in all likelihood be January 31, 200672 of 106a little stronger, which will buy us that “” to “may well” as time evolves, but not necessarily.
may I like the ordering as is presented here.
So this fits very well into my view of where we should be.
On the last point, I’d like to compliment Vince for predicting that he will yet again be back talking about it.
[Laughter] I think that’s the right path.
I think bringing it to everybody’s attention is a good thing.
But your third solution, which is somewhere in between, is actually the right answer.
<START>How one fosters a consensus around that is tricky, and I’m glad I don’t have to do it.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
I support the increase of 25 basis points at this meeting.
I would like to add a third question to the two that Vince gave us at the top of exhibit 2.
What language creates the best basis for smooth transition of future language?
Every time we make a change, it gets parsed, examined, cut, read between the lines, and so forth.
So part of my motivation in suggesting the reversal of those two sentences was to make what I thought might be an easier transition in the future.
<START>Clearly, it’s a very fine point, but that’s what we end up dealing with in order not to provide any signals that we didn’t really intend.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Well, I support a 25 basis point move.
I think President Poole has made a good point.
I wrote a note in support of it, but I can accept the language that’s here.
Then, finally, I am in full accord with the President of the Reserve Bank of New York’s articulation of the issue of procedure, which I think we should defer.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation of 25 basis points.
I rather like moving the operative forward-looking language to “may” as opposed to “may well” because I think it frees the markets to look much more at the data, as they would do naturally January 31, 200673 of 106anyway.
I do think it’s at least 50–50, as Governor Kohn said, maybe a little bit more, but I think “may” covers us well enough for March.
On the procedural point, I obviously agree with the consensus in the room that we should postpone this until the March meeting.
I must express some uncertainty about how we vote on an entire statement and directive as a group of nineteen.
So I would have a tendency toward the status quo, but that just may be because I’m inappropriately conservative and not appropriately imaginative.
So let me stop at that and move on to the next person.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, I agree with your proposal.
I’m very pleased with taking the word “well” out just because I think the statement should be giving the market 50–50 odds rather than something greater than that as we look forward.
And we are data dependent.
So I really prefer that.
And I agree with postponing the discussion on procedure for the next meeting.
There’s much to be done, and I think in the transition we need to wait until then.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I find myself in agreement with, I guess, everybody who has already spoken.
The ¼ point increase seems appropriate to me.
I’m comfortable with the language as proposed, and I think we should defer the discussion of ownership of the statement until March.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, am comfortable with your proposal to move 25 basis points today.
I am also comfortable with this language.
I actually could have gone with an even shorter formulation that was on page 22 of the Bluebook, which basically combined rows four and five and didn’t make reference to the need to move further.
But all things being January 31, 200674 of 106equal, taking “well” out probably goes a bit in that direction.
So I’m comfortable with the way it is.
Fifty-fifty?
I don’t know.
I am not sure that it is a 50–50 chance, but maybe it is.
So I am okay with that.
On the ownership of the statement, what President Santomero said resonated with me.
I think there is a halfway path here, and the issue needs a little more conversation.
I don’t think it’s something we should decide now.
So we should stay with the status quo.
<START>I’d also like to raise some concern if Monday–Tuesday is going to become commonplace.<END>
Monday is a hard day, particularly if you’re not going to give us the Greenbooks and the Bluebooks until late the week before.
I think the timing puts a lot of pressure on everybody that we could alleviate by going with Tuesday–Wednesday.
MR.
REINHART.
The reason for Monday–Tuesday was that you probably already had travel plans that got you into D.C. on Monday, whereas having to extend to Wednesday might pose more of a hardship.
But it was viewed as just for this meeting.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Okay.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, support your recommendation on the 25 basis point increase in our fed funds rate target.
I, too, like the language as you proposed it.
Removing the word “well” in the statement gives us, I think, more of the flexibility that I said I desired.
And I, too, would like to defer the decision on what we vote on.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
I’m comfortable with the language.
Some of the alternative language that has been suggested is attractive.
I think we should make as few changes today as we can, and this recommendation does that.
I also support the Vice January 31, 200675 of 106Chairman’s recommendation to wait until another day to have a full discussion of the vote on the statement.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I also support fully your recommendation with respect to the 25 basis point move and with respect to the language, and I agree with the Vice Chairman’s comments that the discussion about what we should vote on is very important.
It has all become an aspect of policy, but there are a lot of details to discuss, and we should defer a decision on it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support both the 25 basis point increase and the wording of “may,” and again, I think it would be good to defer the discussion about the implications of the alternatives that Vince has laid out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
<START>Mr. Chairman, during your tenure the FOMC has been successful in anchoring long-term inflation expectations that are appropriately at low levels, and I think we want to make sure we maintain that legacy going forward.<END>
I continue to be concerned about the possibility that inflation will move up and run above 2 percent for an extended period of time.
<START>So I’m not certain how long we could experience core inflation of more than 2 percent without having inflation expectations rise.<END>
But I can agree with your recommendation on the statement.
I think it does enable us to be flexible going forward as to what we’re going to do and does allow for the possibility that we might have to move higher than the Greenbook assumptions.
And I agree on postponing the decision on the broader question of what we vote on at the meetings.
Finally, in the spirit of less is more, I just January 31, 200676 of 106want to thank you for your service to the Fed and thank you for your service to the nation and say it has been a great privilege to work with you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support both the ¼ point increase and the statement.
I remind my colleagues that in the last two meetings we will have now removed the terms “accommodative” and “measured,” and in combination, that’s a very significant move forward.
<START>We have left ourselves at the point where I think we want to be, with the flexibility moving forward to respond to the data as they come in.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
I support a ¼ point move today, Mr. Chairman, and I support the language in this statement.
<START>I’d be ready to support today moving to voting for the whole statement consistent with the global march of democracy, but it’s hard to be against further deliberation, especially within the Federal Reserve System.<END>
So I’ll defer to my colleagues and agree to that course of action.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>I gather correctly there’s been no real interest in reversing the paragraphs.<END>
So I think that we can go forward and, as I said before, you may read
—[Laughter] MS. DANKER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In that the decision has been to go ahead with the status quo in the same way as in the past, I will read the wording out of page 31 of the Bluebook
<START>—the directive wording first and the risk assessment second, dropping the word “well.” “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.<END>
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 4½ percent.” And “The Committee judges January 31, 200677 of 106that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance.<END>
In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to foster these objectives.” Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes Governor Bies Yes Governor Ferguson Yes President Guynn Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Lacker Yes Governor Olson Yes President Pianalto Yes President Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I request the Federal Reserve Board to engage in addressing the requests for changes in the discount rate.
[Recess] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Federal Reserve Board voted unanimously to accept the discount rate requests of eleven Banks.
As to the date of the next meeting, Vincent will send notice.
MR.
REINHART.
As soon as we have a new Chairman, which is subject to action by the Senate, signature of the President, and a notation vote by this Committee, I will send a memo around providing the time of the next meeting.
As the agenda is not yet set, I am not quite sure what time it will start.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The meeting is adjourned.
END OF MEETING January 31, 200678 of 106
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 44
