
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

We’re going to be getting some important data.
We’ll be getting two June 28-29, 2006124 of 177employment reports, so we’ll get to see whether the lower numbers in employment are temporary or not.
After we see four or five months of data, we will be able to start pulling out whether something is temporary or not.
We have some other important numbers coming up, and so I support basically keeping alternative B as it is.
I think that is the best way to achieve the objective of leaving our options open but not in any way unanchoring expectations.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I support the 25 basis point increase at this meeting, and as several people have said, I think the real issue is what we signal going forward.
Let me refer to some comments already made and respond to some of my colleagues.
President Poole, I’m sort of right where you are:
I’m thinking 50-50 going forward, and so I’m leaning toward the neutral language that leaves our options open.
However, I’m troubled, too, as Governor Kroszner just said, about talking about our position as restraint at the moment.
I see where we are as having removed the excess accommodation.
I’m concerned that if we call this restrictive and if we want to backtrack, it might signal that we’re easing up again.
I think we’re right in the sweet spot, and I don’t really want to characterize it one way or another because, again, I think we’re where we need to be.
The other comment I would make is that we’re still seeing banks loosening lending standards.
There’s plenty of liquidity out there.
As Governor Warsh said yesterday, people are leveraging.
Pricing may be restraining, but there is liquidity.
Credit spreads are still very, very minimal.
From that perspective, the market, given what they’re seeing day to day in deal-making, react by asking how we can call it restrictive.
may I like President Moskow’s comment about moving up the first sentence of row 4, the first part about the moderation in growth, to the rationale.
As we spoke around the table yesterday, we June 28-29, 2006125 of 177were trying to decide what to do with these signals of inflation
<START>—how much of this inflation is transitory and how much will be worked out as housing cools because, again, that is really where the slowdown is coming.<END>
The slowdown is coming from housing, but that’s what we really wanted to happen.
By having the rates rise, we’ve pulled the hot sector down closer to where we want it to be.
If you look at section 3 of alternative B, we really are laying out why we think inflation is headed in the right direction.
Productivity gains are still good.
Unit labor costs, therefore, have been held down.
Inflation expectations are contained.
We could add to those points that the moderation in aggregate demand will also help contain inflation.
However, we still have other pressures.
I think the sentence in row 4 supports that rationale, so I like the suggestion that we move it.
<START>I also agree with the suggestion that we take out the first word in the sentence, “readings on core inflation” and just say “core inflation.” I am open to saying “unwelcome”<END>
—it serves as a signal that we are anchoring expectations.
Some numbers as high as 3.8 are very unwelcome to me, so I would be glad to stick the word “unwelcome” in there.
The only other thing I would say is that in number 4 I would just put a period after “outlook for both inflation and economic growth.” To get everybody focusing on the outlook is what we’re all talking about.
When we say “data dependent,” we mean that we need the data to validate our forecast or to modify it.
I think the markets look at just the data, and I would just as soon put a period after “growth.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me support the move of 25 basis points on the merits.
I don’t feel as though I’m constrained by market expectations for this meeting;
rather, on the merits, I think that’s the right thing to do.
June 28-29, 2006126 of 177Before getting into a discussion of the language, maybe I can give a couple of perspectives, Mr. Chairman, on the markets themselves.
My sense of things is that a bit of a herd mentality remains in the markets in that they have been waiting for our every utterance and, in some ways, they have been guided by us for a very, very long time.
The discussion we’re having today is really the tough one because we recognize that we need to wean the markets from the degree of certainty that we no longer possess.
I think this discussion is really quite healthy in doing so.
In light of that perspective, I think that alternative B strikes the right balance.
Without trying to wordsmith the statement at this point, I think that, although I share Vince’s view that ultimately the markets will get to a probability for August that is more balanced, it will take some time.
That is, I think the markets’ first reaction to alternative B and to the various versions that we’re talking about will have some “stickiness” to the view that they have now.
They will believe that we have stopped giving them guidance, that we’ve gotten out of that business, and that we are somehow culpable for that.
We have led them to the river, and now we are telling them that what they do is really their decision after all.
My own view is that this shift is a very, very good thing;
but it is not going to be without some pain, and I think swipes will be made at us.
The Chairman’s monetary policy testimony will perhaps represent just a little bit of that.
<START>But a dispersion of market views as to what we should be doing, what the state of the economy is, and what the prospects are for inflation is a very healthy thing.<END>
We will be introducing some volatility into the markets, probably in a more meaningful way than they may have seen, but on balance I think such a shift is all to the good.
With that backdrop
—that these markets are not focused on nuance
<START>—and the recognition that the discussion we’re having is about nuance, let me say a few things in support of alternative B. First, in the rationale section, where we say that inflation expectations remain contained, I think the June 28-29, 2006127 of 177markets will take a couple of shots at us and say, “Boy, you said they were contained previously.<END>
You say they’re contained now.
What was all that that we heard in between?” The way that I get comfortable with the statement that inflations expectations are contained is that some of the movements in the markets, in the inflation surveys, in the TIPS markets, and in the commodities markets show they have been responsive to our views.
I also feel that we can honestly describe them as being contained, but the container may be bigger than we had said it was before.
[Laughter] I guess I’m not troubled by that.
<START>If we introduced language such as “unwelcome,” the markets would take it as a reprise of the Chairman’s remarks from a few weeks ago and would take the view that we were anticipating that they move up the fed funds futures markets for August.<END>
I think that view would be very problematic in light of what I hear is the central tendency of people’s views here
<START>—that we want that bet to be fairer, closer to 50-50, and I fear that our historical use of “unwelcome” would go against what we’re collectively trying to accomplish.<END>
Let me make another comment, about the assessment of risk where we say, “The Committee judges that some inflation risks remain.” I think that people in the markets are going to focus on the word “some.” “Some” in recent meetings has meant some further policy firming
—that is, more than one move;
“some” was a strong word.
In this context, after some time and understanding, which will not be at 2:16 or 2:30 or even today or tomorrow, they’re going to recognize that “some” actually weakens the statement somewhat.
<START>Saying “some inflation risks remain” rather than “the Committee judges inflation risks remain” will, on balance, modestly lower the fed funds futures for August and beyond and will more likely bring us back to a point where we will have a fair fight come our August decision.<END>
I think that taking out “some” is likely to be a good change.
<START>So, on balance, Mr. Chairman, I support alternative B. Some of the suggestions that have been made about how to characterize our views vis-à-vis neutrality and whether or not we’re mildly restrictive strike June 28-29, 2006128 of 177me as leading to a discussion in the markets that might not be terribly helpful at this time.<END>
Our walking away from what the markets perceive to be firm and obvious guidance is a bigger move for them than I think this discussion may be suggesting, and I’d rather not add a new notion of neutrality, and a discussion about whether we are less loose or more tight strikes me as inopportune at this moment.
I concur with a comment that President Yellen made at the outset about thinking about our August decision with an option model theory approach.
This approach is basically that we don’t want to exercise that option until we have to.
Alternative B preserves our options, on balance, for a fair fight and a fair discussion come the August meeting.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Just very quickly, I think we should remember that the core PCE index comes out tomorrow.
If that’s an unfortunate number, it’s going to be right up against what we say, and people might say, “Some inflation risk?
We’ve got a bad number.
Where are these guys anyway?” So I would vote for taking the “some” out and for saying, “Inflation risks remain.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I would read our discussion yesterday as implying a central tendency to our forecast of an economy that’s growing basically at potential over the forecast period with a trajectory for inflation that is higher than we’d like if it were to extend over time and that moderates slowly and modestly over that period, and the risks of that forecast are still slightly to the upside.<END>
<START>Even if we were all quite confident about that basic forecast and had the same view of the risks around it, we couldn’t say that we actually know at this point how much more tightening we will need to achieve our target.<END>
June 28-29, 2006129 of 177I think it’s obvious that we should move today.
I think we need to send a signal that we want the fed funds rate to have a positive slope going forward.
<START>Achieving the probability of 50-50 around a move in August would be terrific, but I don’t know if we can do that.<END>
We want to have as much flexibility as we can have.
We want the market’s expectations about policy to be responsive to the data going forward, not sticky because of anticipation of what we’re going to do;
and I think, of course, that we don’t want to pre-commit.
I believe that alternative B actually does a very nice job of achieving this objective.
But it’s all about the alternatives, and I think that alternative B, like democracy, is better than the alternatives.
[Laughter] I think we face two types of risk now.
<START>One risk, which I think Janet articulated best yesterday, is that we may already be in the midst of what will prove to be a more acute adjustment in housing and a much more dramatic response by households to the change in expectations about future income and wealth and that the saving rate has been unsustainably low and will have to rise more significantly.<END>
That is a plausible scenario going forward.
A second risk is that, under an expectation that we stop at 5.25, we may be left below the optimal path for policy.
I want to say two things emphasizing that risk, even though I don’t think we can judge it as the predominant one.
First, to echo what I said yesterday, if you look back at where we thought we would end and where we thought prevailing estimates of the neutral rate were, we have been way under and the market has been way under.
The Bluebook estimate of now-prevailing equilibrium illustrates a basic 200 basis point move in estimated equilibrium over this period, and the market’s expectations of the terminal rate have moved a lot.
<START>So we may have been too loose for too long, and we may have to do more moves to adjust for the effect that our stance has had on inflationary behavior, inflation acceptance, psychology, and momentum.<END>
June 28-29, 2006130 of 177The optimal control exercise
—and I thought the memo that you gave us before the meeting was very helpful
—left me a little troubled because you can read those exercises as saying that, if our objective for inflation really is 1.5, we’re going to have to be tighter than 5¼ percent;
and if you relax the assumption around smoothing, you get a significantly higher near-term path for the fed funds rate that is judged to be optimal.
But even with that, those exercises imply a view about inflation persistence that says we’re going to be above 1.5 percent for a very, very long time.
<START>That situation, as I said, does create some risk that people will read the persistence of inflation as implying that we have higher inflation tolerance than we do or it may make us vulnerable to some further gradual erosion in credibility.<END>
So it’s possible that we’re going to need to be higher than the funds rate path assumed in the Greenbook, but we just don’t know, and we don’t need to make that judgment today.
We do not want to try to cap expectations at any particular level and hold them down.
Just a few things on the suggestions made.
All the suggestions were very thoughtful, but I would oppose all of them.
[Laughter] The rise in core inflation would be unwelcome if it was sustained or if it represented an expected path for inflation that was significantly higher than the central forecast.
To say that a bulge like the one we’ve seen today, given what we think is driving it, is unwelcome increases our vulnerability to the perception that we’re going to be a little too backward-looking.
We need the flexibility to stop at the point where core inflation is still accelerating, and “unwelcome” would limit our capacity to do that.
I think Governor Kroszner was exactly right in resisting the suggestion that we characterize our current stance of policy as somewhat restrictive.
We don’t know how restrictive policy is;
but even if we did, we should not be in the business of calibrating a judgment in our statements about how restrictive we are.
Most important, the statement says implicitly what I think, Bill, you’re June 28-29, 2006131 of 177trying to achieve, which is to convey that we see monetary policy as getting some traction on the economy today.
We also don’t need to be quite as vivid in saying our expectation is to bring core inflation down over the medium term to some implicit level.
“Medium term” does have a lot of flexibility in it, but as the optimal control exercises suggest, we don’t really know what the costs are of adopting a specific horizon now for bringing inflation down from what is only a very small deviation from our implicit target.
I think that alternative B strikes a good balance now, and each suggestion would alter that balance in a way that would not be as good at capturing the consensus about the trajectory that was described yesterday.
So I support moving 25 today and the language in alternative B. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
Thank you all very much.
Jeff.
MR.
LACKER.
Just a couple of comments in response to a few things, if that’s all right, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Certainly.
MR.
LACKER.
<START>First, the statement language that we’ve been using in row 4 to try to influence the probability that we’d like to see immediately after the statement of the next move has conflated two things.<END>
It has combined our assessment of the probability of various data coming in and our intentions about how we’re likely to react to those data.
As a result, when data come in, they have a short shelf life, and not too far out into the intermeeting period the markets become uncertain because we haven’t told them separately what our intentions are, what guides how we respond to the data.
<START>That’s why I think alternative C, which says something about what we’re about, is going to anchor inflation much better.<END>
President Stern, I take your comments to mean that you favor something that’s synonymous with “unwelcome” but less coy, and I welcome that suggestion.
June 28-29, 2006132 of 177We haven’t really given Vincent’s simulations, and the inferences that we can draw from them about the feasible paths of inflation, a lot of discussion or scrutiny.
I’d be interested to know whether the way in which the evolution of inflation expectations is modeled in those simulations is consistent with the possibility of more-sudden and faster changes in those expectations
—as we saw, for example, in the middle of 2003 and as seems to have taken place over the last two intermeeting periods, though with small fluctuations.
It strikes me that they leave out of the entire simulation the possibility of our communications influencing those expectations in a more rapid way.
This is a debate that goes back three decades, and I don’t think we’re going to settle it here today.
<START>But my reaction to those simulations is that it certainly seems plausible to me that we could establish more rapidly in the public’s mind our intentions to aim for inflation at 1½ percent.<END>
And I don’t think we should shy away from attempting to communicate in a way to help that process along.
Stopping when core inflation is accelerating seems to me highly implausible.
I doubt that we would be willing to take that risk with the market.
That’s exactly the problem we ran into in late April with the JEC testimony:
<START>In the presence of declining inflation, the thing that people singled out from that statement was the remark that we may pause even if inflation risks are on the high side.<END>
That statement probably did more to call things into question in these last two intermeeting periods than anything else.
So, again, I think we need to focus on the way markets are going to interpret news coming in and the way they’re going to understand how we’re going to react.
That’s why I’ve been harping on intentions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
<START>Not to beat a dead horse here, but I think we have to be sensitive to the fact that we’re going through a very difficult time right now.<END>
After two or three years of the market’s having a good deal of certainty about exactly what we were going to do, seeing no other June 28-29, 2006133 of 177path for policy but up from very low levels, we’re in an environment in which everybody realizes there’s a great deal of uncertainty.
I don’t think we should extrapolate from the way a particular piece of information is received or remarked upon in this period to our further discussion of where we stand with regard to our statement and the kinds of things that we want to talk about.
Core inflation is a backward-looking number by definition.
There will be times in which we will not want to move on our assessment of the forecast even when core inflation is rising, and I don’t think that we should view that decision as less of a commitment to inflation but rather as a reasoned balancing of our two goals.
Whatever happened after the JEC testimony is more indicative of the period we’re going through and less indicative of how we should think about the way in which we communicate.
We’ve got to keep the balance in mind.
If we don’t keep the balance in mind, I believe we are subject to overreaction, and the economy pays a penalty for that.
I don’t think we should be insensitive to that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Well, let me thank you all very much for your extremely helpful and useful comments.
I, too, think that we should raise 25 basis points at this meeting.
I think it’s justified by the basic economic situation.
The greater risk seems to be from inflation.
I think also, following some things that President Lacker said, that a credibility–psychology issue is going on here.
Late in April, perhaps because of my testimony, we had a small inflation scare.
The TIPS spread widened.
The commodity prices, metals prices, essentially went vertical for a while.
The minutes, my remarks, the remarks of other Presidents and Governors succeeded in bringing those expectations down significantly, even though we had two upside surprises in the CPI during that period.
So obviously some connection exists between our talk and market expectations.
Having said that, I think we need to do what we say we’re going to do.
June 28-29, 2006134 of 177Now, conditional on what we know today, I should also add that I think we’re getting very close to where we need to be.
We don’t know for sure yet.
<START>Obviously we have to look for more information, but in our public utterances going forward we should be somewhat more balanced about the risks and also somewhat more uncertain about where we’re going in the future.<END>
The risk-management calculations associated with this move are quite difficult.
President Poole has mentioned the risk that if inflation expectations get embedded at a higher level, it would be much more expensive to reduce them later than it is to nip them in the bud, so to speak, at this point.
That risk argues for moving earlier rather than waiting to see what happens.
<START>That being said, I recognize that there are also some downside risks, some potential nonlinearities in housing markets and financial markets.<END>
So where I come out is that I think we should move but try to keep our options open and to move slowly if we do move further.
With respect to the statement, I’m the first to agree it’s not a work of art.
We have a very difficult balancing act here.
First, we have achieved some credibility gains in the past few weeks.
We’d like to hold onto those or at least as much of them as possible.
However, we want to keep our options open for August, and we don’t want to generate in the market a fear that we are completely focused on inflation with no regard for output, the other part of our mandate.
<START>It’s a delicate balancing act to show that we are aware of the inflation situation but that we are not single-mindedly focused on the inflation situation.<END>
<START>The statement is designed to show that we are cognizant of the inflation risk.<END>
We take note of the elevated readings.
We mention that inflation risks remain.
We also note, however, that output is moderating and give some reasons for that, and we say in section 4 that the moderation in output will reduce some of the pressure.
Obviously there’s disagreement about how flat the Phillips curve is, but all else being equal, that will be a factor.
<START>June 28-29, 2006135 of 177Responding to Governor Bies’ suggestion, I think putting that first sentence of section 4 into the rationale in section 3 is more logical, but the way section 3 is structured, first it says, “Here are the things that are slowing inflation,” and then it says, “But here’s what we’re worried about.” So if we put it there, it will downgrade it somehow;<END>
if we put it in section 4, it will say that we are aware of the output risk.
<START>There’s also perhaps a subtlety in section 4 that the firming will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth.<END>
That’s actually an adaptation of a suggestion that President Minehan made, and what it does, I hope, is indicate that we’re looking at both variables as we make our decision.
<START>So I’m hopeful that this statement will strike the balance between conveying our vigilance, conveying our concern, maintaining our credibility gains, and removing the notions from the market that we are certain we will move in August or that we will pursue inflation single-mindedly at a rapid rate and independent of whatever happens on the real side of the economy.<END>
Again, with respect to some of the suggestions that were made, I think they’re all very interesting.
President Poole made a very interesting case.
I don’t think there’s a consensus for going to the restrictive language right now.
<START>However reasonable it may be in principle to use the first sentence in alternative C, section 4, or to say that readings are unwelcome, I fear it will tip the balance toward a higher probability in August;<END>
<START>perhaps this nuance is too fine, but I am concerned about the effect on the markets of perceiving the Fed as too aggressive.<END>
There is a new Chairman.
They don’t know me.
<START>As far as they know, I am an inflation nutter, and I want to make sure that they understand that output is one of our concerns.<END>
Those were the main points I wanted to make.
Governor Bies suggested striking the last phrase in alternative B, section 4.
I don’t feel strongly about that.
Does anyone have a view on that?
Vice Chairman Geithner.
June 28-29, 2006136 of 177VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
I guess I don’t have any concern with doing it, except that I wouldn’t know how to answer a question about why we took it out of the formulation after having it in for some time.
Every change we make to the statement has to meet that test, and I’m not sure how I would explain it, although I think I agree with you, Governor Bies, about the reason for it.
But I just don’t think the benefits of doing it offset the need for explanation.
MS.
BIES.
I was just suggesting a change owing to comments from some of the folks trying to interpret us.
Whenever a piece of data comes out, the market reacts, and that reaction is part of the volatility.
To the extent that the data are anticipated, they are implicit in our forecast, and we don’t want to imply that every piece of news changes that.
I was just trying to respond to those comments.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Let me say that I hope in my monetary policy testimony to talk a bit about our framework, our focus on the forecast and on the outlook, and the fact that we will not ever respond to any individual number.
I would be quite happy to receive any suggestions that members might have about how to explain these issues.
We’ll be working on that over the next couple of weeks.
President Pianalto, did you have a comment?
MS.
PIANALTO.
Well, just a comment that we’ve changed “implied” to “determined.” Is there supposed to be a difference?
Again, it’s a nuance, but will people focus on that change of word?
Is “determined” stronger than “implied”?
That’s all.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
<START>It’s valid to change the word back to “implied.” VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.<END>
That would be fine.
Good point, Sandy.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Very good.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I just want to clarify the point that Governor Bies and I were making.
<START>We were suggesting that we move the first half of the sentence in number 4, the clause “although the June 28-29, 2006137 of 177moderation in growth of aggregate demand should help to limit inflation pressures over time,” up to the rationale part.<END>
In the last sentence of section 3, you could remove the word “however” and just put that phrase right at the beginning of the sentence.
I think the result still would have the same continuity that you want to see in the rationale section, and I think it’s more of a rationale point than an assessment-of-risk point.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>It is, but logically you would have to say “ongoing productivity gains have held down the rise in unit labor costs, inflation expectations remain contained, and the moderation of the growth of aggregate demand would help to moderate.” Then you say “however,” signaling that these are the things that we are really worried about<END>
—resource utilization and prices of energy.
<START>The sentence as it stands signals to me that all these things are working to constrain inflation, but we are more concerned about resource utilization and commodity prices because we put them at the end of the sentence, at the end of the paragraph, giving them the greater emphasis.<END>
I think that putting this clause where it is conveys somewhat greater attention to aggregate demand as a new element in thinking about the inflation outlook relative to our thinking at the last meeting.
I realize that it’s a subtle issue of emphasis, and as I said, I don’t think this statement is a work of art.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Of course, I understand the logic, but if you do put it in section 4, as President Geithner said, it has a tendency to stay there.
We have to see what it would look like in future meetings as well.
If you then take it out, you have to question why you are doing so.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>Well, I think the risk assessment is going to change.<END>
We just changed the risk assessment from “further policy firming may be needed” to “risks remain.” So I think that structure is somewhat more fluid than the other parts.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
I was going to make the point President Pianalto made.
June 28-29, 2006138 of 177CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Good.
I would like to put the recommendation on the table for 25 basis points and alternative B as modified by the one word “implied.” You can take care of that later, Michelle?
Do you have it to distribute?
You’ve distributed it already?
MS.
SMITH.
We can insert it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Fine.
Could you please call the roll?
MS.
DANKER.
I’ll be reading the directive wording from page 29 of the Bluebook and the assessment of risk from the table that was handed out with Vincent’s briefing.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 5¼ percent.” And “Although the moderation in the growth of aggregate demand should help to limit inflation pressures over time, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain.<END>
<START>The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth as implied by incoming information.<END>
<START>In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to support the attainment of its objectives.” Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes Governor Bies Yes President Guynn Yes Governor Kohn Yes Governor Kroszner Yes President Lacker Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Warsh Yes President Yellen Yes June 28-29, 2006139 of 177CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.<END>
Thank you.
We have two very short items.
We can perhaps do those, finish the meeting, and then have our coffee.
But first, we’ll be right back.
[Laughter] [Recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
Sorry for that interruption.
We have a report now from the subcommittee on communications.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I distributed a memo earlier this week, a report from our communication with you about how you would like to proceed going forward.
The main thing I’d like to do is hear whether there’s any reaction to that report.
Very tentatively, our idea was to cover goals, broad strategies, and philosophy in August.
A number of people thought it would be a good idea to start with that.
It might provide a framework for further consideration.
Then we would move on to the numerical definition of price stability in our two-day meeting in October, which Debbie will talk about in a few minutes.
<START>Most people wanted to start with the numerical definition of price stability, both because it would influence a lot of what else would happen and because it reflects on the discussion we’ve just been having.<END>
It’s relevant to the way we approach our monetary policy right now and in the immediate future.
It will certainly influence some of the discussion we have about what the announcement should say.
So a number of reasons were given for starting with that, and we proposed to do it at the October meeting.
Does anybody have any reactions?
Cathy.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I certainly think that at the August discussion we need to settle on the policy, the underlying goals, and all of that.
I, for one, am looking forward to an October discussion of inflation targeting about as much as I would be looking forward to a root canal.
[Laughter] I would be happy to put it off for a standard two-day meeting in January.
I know I’m in a minority on this one, but I just wanted to register how much I’m looking forward to this.
[Laughter] June 28-29, 2006140 of 177MR. KOHN.
<START>Root canals save teeth that otherwise would be lost.<END>
No gain without pain.
MR.
LACKER.
You could skip it.
You could stay home.
MR.
GUYNN.
There’s another way to avoid that, I can tell you.
[Laughter] MR. KOHN.
Any other comments or suggestions about these sorts of near-term paths?
Hearing none, we’ll do that.
From talking with my fellow members of the subcommittee, I’m not sure that there’s much background material we could provide for the August meeting.
That will be a sort of broad philosophical discussion.
If we think of something, we will let you know;
or if you folks think of something that would be helpful, please let us know.
For the October meeting, I’ll ask the staff to redistribute the material that was distributed in January ’05.
It was a very complete study of some of the issues involved.
We have a number of new members, and some of us haven’t looked at it in a long time.
After reviewing that material, if we think there is some updating or some further work that needs to be done to inform that October discussion, we ought to proceed from that base.
So I’ll ask the secretary to distribute the study soon and then ask people to get back to me if they see something else they think needs to be done before October.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
What does that actually mean we are going to do in August?
Are we going to have an existential conversation without facts, just a sort of general discussion about conviction?
MR.
KOHN.
Several people thought that defining the goals would help structure the rest of the discussion, and they also had some philosophical points they wanted to make.
This goes to your existential point, perhaps, about the best general, broad, strategic way of accomplishing those goals.
I think it would be useful, and a lot of people thought it would be useful.
At least it might not be a long discussion, and we are trying to do it by extending the afternoon
—that might shorten it.
June 28-29, 2006141 of 177[Laughter] We do not have to spend a lot of time, but I think that, if there are issues to get on the table, it would be nice to get them on the table at the beginning of the discussion.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I know I’m talking too much at this meeting, but with regard to August, I think it’s also important
—and this was the last item on your outline
—to consider communications in a broad context, not in the narrow context of the statement.
We communicate in a lot of different ways, and I think we need to recognize that in a deeper way than we have in the past.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
That is certainly the intention of the subcommittee.
All right.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Danker.
MS.
DANKER.
Just to follow up on the memo that was distributed summarizing the results of the survey on meeting format, that survey revealed a number of areas of clear agreement.
<START>The recent format with the separate go-rounds on the economy and policy is viewed as a good one, and there’s little appetite for substantial change to the format at least for now, but more give-and-take during the meetings would still be welcome by most.<END>
Also, special topics are overwhelmingly considered a good use of time, with strong sentiment for using staff from both the Board and the Banks as well as for allowing enough lead time for ample preparatory work.
Finally, there appears to be widespread sentiment for lengthening the amount of meeting time, but opinions are split about whether two-day meetings are the best way to accomplish this.
On this last point, the survey results and subsequent consultations suggest that a consensus could probably be reached around a steady state of, say, four two-day meetings each year.
These four would consist of two meetings with special topics (two was, in fact, the modal response to the survey question on that) and then two meetings before the Chairman’s semiannual testimonies to allow a more in-depth discussion of the economy and the outlook with the lead-in of the chart show.
For 2007, we are thinking of a baseline of two-day meetings in January and June, as those precede the testimonies, as well as two-day meetings in perhaps March and October for traditional-style special-topic presentations.
Whenever possible, we would schedule those two-day meetings on Tuesdays and Wednesdays since that was the day-of-the-week option that appeared least distasteful to you in the aggregate.
[Laughter] Now, coming back to the nearer term, as Governor Kohn noted, communications issues are likely to require significant additional meeting time before the end of this year, including perhaps a couple of two-day meetings.
Therefore, we would like to add time to the August meeting both by beginning a bit earlier and by extending into the afternoon as much as needed.
As long as the policy decision has been completed, the June 28-29, 2006142 of 177announcement could be released as usual at 2:15 in the afternoon, even while the meeting remains in session.
In addition, we would propose to expand both the October and the December meetings to two days to accommodate the communications topic.
Discussions on this topic are, of course, expected to spill over into next year as well, but for now we are not proposing additional two-day meetings for that purpose.
Depending upon how the extended one-day meeting in August goes and how the communications agenda itself progresses, there would be various options for setting aside meeting time next year for those discussions.
So, going forward, if you are broadly in agreement with this approach to the schedule, we will be sending to your offices in the next couple of days a proposed calendar of meeting dates for the remainder of 2006 and through 2007.
We would request, if possible, a relatively prompt turnaround on identifying significant calendar conflicts because we’re receiving numerous inquiries about next year’s meeting dates, which would typically have been released by this point.
Also, as to the special topics, we plan to survey you later this year to see what special topics would be of interest for the slots next year.
So if you have any specific suggestions to make, please let Vincent or me know before then.
Then once the topics are chosen, we propose to use the System Research Advisory Committee to organize the work, with perhaps Board staff leading one special topic effort and Bank staff leading the other.
Finally, thank you also for the additional comments many of you provided on the survey.
They will be useful going forward.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Are there questions or comments for Debbie?
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Does your tentative two-day meeting schedule, Tuesday–Wednesday, include the Wednesday right before I think most of us have board meetings?
I have noted that, and I think it’s a particular problem.
I know Richmond has subcommittee meetings of the board Wednesday afternoon, and we do sometimes in St. Louis.
I know that there are a whole lot of constraints that make this scheduling extremely difficult.
I understand that, and it may be that some of us are going to have to move these committee meetings to after our board meeting.
But at any rate, if possible, I think we should try to avoid that.
MR.
LACKER.
Actually I like missing my committee meeting.
[Laughter] June 28-29, 2006143 of 177MR. FISHER.
What is wrong with Monday or Tuesday in that sense?
What makes it inconvenient
—because Thursday is a crunch, particularly if you’re going to travel a distance.
MS.
DANKER.
Monday and Tuesday, again, was not the least distasteful option from the perspective of the survey respondents.
MR.
REINHART.
It was also the most distasteful option from the perspective of staff, both at the Board and at the Reserve Banks, because it does interfere with the briefings many of you receive and just makes our life more complicated.
I appreciate that that’s not necessarily in your welfare function.
MR.
POOLE.
Tuesday–Wednesday is fine if it’s not right ahead of our board meeting.
That’s the issue.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Is there a possibility of rescheduling some of the board meetings?
Are they inflexible?
MR.
POOLE.
We’ve had second Thursday every month for our meeting since day one as far as I know.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I don’t want to jump in here, but I suppose that, for the meeting in October, we could check with people about what days the 2007 meetings should be on.
MR.
REINHART.
We will do our best to solve the over-determined system that you’re telling us about.
MS.
DANKER.
We’ll distribute the precise dates in the next couple of days and then please just get back to us.
MR.
REINHART.
Also remember that Debbie said Tuesday and Wednesday in part because we also have to line it up with the calendar of international commitments, which include June 28-29, 2006144 of 177BIS meetings and the annual meetings.
So we start with Tuesday and Wednesday, but we may not get there.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I have complete confidence in Debbie and Vincent to solve this problem.
[Laughter] MR. MOSKOW.
When will you announce the fact that we’ll have a two-day meeting in October and December, and how will you explain it?
MS.
DANKER.
I think the intention is to package the ’06-’07 calendar together.
We hope to have clearance from your offices before the end of July, at which point we’ll go out with the calendar going forward.
I’m sure our Public Affairs colleagues will assist us, explaining the additional meetings later this year on the basis of the communications topic, which I think should be straightforward since that has been in the minutes.
MR.
REINHART.
Remember that, by the time the calendar is released, the minutes of this meeting, the Monetary Policy Report, and the Chairman’s testimony will be out, and we already had a marker in the Report to talk about the formation of the subcommittee.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Any other questions?
Thank you.
The next meeting is on Tuesday, August 8.
We are adjourned, and you can all join us for coffee outside.
MS.
DANKER.
And lunch.
[Laughter] END OF MEETING June 28-29, 2006145 of 177
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 40
