
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendation not to move rates at this time.
The accommodative stance of monetary policy that we have in place is intended in part to protect us against the hopefully short-term slowdown that we’ve seen over the last month or six weeks.
So with that insurance built in, I think the current level of the funds rate should hold us in good stead going forward.
I agree very strongly with your point that if we do move, we should make a move of 50 basis points, not 25 basis points, because the catalyst would be some significant weakness in the economy, some sudden shock, or some risk of a deflationary environment.
On the tilt, I think it’s a very close call.
<START>Good arguments have been made on both sides.<END>
On balance, I have a slight preference for conveying the message in the language of the press release rather than by shifting the tilt, but I certainly can live with the approach that you recommended.
I do think that the markets will view this as at least a short-term increase in the probability that we will move the fed funds rate down at the next meeting.
But as you said, with August 13, 200286 of 92other data coming in they could clearly move in the other direction as well.
So as I indicated, I have a slight preference for the other approach, but I can live with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
Will you read the directive language that has no change in rates but shifts the balance of risks to weakness?
MR.
BERNARD.
This is from page 13 in the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 1¾ percent.” And for the statement in the press release:
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Would you call the roll please?
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes Governor Bernanke Yes Governor Bies YesGovernor Ferguson YesGovernor Gramlich YesPresident Jordan YesGovernor Kohn YesPresident McTeer YesGovernor Olson YesPresident Santomero YesGovernor Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Would you circulate the draft statement, which tries to capture that decision?
[Pause] VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Bravo.
Silence indicates admiration.
August 13, 200287 of 92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does anybody wish to make any comments relevant to the statement?
If not, I will assume that it is adequate for our purposes and it will be released.
Our next meeting is September 24.
We do not have a formal program for lunch, but the usual exquisite cuisine is available for those who wish to stay!
MR.
REINHART.
Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to point out that August 14 is the deadline for corporations’ SEC filings and today, August 13, is the deadline for your filings regarding special topics for the January 2003 meeting.
MS.
MINEHAN.
They both have the same importance, right, Vince?
MR.
REINHART.
My goal would be to distribute a memo to the Committee on Monday that lists the results of your returns.
So there’s still a little time to come in under the wire.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The meeting is officially adjourned.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 2
