
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

That’s favorable for Texas because Texas is the headquarters of three major airlines
—American, Continental, and Southwest.
Southwest traffic by the way was up a little last year over year-earlier levels.
Let me say a word about Mexico, which is also important to our economy in several ways.
The boom of the late 1990s drove our border town unemployment rates down below 10 percent for the first time any of our directors from that part of Texas could remember.
The economic slowdown that has taken place since then has not reversed that as much as we had expected.
There is growing anecdotal evidence that this may be due to Mexican immigrants departing the United States in search of a better life in Mexico.
<START>Mexican consulates reported a dramatic jump in applications for the document used by illegal immigrants to make a legal crossing into Mexico.<END>
Maybe I ought to repeat that.
<START>[Laughter] There has been a jump in January 29-30, 2002Page 88 of 194applications for the document used by illegal immigrants to make a legal crossing into Mexico!<END>
As for those coming the other way, immigration arrests fell 25 percent in the first nine months of 2001 and fell 54 percent in the fourth quarter compared with the fourth quarter the year before.
These factors have contributed to our border unemployment rates going up less than the rates have risen in the central Texas cities.
Staying with the subject of Mexico for a minute, I once told Governor Ortiz that he had only two kinds of monetary policy
—tight and tighter.
That has paid off on the inflation rate, which dropped to a record low of 4.4 percent last year.
Earlier this month, Fitch’s upgraded Mexico’s sovereign debt to investment grade.
Moody’s had done so earlier, but Standard & Poor’s has not acted yet.
There seems to have been very little fallout on Mexico from Argentina’s problems.
The peso has appreciated over the last year by a little more than 5 percent in terms of the strong U.S.
dollar.
<START>The Mexican economy is in a recession, but this is the first time Mexico has had a recession without a financial crisis.<END>
Our manufacturing recession, which began before March 2001, was transmitted to industrial Mexico before our overall economy was deemed to be in recession.
In other words, our slowing economy was transmitted to Mexico as a recession because of the concentration of our slowdown in manufacturing and their heavy manufacturing component.
<START>Longer term, however, there is concern that Mexico’s prosperity along the border, especially in the maquiladora industry, may have made it uncompetitive in future years vis-à-vis China and other countries with lower wages than Mexico.<END>
The greater Dallas area has been the region in Texas most adversely affected by the slowdown and recession because of the area’s heavy concentration of high-tech industries, especially high-tech telecom firms.
The computer high-tech sector is showing signs of stabilizing or even rebounding a bit, but there are no signs of that as yet in the telecom sector.
January 29-30, 2002Page 89 of 194Energy, which is often a countercyclical force in Texas, has weakened recently along with other sectors.
The rig count has declined substantially, and energy employment has declined somewhat.
<START>Twelve of the twenty largest cities in Texas had higher sales tax receipts in November than a year ago, and that included the large cities of Houston and San Antonio as well as McAllen, which is near the border.<END>
<START>Most of the declines in sales tax revenue were concentrated in Dallas and its nearby suburbs, where the telecom corridor is located.<END>
<START>For me the significant development in the national economy is that data that had been uniformly bad have recently turned mixed and, in fact, most recently have been almost uniformly positive.<END>
I have in mind, for example, the rebound in consumer confidence, the leading indicators, and the indexes of manufacturing activity.
The declining inventory depletion that will probably take place in the current quarter is likely to give a confidence-building boost to the headline GDP number.
But as the staff has pointed out, the real question is the sustainability of the initial boost the economy will get from a turnaround in inventory liquidation.
We have no quarrel with the broad outlines of the Greenbook forecast and the staff analysis.
We tend to agree with their views, and we think the staff projection is about right.
If anything, I’m a bit more optimistic.
Personally, I wouldn’t be surprised if the fourth-quarter GDP number came in as a small positive!
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The latest readings on the District economy are consistent with what we’ve been seeing and saying about the business news more broadly.
Consumer spending has been strong, particularly for home furnishings, electronics, autos, and at bars and restaurants.
Housing had a very good year in 2001.
Construction activity was strong, and home sales were at record levels.
And realtors are optimistic;
they think 2002 will be even January 29-30, 2002Page 90 of 194better than 2001.
On the other hand, layoffs have continued.
But the unemployment rate Districtwide and in the major metropolitan areas such as the Twin Cities remains in the neighborhood of 4 percent.
That suggests that a lot of the laid-off workers either have been absorbed elsewhere in the economy or perhaps have chosen to spend a few months in Florida or Arizona, as Minnesotans are wont to do this time of year, and wait things out there.
Manufacturing is struggling but does appear to be stabilizing.
And I would say that the tourism business has been adversely affected by the weather.
The weather has been too good.
But the other side of the coin is that the mild weather has had a very favorable effect on household utility bills, which are running well below last year’s.
As far as the national outlook is concerned, I think the prospects for the economy are favorable.
I don’t have any significant quarrel with the Greenbook forecast.
My own view is that the first half of the year will probably be a bit slower than in the Greenbook and that the second half may be a little stronger, but overall the difference is not significant.
<START>Our VAR forecasting model, which has a pretty good track record except perhaps at turning points, [laughter] has the same general path as the Greenbook, although a bit more subdued.<END>
Certainly there is some possibility that the consumer will be a cause for concern, especially if labor market conditions deteriorate further or don’t even stabilize.
But I’m wondering whether there isn’t less of a mystery about consumer behavior than one might otherwise think.
After all, disposable income has risen consistently over many years now and household net worth, while down from its March 2000 peak, is still considerably above where it was five or ten years ago.
Against that background, I don’t find the ongoing strength in consumer spending all that big a surprise.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
January 29-30, 2002Page 91 of 194MR. HOENIG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our District economy in terms of the level of activity is still relatively weak.
But as others have said about their Districts, the signs are growing that the situation is likely to improve, and there is a great deal more optimism among manufacturers and businesses operating in the region.
Turning to manufacturing for a minute, the level of activity in that sector remains low.
Our Bank’s latest manufacturing survey found that production was down again in December after improving somewhat in November.
Employment, new orders, and capital spending were again low in December relative to a year ago.
But importantly in my view, firms have become considerably more optimistic about the future.
Many more of them are predicting a pickup in business and actually are seeing some early signs of improvement in orders.
So, looking forward, I think the situation is quite encouraging.
In terms of our manufacturing survey, the six-months-ahead index for production climbed fairly significantly.
Granted, the rise was from a low level, but the index almost doubled.
The new orders index more than doubled, and raw materials inventories as well as finished goods inventories increased rather significantly according to the survey.
So, there is a fairly strong positive attitude about the future among manufacturers.
Anecdotally speaking, I talked with several manufacturers who seemed very pleased with the inquiries they’re getting and the orders that are now being placed.
Moreover, they were saying almost uniformly that their inventory levels and those of their customers are such that they are hiring or intending to hire people again.
So there’s a great deal of positive news there, recognizing, though, that these are improvements from a low level.
As for consumer spending in our region, the story is very similar to what you’ve heard from others.
Retailers throughout our District were very pleased on balance with the holiday January 29-30, 2002Page 92 of 194season.
<START>They talked some about the extensive discounting, and they expressed concerns about the pressure that has placed on their profits.<END>
Still, they are very positive about the volume of sales.
Auto sales, like elsewhere, were very strong.
There is some concern about used car sales and about financing related to earlier leases.
A fairly large distributor in the Denver region told us that each car coming back in on a lease has about a $5,000 write-down that someone has to absorb.
So they are a little worried about the impact that will have.
The energy sector has slowed.
Obviously, with prices coming down, the level of activity has backed off considerably throughout the District, more so in the Oklahoma area than in the Wyoming area, though activity in Wyoming is still down.
Labor markets continue to be fairly easy in terms of the ability to hire workers.
<START>It’s still rather easy to find new employees, and there are no real signs of wage pressures that anyone is talking to me about.<END>
The farm economy is legislation-dependent, so we’ll have to see how that develops.
But overall, as I said, there are signs of improvement.
Looking at the national picture and comparing our outlook with that of the Board staff, we’re generally in line with the Greenbook forecast.
We see a little slower rebound as we get into 2002, but activity picks up later, and for the year as a whole our forecast is about the same as the Greenbook’s.
One thing I consider important is that, as others have pointed out, the balance of risks is shifting.
The risks are becoming more balanced, though I’m not saying that they are balanced at this point.
And I think it is a fact that we continue to have a very accommodative monetary policy, which should be a positive factor for growth as we get further into 2002 and beyond.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
January 29-30, 2002Page 93 of 194MR. GUYNN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Overall business conditions in the Sixth District are now more mixed than I reported at the last meeting.
<START>While clearly not as positive as some read the evidence at the national level, things are marginally less negative and at least are not inconsistent with the suggestion that activity may have bottomed out.<END>
For example, our consumer sector continues to display resilience.
Most merchants noted that sales had met or exceeded their expectations.
But I must add that this was not the case for smaller specialty stores.
Discounting continues to be widespread, and the majority of the people we talked with said that their profit margins were noticeably worse during the fourth quarter than a year ago.
The most positive reports continued to come from discount retailers like the Wal-Marts of the world, whose profit margins were steady and whose sales growth was higher.
<START>Automobile sales remained solid but predictably were down from their high levels in November as the incentive programs played out.<END>
Real estate agents and homebuilders in our area noted an improvement in home sales in December from the November pace, and the volume of new permits issued remained strong, especially at the low end of the market.
<START>Our important tourism industry and travel-related activity are still hurting, although we’re seeing some gradual improvement.<END>
Markets such as Orlando are under considerable stress because of the low number of visitors and the abundance of hotel space.
The key factor in south and central Florida has been the decline in the number of European visitors.
<START>Airport traffic through Miami International Airport was down 11 percent from year-ago levels, and advanced bookings at resorts for the first quarter of 2002 were 10 to 15 percent below last year’s level.<END>
<START>Reports suggest that several Orlando hotels are in serious financial trouble, with a number of borrowers having failed to make required debt-service payments.<END>
Additionally, the corporate travel market remains soft.
Conventions are not being cancelled, but attendance is low.
Reports January 29-30, 2002Page 94 of 194that car rental rates are beginning to increase and the fact that airline discounting is being scaled back may signal some improvement in business demand conditions.
Our manufacturing sector remains weak overall, and layoffs continue at a fast pace in the apparel industry, which accounts for one-third of the District’s job losses during this contraction.
At the same time, new orders have improved for some producers of industrial electronic equipment, and some firms have even noted that they were rehiring some staff and extending production hours.
Not surprisingly, producers of security equipment reported strong growth in demand since September 11, and both Lockheed Martin and Gulf Stream continued to benefit from federal government and foreign government programs and from the demand for private secure plane travel.
Large cost increases continue to be noted in health care in the form of higher wages for health care workers and higher health insurance costs to employers.
Bankers in our region, while slightly more optimistic than in December, still report that they are flush with liquidity.
Commercial loan demand is limited to nonexistent.
<START>A contact at Equifax, a leading provider of credit rating services, indicated in recent conversations that the firm had several new and very attractive credit-related products but was unable to generate any interest in them from their customers.<END>
The senior executive I talked with likened the hunkering down of business executives to a “deer in the headlights” phenomenon.
Commercial real estate markets have remained weak in the District.
State and local government projects, which as someone else noted had taken up some of the slack as commercial projects dried up, have now also slowed markedly as local governments face their own budget pressures.
The CEO of one very large commercial builder told me on Monday that he fears a significant gap in building activity before it gets restarted.
January 29-30, 2002Page 95 of 194On the national front, the recent flow of more-positive information, which many of us have noted in our public statements since the first of the year, suggests that we may now be at or near the bottom of the cycle.
The deterioration of the labor market seems to be easing, with average hourly wages and the workweek rising and jobless claims continuing to fall.
Even small businesses are noting that some jobs are becoming harder to fill.
Both of the consumer confidence surveys, which I take as coincident indicators, are now less weak.
Even manufacturing, as measured by industrial production and demand for core capital goods, is less weak.
Also, the signs of renewed demand for noncommunications equipment are encouraging.
<START>While caution dictates that we not become over confident and declare victory prematurely, I find it interesting and reassuring that this is the first time in three or four months that the professional outside forecasts, our own internal models, and the Greenbook do not contain further downward revisions.<END>
Furthermore, with the exception of Argentina, forecasts for the rest of the world have been revised upward.
<START>While the evidence suggesting that a recovery is under way has become more convincing, the strength of the recovery once we get past the initial boost from a significant inventory swing is less clear to me.<END>
Like those who prepared the chart show for yesterday afternoon, my staff devoted considerable time in our briefing earlier this week to looking at how various sectors behaved in the quarters leading up to the recession.
That work underscores how differently a number of important factors varied from other recent cycles.
<START>Those differences and the questions they raise about how the same sectors will behave coming out of this recession point out the uncertainty and the risks we face in trying to ascertain the shape and strength of the recovery.<END>
I’m particularly struck by the remarkably strong consumer spending and housing numbers.
Like some others who have commented already this morning, I think one can make a January 29-30, 2002Page 96 of 194good case
—and the Greenbook has done that to some extent
—that we are likely to get only modest additional contributions from those sectors in coming quarters.
I may be even more cautious in my outlook for those areas because I think there’s a reasonably high probability that job losses still to come will be greater than in the Greenbook baseline forecast.
And therefore, the return to job growth may look more like what we saw after the 1990-91 recession.
Businesses are under more pressure than ever to show profits and very likely will continue to squeeze their labor costs.
I have argued in the past that the outside reading of the implicit policy rule being followed by the Fed is to cut the funds rate until we see signs of a turnaround in economic activity.
The economy seems to be at that point.
While further fiscal stimulus now looks less likely and probably less needed, significant monetary stimulus remains in the pipeline.
Thinking more now about the longer-term path of policy, further easing at this point would appear to hamper our ability to return the funds rate to appropriate levels as we get into the recovery.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
Thank you.
Those of you who live in the warmer climates of the nation probably don’t realize that we are now at the peak of the boating season in the north of the country!
That’s because boating is not about having a large, expensive piece of fiberglass bobbing up and down in a marina someplace.
It’s about boat shows because that’s where all of the real excitement takes place.
The ten-day-long Cleveland boat show concluded this past Sunday.
I reported to you a year ago that a vendor of jet skis and personal watercraft had sold only 9 items last January versus 100 the year before.
I had thought that that was actually a positive development.
So I rather reluctantly report that there has been a sharp rebound in January 29-30, 2002Page 97 of 194personal watercraft sales this year.
In light of what people were reporting about the excitement at the Cleveland boat show, I did an Internet search to see what was going on elsewhere.
The boat show season kicks off every year with the big show in New York at the Javits Center.
This year attendance at that show, which was held over the first nine days of the year, was over 100,000.
According to some vendors, they saw an increase of as much as 40 percent in sales.
<START>Some boat dealers claim that half their sales occur during the January through April boat show season, so they take the strong sales in these first few shows of the season as an indication that it may be a strong year.<END>
One industry analyst on boating offered the view that the rebound we’re seeing in that industry involves a shift in consumer spending toward family recreation.
He claims that this is consistent with a lot of other recent developments, such as more family events at arenas and entertainment centers.
He believes people are substituting buying a boat, for example, instead of going to Orlando or other so-called family destinations, to achieve a sort of “feel good” effect.
As a side note let me mention something about auto shows
—a phenomenon kicked off, of course, with the big Detroit show.
This has nothing to do with macroeconomics, but we were told that the excitement among the crowds was overwhelmingly at the GM exhibits.
Second in popularity was Chrysler.
There were virtually no crowds and no excitement at the Ford exhibits, which underscores what we are already seeing about that company and the problems it is facing.
<START>In the retail sector, even large national retailers that had reported declines in sales versus a year earlier expressed essentially relief that the declines were smaller than they had expected.<END>
Certainly by the end of September most people were marking down very, very sharply their expectations about fourth-quarter sales.
<START>One director with a large national retail company said, “We were prepared for a complete disaster, and it did not happen.” Let me note an interesting January 29-30, 2002Page 98 of 194twist regarding what is going on in retailing<END>
—which may feed into the GDP numbers released this morning and may reflect my ignorance about how those numbers are put together.
A director said that, even with a year-over-year decline of only about 8 percent, his company experienced a much, much bigger increase in the volume of goods moved than he had thought possible.
Then he said that, of course, inventories were dropping by more.
I asked why, and he said that his company is running sales of 50 to 70 percent off, which means that they have been losing money on all those discounted items sold.
He said that the cost of what comes out of inventory is higher than the price that goes through the cash register.
I don’t know what deflators are being used to adjust these data, but it’s hard for me to understand how the Commerce Department knows how to do that.
<START>I don’t understand how Commerce knows what is actually moving and what prices are appropriate<END>
—the deflators to use
—for either the merchandise coming out of inventory or that going through the check-out stand.
One final note on the retail sector:
A number of directors indicated that we should expect in our region a significant increase in unoccupied retail space because a number of store closings in major urban metro areas have been announced and our directors think there will be more.
From the manufacturing standpoint, as in Mike Moskow’s District, cautious optimism was the general tone that we were hearing from our contacts except those involved in the manufacture of large trucks
—eighteen-wheelers
—or related industries.
With the exception of Ford, the auto assembly and parts plants all indicate that they are operating at high levels.
And probably reflecting the unusually warm weather this winter, going on three months now, both residential and nonresidential construction are very strong, at least on a seasonally adjusted basis.
We’re told that manufacturers of electronics, plastics, and chemicals are now seeing the first improvement in orders in a year.
A large regional bank said that it now has openings for 1,500 January 29-30, 2002 Page 99 of 194 people and is offering existing employees a $500 referral bonus for bringing in someone who is hired and stays with the bank for at least six months.
On the national front, in terms of this Greenbook versus the last one, I probably would not have marked down the second half as much as the staff did because of the absence of fiscal stimulus.
Then again, given the discussion we had last time about how much of what was called fiscal stimulus was really an effect on the timing of business fixed investment spending, it is hard for me to judge the likely effect of the changed fiscal outlook.
To the extent that there is a fiscal impulse on certain expenditures, I do tend to think of it as only a timing effect.
So the Greenbook may be right.
Perhaps activity from 2004 or 2003 is not going to be pulled into the second half of 2002 as much as it otherwise would have been.
It’s hard for me to say.
<START>But I still think that the basic trend is more likely to be stronger rather than weaker.<END>
I suppose I wasn’t counting on as much from so-called fiscal stimulus in the first place.
To me an emerging risk that we’re going to have to think all about a bit more
—and I certainly am trying to understand it a little better
—is what I view as a fallout from the Enron debacle.
Yesterday, as you saw, it was announced that got caught up in the accounting issues that have emerged of late.
That was something we had been addressing, of course, for some weeks, and we knew that if there was a disclosure, there could be a reaction.
If a sequence of these types of disclosures comes out, I think we’re going to have to worry about whether people’s general confidence in and the quality of the earnings reports we have seen for some time are as good as we would like to have believed.
That has to be bad for the equity market because the risk premium is going to be influenced by that.
January 29-30, 2002Page 100 of 194Let me fold in some thoughts about the national outlook and what Bob McTeer said about Mexico.
It is true that, when our economy slowed, the Mexican economy dropped as well.
However, that pattern is symmetric.
When our economy tends to recover, theirs will also;
I think of it as something of a slingshot effect.
The Canadians certainly are hoping for a slingshot effect if the U.S.
economy picks up more than had been expected earlier.
I view this $10 trillion economy as a strong locomotive which, if it starts to perform a little better, will help pull along not only Mexico and Canada but most of Asia except for Japan.
I think those countries are poised to do quite a bit better assuming that we also do better.
As we shake off pessimism in this country
—and that pessimism may have been rational but I do think there has been excessive caution in the business sector
—I believe those countries will also.
The result will be a building momentum of optimism that is going to show through in a lot more commerce on a global basis.
There is some lag involved, but I do think it’s fairly short.
My conclusion about the risks to the outlook is very similar to what Tony Santomero said, so I won’t repeat that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Economic conditions in the Second District continued to improve since my last report, and inflation has remained negligible.
State governments in the District face very significant budget gaps, but they are handling them in my view both responsibly and well.
New York City, to a large degree related to the events of September 11, has a rather significant budget gap for the coming fiscal year.
But the general feeling of the City is extremely positive, as we continue to recover from September 11 and as the new mayor is off to an extraordinarily positive start.
<START>He has been successful not only in attracting some unusually good people to his administration but also in reaching out to January 29-30, 2002Page 101 of 194minority communities in a way that has brought to the City a renewed feeling of togetherness.<END>
It seems to be a very positive beginning.
Retailers report better-than-expected sales in late December and early January and say that inventories are lean.
Private-sector job losses in New York State, New York City, and New Jersey abated noticeably in December.
In fact, in the City we lost 70,000 jobs in October, 20,000 in November, and only 10,000 in December.
Indeed, it looks very much as if the District is not going to have as much of a problem period as it did in the early 1990s, when its economy performed much less well than the rest of the country.
Rather it seems poised to do at least as well, and perhaps even a little better, than the nation.
The office market in New York City appears to have improved somewhat in December, but the suburban markets in the metro area continued to soften.
You’ve probably been reading about the announcements by some securities firms that they are moving their backup sites.
That was really anticipated, so it’s not particularly new news except perhaps to the reporter who broke the story.
On the national level, we share the view that the economy is already recovering and that the inventory correction will return the economy to fairly decent growth by midyear.
We believe the expansion will then continue but at a pace that’s a bit modest, as the Greenbook suggests.
On the downside, let me expand on one risk that has been mentioned and cite some additional factors that are of concern.
The stock market and the yield curve in the bond market clearly are forecasting a much stronger economic recovery than any of us is anticipating, with much stronger growth in profits.
The equity markets could, as the Greenbook suggests, limp along sideways for a while and then grow.
On the other hand, when profits disappoint, as I think they will, we could have an equity market correction of some significance with a resulting adverse effect on consumer confidence.
<START>January 29-30, 2002Page 102 of 194In the business community there is such a degree of gloom that, in response to the clear views of the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, we have in fact been recommending a discount rate cut since December 29.<END>
The only way I could have avoided that was to tell our directors that they should do what I want and not what they want, and I don’t believe that’s what the president of a Reserve Bank should be doing.
To what degree this gloom could become a self-fulfilling prophecy is very, very difficult to predict.
I think what is likely to occur is that business fixed investment will come back more slowly than any of us would like to see.
<START>Of course, as in the Santomero-Jordan view, we could have excessive gloom, then a big swing toward a rebirth of optimism, and then business fixed investment would come back even stronger than we anticipate.<END>
I believe that the risks are somewhat to the downside in that I think the economy could experience a recovery in the middle of the year and then pause
—not stall out and go back into recession but look as if it’s not going to pick up further.
At that time, we might be required to do some additional easing of monetary policy.
On the other hand, even though I view Tony Santomero’s scenario as less probable, I think it’s entirely possible.
Therefore, it seems to me that in the monetary policy area we have to be unusually watchful and prepared to move in whichever direction appears appropriate, if either does.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The list of indicators that are beginning to show signs of strength is long and getting longer.
I won’t go through all the upbeat statistics, but let me focus on two summary measures.
One is what other forecasters are saying.
These forecasts can be viewed as summaries of all the leading indicators and statistics now available on the economy.
I don’t have a complete time series, but both the Greenbook and the Blue Chip forecasters have been revising their projections upward lately, in contrast to last year when January 29-30, 2002Page 103 of 194revisions were sharply and continuously downward.
The second is what financial markets are saying.
<START>The staff in its Monday briefing devised a statistical measure that combines leading information from the stock market, term spreads, and the real fed funds rate to measure the probability of recession.<END>
This measure rose sharply around March of last year, indicating recession.
It is now dropping sharply, indicating that the recession is over, roughly replicating the behavior of the index in earlier recessions.
Now, I wrote this a day or two ago, and I would add a cautionary note that essentially follows what Jerry Jordan said a minute ago.
If there is what I’ll call an accounting shock to the stock market, we may have to take that into account in our thinking in some way.
But aside from that caveat, based on this evidence and all the other things we’ve heard this morning, there seems to be far less need for an expansionary monetary policy than there was previously.
I also want to focus on a different side of the question that we haven’t talked about very much in our meetings.
It concerns what could be called the marginal impact of monetary policy.
There are two ways to think about this marginal impact.
One is what I’ll call the orthodox approach, and the second is what I’ll call the regression-to-the-mean approach.
<START>In the orthodox approach, a drop in short-term interest rates lowers long-term interest rates and raises consumption and investment.<END>
Models using this approach
—our own FRB/US model doesn’t really use this approach
—are usually complicated and not strictly linear.
But the impact of monetary expansion is approximately linear.
That is, the impact on consumption and investment is roughly the same when the funds rate is, say, 4 percent as when it is 2 percent.
By contrast, in the regression-to-the-mean approach, long rates stay within their historical bands.
Long rates average expected future short rates over a long period of time, and it is natural that, when bond dealers form long-term expectations, there is a strong adaptive component.
In this sense, when January 29-30, 2002Page 104 of 194short rates get well outside their historical ranges, it becomes progressively harder to budge long rates.
In this approach, the marginal impact of changes in short rates could be much less when short rates are 2 percent than when they are 4 percent.
The logic is essentially the same as with the zero-bound liquidity trap argument except that the motivating factor is not so much the zero bound as such but a comparison of long rates to their historical ranges.
It’s not hard to figure out where I’m going with this.
We just may be getting to the range where further reductions in the funds rate will not have that much impact on long rates and on the real economy.
And this point is magnified by another factor that is contrary to what most textbooks have these days, as amply discussed in the Reifschneider-Williams paper.
At least for the United States right now, rate reductions are unlikely to raise net exports, one of the important channels of monetary policy.
<START>The effects of overall economic strength, good policymaking, and other factors seem clearly to dominate the Mundell-Fleming mechanism, whereby easier monetary policy lowers the currency values and stimulates net exports.<END>
The combination of less need for monetary expansion and, if true, the declining marginal impact of monetary expansion means that we may have hit a crossing point.
For most of last year, the need for expansionary policy was clear, and policy easing was presumed to be effective.
Then the choice was relatively noncontroversial.
<START>Now the need is dubious, as is the effectiveness, and there is a much stronger case for standing pat.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>As others have already said, the recent indicators have on balance been more positive than one might have feared at the last meeting, and they are broadly consistent with recovery starting before long.<END>
Unlike Governor Gramlich, I’m not going to put much weight on the consensus forecast because, while it is obviously meant January 29-30, 2002Page 105 of 194to be a compendium of a large number of forecasters, I’m not so sure the forecasters have gotten it right thus far.
Actually, I would put more weight on some of the incoming data, particularly in my case on the new orders for capital goods.
Given the nature of this slowdown, the place where I thought I’d first look to see if there’s any turn is in that area.
And indeed new orders for capital goods did firm in the latter part of 2001, especially for computers and semiconductors.
In addition, there’s a variety of survey data that others have talked about, which I think might be indicative of a turn, as well as the initial claims data.
Moreover, there are some forces that will be at work to give a lift to the economy in the months ahead.
<START>Inventory liquidation has been brisk over the past year or so, and the accelerator relationship bodes well for recovery in business investment once firms see final demand stabilizing and turning up.<END>
In addition, I take some comfort from the fact that returns on investment in tech goods outside the telecom sector appear to have remained high, which should bolster investment and continue to keep labor productivity growing relatively strongly.
Having said all that, I think the major policy issue here really has to do with the so-called balance of risks.
There are two ways one can look at that.
One involves the risk of some surprise that throws us off the baseline forecast.
In that regard I think a number of forces are restraining the economy and create some downside risks.
I’d like to pick up on one that Jerry Jordan and Ned Gramlich touched on, which strikes me as very important.
<START>The most recent profit reports have been roughly in line with expectations or even a little better, but profits continued to fall relatively sharply last quarter.<END>
Moreover, the scope for improving profits will likely be affected by a limited ability to raise prices at a time of ongoing competitive pressures.
The equity markets do seem to continue to incorporate a fairly sharp turnaround in profits in January 29-30, 2002Page 106 of 1942002.
That could, if it fails to materialize, send stock prices lower and adversely affect both business and household spending.
I would add to this the point that Jerry Jordan made, which is that the so-called Enron effect or accounting effect creates some greater uncertainties, which again add to the potential downside risks there.
There are other kinds of risks that one might point to.
Declines in energy costs have been supporting consumption and business profits in the aggregate.
<START>But as I recall from the chart show yesterday, it seems as though going forward energy prices have only a little more room to decline in a lagged response to the previous drop in the price of oil.<END>
The wealth effect that we’ve talked about is probably still mainly negative, with more drag on household spending to play out.
Finally, there’s the entire question of the interplay of the asset and liability sides of the balance sheet with respect to both households and businesses.
<START>If profits remain weak, if unemployment continues to pick up, and if the ability to increase compensation remains in any sense constrained, there’s a possibility<END>
—in a context where both households and businesses have taken on a lot of debt in recent years
—that debt service burdens may become increasingly onerous.
I’m not suggesting that this will necessarily play out in the way that the newspapers or magazines portray it, but there is still a possibility that debt service burdens will exert downward weight, if you will, on households and businesses.
So from that standpoint, I believe the risks are primarily to the downside.
One way to think about our policy decision
—and no one has raised it thus far
—is that we have a dual mandate.
The fact that inflation appears to be under control currently and is likely to remain under control gives us a little more scope to look at the other side of the mandate
—to foster maximum sustainable growth.
Here I’d like to point out that in the staff projection the output gap is persistent and positive during the entire forecast period.
If one is to believe the January 29-30, 2002Page 107 of 194staff forecast or others, we will have an output gap for the next eight quarters that goes from about 1.8 percent of GDP down to about 1 percent of GDP.
One might argue
—and this might be consistent with what Cathy Minehan was saying earlier
<START>—that in that environment the easier monetary policy scenario in the Greenbook, which suggests a bit more easing and is similar to the “inflation cushion” scenario in the Bluebook, be totally inappropriate.<END>
might not Again, that’s contrary to what Ned Gramlich just said, and I’m not sure my position necessarily is one of strongly recommending further easing.
But I’d like to leave that possibility on the table because we do have a forecast scenario in which there are a variety of downside risks.
<START>Moreover, even if the baseline forecast materializes, it will mean a very weak recovery with a persistent positive output gap.<END>
<START>And I think we should not let the second half of our mandate go unheeded in a period when inflation and inflationary pressures seem well contained.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
Shortly after the last meeting I heard two major retail bankers
—one on the East Coast at the Boston Fed board meeting and then a couple of days later one on the West Coast
—describe their loan portfolios with surprising optimism, both in terms of loan performance and of loan demand.
Given that so much of our focus at the last meeting
—and it’s the case again today
—was on the question of the resilience of the consumer, I’ve informally surveyed about a dozen other banks and one finance company as to what their experience has been on the consumer side.
I have a couple of observations to report.
First of all
—and I corroborated this with our own numbers from Call Report data
— thirty- and ninety-day delinquencies at the end of the third quarter of 2001 were roughly the same as in 2000 and 1999.
Although charge-offs were up slightly, one institution accounted for January 29-30, 2002Page 108 of 194a significant number of those.
In each case, I would say that the contacts I talked with expressed optimism and they said that loan performance was positive very much across the line with the exception of the subprime market.
Both in automobiles and in real estate the subprime market is weak.
One factor that may be having an impact there is that we are getting very close again, for at least the third or fourth consecutive year, to having bankruptcy-reform legislation.
And each time we do, we get an upturn in the number of bankruptcy filings, which particularly affects the subprime marketplace.
In terms of products, the growth product for consumer loan portfolios has been the home equity line of credit, almost across the board among banks.
And bankers are hopeful that they can resume auto lending, with the automobile industry changing its incentives from the zero percent financing immediately following September 11to the rebate in 2002.
But the real increase, of course, has been in the refinancing of real estate.
That has had two interesting effects.
<START>One, it cuts off the growth in home equity lines of credit because a homeowner cannot withdraw his home equity by refinancing and also commit it to secure a line of credit.<END>
They are mutually exclusive.
<START>But because there have been a lot of refinancings, either for purposes of debt consolidation or to obtain a lower interest rate, we have the seeming contradiction of growth in the consumer loan portfolio actually freeing up funds for discretionary spending because of the reduction in overall debt payments.<END>
In sum, the consumer sector has clearly outperformed expectations to this point from a year ago.
The movement in retail credit portfolios has supported discretionary spending.
But lenders are cautious.
They are aware that unemployment has not peaked and that loan performance on the consumer side will lag, so they do expect to see some further weakness in coming months.
In general, I don’t hear anybody describing consumer sentiment as buoyant.
January 29-30, 2002Page 109 of 194Their assessment is more cautious.
I would say that their evaluation of the consumer’s ability to participate, either at current or slightly higher levels, is neutral or maybe just slightly above neutral.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Many of the comments I had put together we’ve already focused on, but let me summarize the issues I’ve been looking at.
First, on the inflation front
—after today’s numbers particularly
—I continue to be quite surprised by how little evidence there is of price increases.
The fact that we actually had a fall in nominal GDP in the quarter is unusual, over a period of a couple of decades anyway.
It leads me to be concerned about what is going to happen to gross corporate earnings in the coming year.
To get the PE ratios that the market is pricing in
—to get to those double-digit earnings increases
—would imply huge increases in unit sales in the context of a lack of pricing power.
<START>So, I share some of the concerns stated earlier about the ability of companies to generate that quickly the earnings turnaround implied in current PE ratios.<END>
This recession, as we’ve discussed, has been shallow in large part because consumers continued to spend throughout the whole recessionary period.
One can look at the events of September 11 as a shock that produced something of a cocooning effect
—people didn’t go anywhere and didn’t buy anything for a few months.
We’re now seeing consumer confidence back to the level that prevailed before the September 11 events.
And to the extent that consumers can just hold the course for the next few months, I think we have a strong base and I believe that we have turned the corner on economic activity.
The rapid liquidation of inventories by businesses in the fourth quarter is another sign that inventories are close to the levels companies will need to have, even though the small January 29-30, 2002Page 110 of 194business survey, as I read the numbers, indicated that those firms still plan to cut inventories in the first quarter.
<START>Moreover, as Governor Ferguson noted, the good news is on the business investment front as a whole, since that is what got us into this recession.<END>
The fact that new orders for computers and peripheral equipment have grown for three months suggests that we probably have hit the bottom on that.
Even small businesses, while still intending to liquidate inventories, now indicate that they actually are looking at plans to increase their capital investment expenditures.
<START>Since I believe small businesses have been critical in creating job growth in this country, I see that as the starting point for getting us back to a faster pace of growth.<END>
Let me note two areas I am concerned about.
One was mentioned quite a bit in the various District reports, and that is the problems that state and local governments are facing.
Many state and local governments are running out of their rainy day funds.
Several are under severe stress.
Many that had unemployment reserves are not going to have much left, barring any additional assistance that comes from the federal government, and that is already showing up in layoffs and reduced support for local services in a lot of areas.
<START>These reserves were accumulated for the purpose of helping the people who have probably lost their jobs.<END>
So I am concerned about the effect and the potential drag on economic activity from the state and local sector, whether it’s in construction or employment more generally.
<START>I also share the concerns that several have mentioned about confidence in the capital markets due to the Enron scandal and other recent accounting restatements.<END>
<START>I think the noise is going to get even worse, given that some of the earnings boost this year is due to changes in good will accounting.<END>
Those changes effectively stop amortization and give a one-time uptick to stated earnings.
But it really isn’t earnings;
it’s just another accounting change.
<START>I also worry that January 29-30, 2002Page 111 of 194if companies are forced to bring joint ventures back into their consolidated statements, they may be bringing them back on the books just at the point when the joint ventures are going from losses to profits, and that may make the earnings picture cloudy.<END>
It will further reduce confidence in the quality of the accounting standards in this country.
On balance, I believe that the economy has turned.
I see neither risk of inflation nor risk of deflation.
<START>The forecast in the Greenbook is close to what I would project, but I am more pessimistic about companies rehiring workers.<END>
I think that will occur much more slowly than is forecast in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
Coffee is available in the next room.
Shall we take a break?
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Increasing signs of stability in demand and production lend credibility to a forecast that the economy is in the process of turning up, potentially leading to a resumption of sustained economic growth.
The better news of the last few months suggests that the major forces that have been depressing final demand over the last year or so are abating and their further effects will be limited, even though they have not yet completely played themselves out.
For example, although previous declines in equity prices will continue to restrain consumption, the net rebound of equity markets in recent months, if not reversed, should limit the extent of the negative wealth effect.
In the business sector, the firming in orders for capital goods helps to support an assessment of good progress in working down the overhang, and the persistence of productivity gains suggests strong incentives for capital investment going forward.
The terrorist attacks have left little lasting imprint on consumer confidence.
And overseas, economies also show some signs of stabilizing and have been resilient to contagion from Argentina.
<START>But while this evidence on demand and asset prices provides some comfort that the recession will be shallow and end soon, it leaves considerable margin of doubt about the strength of the recovery.<END>
The forecast of the staff and FOMC members for 2002 is that the pickup will be moderate, consistent with some further slackening in resource utilization in the near term.
In the staff forecast, the output gap closes slowly in the second half of 2002 and in 2003.
<START>As suggested by the staff memo on monetary policy effectiveness, the nature of the shocks of the past year<END>
—by lowering expected profits, raising risk premiums, and affecting economies overseas
—has led to asset price movements that imply that the gap between the funds rate and its equilibrium level significantly overstates the degree of demand stimulus embedded in financial markets.
<START>That is, owing to a higher cost of equity capital, January 29-30, 2002Page 112 of 194lower wealth, a stronger dollar, and elevated risk premiums in credit markets, the monetary policy pipeline is not as full as might be supposed.<END>
And these more adverse financial conditions may unwind only gradually in the recovery.
<START>Pressures on profits and cash flow in coming quarters could well damp increases in equity prices and reductions in risk premiums, as well as hold down growth in investment more directly.<END>
Moreover, as Dave Wilcox pointed out yesterday, because household spending has been so well maintained, the release of pent-up demand for durables and a rally in residential construction that historically have accounted for some of the vigor of recovery are not likely to be present this time around.
As could be seen in the extended baseline in the Bluebook, the continuing restraints on demand in the staff forecast mean that the degree of ease in the stance of policy must be reversed only gradually to permit the economy to return to its potential.
In fact, an outlook like that in the staff forecast could be seen as providing support for another modest policy easing.
<START>With the federal funds rate held at its current level through most of this year, substantial output gaps persist over the next two years, and inflation comes down appreciably further.<END>
Easing policy another notch would promote growth while allowing some, more limited, further decline in inflation.
Indeed, the rate of inflation forecasted in the Greenbook for 2003 is quite low
—in the zone the Reifschneider-Williams briefing yesterday identified as elevating the odds on policy being constrained by the zero nominal bound.
<START>If the economy were to be hit with major downward shocks over the next few years, the scope for achieving negative real interest rates to counter the effects of those shocks would be narrow.<END>
<START>Since it’s not difficult to conjure up a number of candidates for such adverse developments, the Committee might feel more comfortable if the economy were stronger and inflation a little higher over the period in which those shocks might occur so that real short-term rates could be lower in the future, if necessary.<END>
<START>In this context, a further reduction in rates today could be seen as “insurance,” though against the possibility of a future adverse surprise requiring a substantial monetary policy response rather than against a possible near-term shortfall in the economy stemming from recent developments.<END>
But the recent more upbeat data also make it more likely that policy may already be positioned to support a sufficiently robust expansion to provide a margin of safety against adverse shocks.
And these data increase the odds that a further ease would risk policy overshooting
—of fostering a rebound in demand that could be difficult to contain.
Keeping policy unchanged at this meeting would allow the Committee to assess better the likely strength of demand and its response to its previous easing actions, a considerable portion of which was undertaken in the last few months.
<START>Those actions were taken partly in anticipation of a period of further weakness in economic activity and decline in resource utilization and were influenced as well by an assessment of substantial downside risks in the forecast.<END>
<START>In the event, the outcome perhaps has been a little better than many of you probably expected after the terrorist attacks, and the odds on even more adverse outcomes from the forces that have been bearing down on the economy have diminished considerably.<END>
<START>Indeed, the positive cast to the data may suggest increased chances that the economy could continue to come in stronger than forecast, better balancing the considerable remaining downside risks.<END>
<START>If firms have been calibrating their reductions in inventories, investment spending, and labor force to the possibility of very weak outcomes, the persistent strength in consumption could spark a reasonably robust rebound in business spending.<END>
January 29-30, 2002Page 113 of 194Moreover, the current very easy stance of policy as measured by short-term interest rates itself provides some cushion against downside economic risks.
<START>The gap between market and economist evaluations of the most likely strength of the recovery has narrowed over the intermeeting period, but it remains wide, and the yield curve retains a steep upward slope.<END>
<START>Should incoming data point to a weaker recovery than is implicit in current market prices, a funds rate of 1¾ percent leaves considerable scope for intermediate-term and long-term market interest rates to work lower, which could lend support to the economy while the Committee evaluated the need for further policy action.<END>
<START>Although the Committee may see the risks around the type of rebound in the staff forecast as now better balanced, they may still be weighted to the downside, and the forecast itself suggests unbalanced outcomes, at least for a time.<END>
<START>With growth in output remaining below that of potential for a while and inflation on a downward trajectory through the forecast interval, your goal of maximum sustainable growth would seem to continue to be at greater risk than your objective of keeping inflation low.<END>
The decline in inflation, by itself, will tend to increase the real federal funds rate.
<START>The message of an announcement of unbalanced risks and an unchanged funds rate target would be that on balance you were still more concerned about subpar growth than about rising inflation but your concerns had diminished considerably.<END>
<START>In the current circumstances, with inflation likely to be falling, a judgment that the risks were balanced would seem to require some confidence that final demands were strengthening enough, and the recovery had taken hold sufficiently, to promise sustained growth above the trend of potential at the current stance of policy.<END>
Such growth is needed to reduce the output gap and eventually put a floor on the rate of inflation.
Financial market participants apparently expect the economy to be sufficiently strong to put high odds on substantial tightening beginning this summer.
<START>If you share their outlook, you probably should adopt an assessment of balanced risks at this meeting.<END>
Under conditions of the staff forecast, however, it is not until late this year that the Committee needs to begin moving the federal funds rate more actively back toward a neutral stance in order to forestall the economy later overshooting the level of its potential.
You may consider even that delayed tightening as premature if you are concerned about low rates of inflation and resource utilization in 2003.
Despite the expectations embedded in interest rates, most market observers anticipate that you will retain the current balance of risks assessment at this meeting, perhaps on the way to balanced risks at the next meeting or so, and market reaction to such an announcement should be minimal.
<START>Your implied doubts about the strength of the recovery might lower long-term rates a little further, but if the stance of policy is kept unchanged at this meeting, markets are unlikely to build in expectations of additional near-term policy easing unless the information becoming available over coming weeks turns unexpectedly weak.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Are there questions for Don?
January 29-30, 2002Page 114 of 194MR. PARRY.
Yes, I have a comment more than a question.
I found chart 4 in the Bluebook on alternative strategies for monetary policy quite interesting.
<START>To me it seems to highlight the important point that inflation has gotten low enough that the particular inflation goal matters for near-term policy decisions.<END>
<START>In addition, the inflation goal has become important in the context of the discussion that we had yesterday regarding the zero bound on nominal short-term interest rates.<END>
<START>In my view these considerations call for some further Committee discussion at some point, perhaps at the June meeting, about the desired steady-state rate of inflation.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
Don, you referred to the framework reflected in chart 5, which depicts the current fed funds rate versus various estimates of the equilibrium real fed funds rate.
<START>I find this a useful framework even though I do have problems with the use of a lagged PCE as a proxy for inflation expectations.<END>
Nevertheless, you cited a number of reasons why, in the current situation, the funds rate may not be as stimulative as it appears.
Given that, let’s say you superimpose on that chart the relationship of the nominal funds rate to other market rates
—the spreads of the two-year, five-year, and ten-year rates over the funds rate.
If those spreads are wider, would you characterize that as more stimulative or the same amount of stimulus for a given nominal or real fed funds rate?
MR.
KOHN.
I would characterize that as markets believing that the current nominal funds rate is quite stimulative and likely to result in fairly vigorous growth before too long and, therefore, they expect the funds rate to have to rise.
To me that would indicate that markets are optimistic, as reflected in the yield curve and as reflected in the equity markets.
It says that financial market participants are more optimistic than the Board staff
—or I think than many of you, judging from your forecasts submitted for this meeting.
I don’t know that it indicates January 29-30, 2002Page 115 of 194relative to your own forecast that policy is stimulative.
I think it indicates that the markets believe policy is stimulative, however.
MR.
JORDAN.
Okay.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions for Don?
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
<START>Don, also on chart 4, I was curious about the projection of the unemployment rate in the price stability scenario.<END>
I realize, obviously, that these are long-term projections, but when the forecast is run out to 2006 the unemployment rate is still significantly above the NAIRU at that point.
I was just wondering how this model works.
When would you expect the unemployment rate to start coming down closer to the NAIRU?
MR.
KOHN.
I think it would be coming down over subsequent years.
As we get to 2005 and 2006, the real federal funds rate is about at its equilibrium.
When it’s at its equilibrium, the economy should come to its equilibrium.
So, convergence to the NAIRU would be occurring.
It’s just a question of how fast it would happen.
The dynamics of this are such that, in order to make it happen faster, you could have a somewhat lower real federal funds rate, obviously, for a time and then come up to the equilibrium later.
But the way this model is constructed, convergence will happen gradually as the economy comes to its equilibrium.
MR.
MOSKOW.
So it would happen but beyond the 2006 timeframe?
MR.
KOHN.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
<START>Not to prolong this discussion too much, but following up on the last couple of commentaries, I want to raise a concern.<END>
<START>I’ve never been one to think that having a number that we agree is our inflation target<END>
—or certainly that publicizing such a number
—is a good thing.
But I must say that these charts raise that issue, particularly when as in chart 4 price January 29-30, 2002Page 116 of 194stability is defined as ½ percent, measured by core PCE, and that chart suggests that it takes three to five years to get there.
Granted, who can really rely on the results of a model when one is projecting out that far?
Still, using that framework for thinking about this issue is a little disturbing, given the amount of resource slack that is embedded in that kind of price stability number.
I’m not sure I want to go in Bob’s direction, but I must say that these charts are a little troubling to me.
MR.
KOHN.
<START>I think an interesting, almost extraordinary point here is that this Committee faces a problem that no FOMC has faced in years.<END>
What is it, nearly forty years?
Many of you
—and some people who aren’t here and departed recently
<START>—used to say that it would take just one recession to get back to price stability.<END>
<START>We had that recession plus a nice burst of productivity growth, and inflation is in the neighborhood of price stability.<END>
The Committee for the last twenty years really has not worried about how low inflation should go.
But now you have something new to factor into your thinking about monetary policy.
That doesn’t necessarily mean that you need to vote on what that number is and publish the number.
But it does mean, as you’re thinking about your policy choices, that you need to keep in mind that it is possible for inflation to go too low.
Actually, I think it’s a compliment to the Committee that you’ve gotten to that point over the last twenty years.
MR.
PARRY.
That’s exactly the point I was trying to make in saying that we need further Committee discussion of this.
MR.
MCTEER.
Maybe we ought to enjoy it instead of worrying too much about it!
[Laughter] MS. MINEHAN.
Yes, why doesn’t it feel enjoyable?
January 29-30, 2002Page 117 of 194CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, those are your central banker credentials at work.
[Laughter] MR. FERGUSON.
Our job is to worry about everything.
<START>Good news is good and bad.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions for Don?
If not, let me get started.
I don’t have much to add to what has been said, but there is an issue that I think requires some attention.
<START>Earlier today, Dave Stockton raised the question of a potential internal inconsistency in the forecast, which stipulates that profit margins will remain flat at a very low level but also assumes that the stock market holds up, the wealth effect does what it does, and the demand for capital goods starts to come back.<END>
There also is a question as to whether the lower portion of chart 9 from yesterday’s presentation, which depicts nonfinancial corporate profit shares over the last twenty years, depicts the true underlying profit potential.
Current and projected profit shares are shown in the chart as being below those of 1991 and even those of 1982.
In constructing the national income accounts, BEA includes stock option realizations in the wage and salary component of the accounts but largely excludes the capital gains of companies that may offset those costs.
The reason is that, by definition, capital gains are stripped out of the national income accounts.
<START>However, one should seriously question whether including the realized capital gains on company-issued stock options in employee compensation while excluding capital gains from company profits constitutes “single-entry bookkeeping.” Indeed, if the capital gains on the exercise of options were to be included in company income, the profit share would be boosted by a sufficiently large amount to bring it back to 1991 levels at least.<END>
<START>Nonetheless, the decline in that profits share ratio, even after taking appropriate account of both sides of firms’ books, is still very pronounced, and it raises some interesting questions as January 29-30, 2002Page 118 of 194to why the forecasted recovery is so tepid.<END>
The reason surely is that we had a 3.1 percent annual productivity growth rate in the fourth quarter at what might have been the bottom of this cycle.
<START>The usual expansion in profit margins coming off of the bottom of a business cycle typically is boosted by a turnaround from negative to positive output per hour.<END>
However, unless somebody wants to come out and forecast a 6 percent annual productivity growth rate, it’s hard to make that projection this time around.
As a consequence we’ve got a very tricky problem because I would venture to say that, if indeed this is the correct profit margin forecast, then clearly the implied stock market valuation in the Greenbook is just not right.
<START>As David has argued, these numbers, especially down at these levels, are quite sensitive to very small changes in big aggregate totals like employee compensation.<END>
<START>Consequently, if the slowdown in the rate of increase in compensation were to be a little larger than expected or the rate of price disinflation is not as onerous as is implied in the Greenbook, then we’re talking about a 7 percent profit margin.<END>
<START>And when the other aggregates involved are very large, small changes in the elements of unit labor costs, or even in corporate energy costs, can have significant effects on the profit margin.<END>
The problem is that the Greenbook indeed may have it right, and the slowness of the economic recovery that effectively reflects this in an interactive way suggests that what remains an open question is whether final demand really is going to pick up when the inventory runoff starts to abate.
This leads to an ever-increasing need, I should think, for a standard old-fashioned Keynesian multiplier effect coming from the swing of inventories spilling over into disposable income and creating a level of final demand beyond what’s implicit in the Greenbook.
<START>But while this may seem like a standard recovery out of a post-World War II recession, there is an anomaly here because, as has been commented on before, GDP hasn’t gone down very much.<END>
Indeed, as January 29-30, 2002Page 119 of 194of this morning’s release, it went down even less than we thought.
Moreover, the upside momentum from the multiplier kick, which has been one of the factors that has given us a 7 percent increase in the first four quarters of earlier recoveries, does not show up in these data.
Indeed, it may not be there in reality, which would say that this is a different type of recovery.
As a consequence, the general notion of keeping the balance of risks toward weakness in fact reflects what is obviously the state of play at this time.
Nonetheless, the degree of inventory liquidation that has taken place has been so large and pervasive that it will help support the economy, if only because as we’ve discussed previously one of the very few things we know about economic forecasting is that inventories cannot go below zero.
<START>So, if they are being liquidated at a very rapid rate and the level of inventories is moving toward zero, of necessity the rate of liquidation must slow irrespective of anybody’s state of confidence, wishes, hopes, or fears.<END>
And if that does happen, unless consumption falls off very dramatically, production has to rise to meet consumption.
This is one of the very rare phenomena that one can employ with certainty in economic forecasting.
There are few others that can provide the high degree of probability that this has, and the liquidation we have seen is bigger than we’ve ever seen it.
The trouble is, what happens in the spring or summer when it’s over?
I would scarcely want to argue that the horizon for our balance of risks statement is really focused on a period six months from now.
<START>So in a certain sense there is an argument, to which at the moment I’m not subscribing, that we ought to go to a neutral balance of risks as well as hold the funds rate unchanged.<END>
The difficulty is that this institution’s credibility has gotten to a point where what happens in the marketplace reflects not only the market’s expectation of what we are doing to the funds rate but also what the market believes our economic outlook is.
<START>Consequently, if we make January 29-30, 2002Page 120 of 194no change in the funds rate today, which is what I recommend, and on top of that we were to move to a statement that the risks are balanced, the markets would change.<END>
Long-term interest rates would rise.
And I submit to you that as of tomorrow morning the markets would essentially be reflective of an environment in which the balance of risks should be negative because the rise in long-term interest rates would alter the general outlook.
<START>So in our meetings we are required to evaluate not only the balance of risks but also what our statement about the risks will do to the outlook, which feeds back on our assessment of what the balance of risks is.<END>
As a result, I would prefer to stay with the balance of risks toward weakness and leave the funds rate unchanged.
And having listened to the conversation around this table, I suspect that generally is where most of us are.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
Let me just add a comment since I’m supposed to know something about markets.
I think that the market reaction to our going to a balanced risk statement would be formidably dangerous.
And, therefore, I believe it is especially important that we follow your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation on the funds rate.
I would have preferred a move to a balanced risks statement.
Let me just comment briefly about our situation looking ahead.
Taking the Greenbook forecast as a baseline
—and in my view it’s a very reasonable baseline
—I think our policy options this year are going to be relatively straightforward if the outcome approximates that baseline.
We’re going to keep the funds rate about where it is or nudge it up along the way.
The policy decisions will be relatively January 29-30, 2002Page 121 of 194uncomplicated.
<START>A number of people have talked about the downside risks, and I attach positive probabilities to all the risks that people have mentioned.<END>
<START>If in fact the economy comes out significantly on that negative side of the baseline, then I think our situation will be less comfortable but actually still rather straightforward.<END>
The funds rate will either stay the same, or we’ll be shading it down.
That’s about all we can do under those circumstances.
I’d like to comment very briefly, though, on what would happen if the outcome were on the high side of the Greenbook forecast.
There is a distribution around that outcome.
I’d note, of course, that the economy is very, very liquid.
<START>Money growth has been very high, and I think it is not by any means beyond the realm of possibilities that we could see some quarters where real GDP growth is in the 6 to 8 percent real growth range.<END>
<START>That’s a fairly easy number to get to for a couple of quarters if consumption demand remains around 4 percent, business investment tends to level off, and we get an inventory surge.<END>
<START>If that happens, then the issue going forward is going to be how sustained that growth is likely to be, and we’re going to have a much more difficult job of managing expectations.<END>
I think what will happen under that set of circumstances is that, as soon as we start to raise the funds rate, the market is going to project more funds rate increases to come.
<START>As a consequence, it will be a tricky task to manage expectations correctly so that the market doesn’t overshoot a sensible response.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
<START>I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, including the balance of risks statement, although it seems to me that most of the time at the trough or very early in an expansion that’s almost stating the obvious in terms of where the risks lie.<END>
Let me make a comment on one other thing.
I certainly don’t know how the profits picture is going to play out.
But the Greenbook does have rather modest productivity gains over the next several quarters.
If January 29-30, 2002Page 122 of 194we get just a percentage point or so better than that, that may not be great for labor market conditions but it may show up in improved profit margins, other things being equal.
And I can easily imagine that occurring.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You know, if we cyclically adjust it, the 3.1 percent productivity growth figure is a rather larger number than any of us would believe.
MR.
STERN.
Oh, cyclically adjusted that’s a remarkable number.
But if we look at the Greenbook numbers going forward from this point, they are still rather modest.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That’s true enough.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
Thank you.
I thought your analysis of the profit situation was very interesting, and I’d like to understand it better.
So maybe in the future the staff could illustrate for us how sensitive these numbers are to changes in the assumptions about such things as productivity.
I would also include an analysis of other factors, such as the repatriation of earnings under alternative assumptions in a global marketplace.
As for the policy action this time, I have no problem at all with staying at the current funds rate.
On the risk statement, I agree that changing it is a risky thing to do once we already have a statement in place.
<START>It is the changing that bothers me, and I want to be cautious about doing that.<END>
<START>At the December meeting I would have been very happy to leave the funds rate target where it was, and if the consensus was to have the balance of risks on the downside, that would have been okay.<END>
But my second choice would have been to cut the rate, as was done in December, and to go to a statement saying that the risks were balanced.
Had we done that, I can’t see that anything we heard here today would lead people to say that now the risks on the downside are greater than they were in December.
That wasn’t the tone here at all.
But what troubles me most about the risks statement is how it’s interpreted by the markets and the public.
And the truth is that I don’t know.
The word January 29-30, 2002Page 123 of 194“weakness” doesn’t mean weakening or declining.
If it means weak as in not robust, that’s one thing.
But none of us is saying that we think the downside risks are such that we could see declines in economic activity from this point on;
we’re simply saying that we expect not very vigorous growth.
So I think we’re stuck with the same balance of risks toward weakness, and all I can hope is that in remarks and testimony it is explained as saying that we’re expecting growth but not very vigorous growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I support both parts of your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Mr. Chairman, I support both parts also.
Let me say two things.
On the balance of risks, if the scenario that many of us have in mind pans out, we will have a lot of time to move to change the risk statement from weighted toward weakness to balanced.
I don’t think we have to do it today.
There’s going to be time.
This is the way we’ve acted in the past.
We’ve turned policy around slowly.
<START>So I’m very comfortable with standing pat on the rate and keeping the negative balance statement.<END>
Perhaps if we were to change an adjective or two in the statement, that might help.
Let me also go back to an issue that both Cathy and Roger raised in the earlier go-around.
<START>Looking out a bit in time, as in the Bluebook simulations, would we prefer a combination of 5 percent unemployment and 1 percent inflation or 4½ percent unemployment and 1½ percent inflation?<END>
They indicated that they might well prefer the latter choice, and I might too.
But I don’t think we have to make that decision now.
Even though this is not the way the simulation was framed, I think that’s a question that will confront us in the future as we face the issue of January 29-30, 2002Page 124 of 194how fast we come back to equilibrium.
I think that’s a good question, but it’s a question for another day.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support both halves of your recommendation.
I will say that, as I listened to Don Kohn’s presentation, my earlier statement indicating that I could imagine even supporting a cut in the funds rate today was in some sense reinforced.
I know Don was trying to give both sides of the argument.
He did a great job.
<START>And I do think there are some credible arguments for saying that we really should keep the possibility of a reduction in the funds rate on the table.<END>
Therefore, I also was pleased to hear what Governor Gramlich had to say about this being an issue for a future day.
<START>It is just not clear to me that we are doing everything we should be doing if we are going to tolerate unemployment that appears likely to be at or near 6 percent for as long as the forecast allows us to see the future.<END>
That is above anyone’s estimate of the NAIRU.
Even people who recently left the Committee, I think, accept that the NAIRU is that high.
<START>would not It’s not quite clear what price inflation or price stability should be, but it doesn’t strike me that 1½ or 1¼ percent is totally unacceptable and means that we have failed.<END>
But for today, I will certainly support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
In my statement I talked about the risks on both sides.
But I do think the two key risks, which we all talked about
—capital spending and the consumer
—are truly weighted to the downside.
A lot can always go wrong on the consumer side.
So I support both parts of the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
January 29-30, 2002Page 125 of 194MR. PARRY.
<START>Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation with regard to the rate, and I certainly would defer to you and Vice Chairman McDonough in terms of the market effects of changing the balance of risks statement.<END>
However, it doesn’t appear to me that the risks are now primarily in the direction of generating economic weakness.
To me, at least, the risks actually appear balanced.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I support your recommendation on both parts, Mr. Chairman.
I believe a more measured approach to monetary policy is appropriate today.
I think we should let the policy stimulus currently in the pipeline work through the economy, and in my view a pause would be a good idea.
Moreover, the groundwork has already been laid so that the markets and the public will not be surprised if we leave rates unchanged.
<START>Indeed, I think they would be comforted by that decision, as it would reinforce their view of the recovery without making them euphoric and then getting into the feedback problem to which you alluded.<END>
And I think that’s an important thing to consider.
So I fully support your proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I fully support both parts of your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I guess I was a bit attracted to Don’s definition, if you will, of what constitutes economic weakness in the sense of excess capacity in the system.<END>
And I think that’s what we are looking at.
It’s not that excess capacity will be increasing;
obviously it will diminish over the next year or so.
But it seems to me that, when we think about the context of risks at a particular time, we have to be looking at risks within at most a year’s time frame and no more than that.
Over that time frame of a year I think economic activity is going to be weaker than we would like it to be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
January 29-30, 2002Page 126 of 194MR. BROADDUS.
I fully support both parts of your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
If I may, I’d like to make an observation about the comments of Bob and Cathy and others regarding the longer-term simulations.
I hope we don’t get too uncomfortable too fast with the price stability we’ve spent twenty years trying to achieve.
[Laughter] In that context I would just point out that I have great respect for the simulations, but there’s a huge confidence interval around those simulations when one is looking three or four years down the road.
<START>Also with respect to the zero bound, if we’ve achieved price stability, we have high credibility, and we’re going to have to live with that threat of approaching the zero bound.<END>
To me, one of the things that came out of Marvin’s presentation yesterday was that it made me optimistic that we can study the issue further and become more comfortable with ideas on how we can deal with it.
So before we make any decisions along those lines, I think we need to study it further and talk about it further.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
I, too, was struck by some of Don Kohn’s comments on definitions of weakness.
I hope there is some way that we can signal that we’re talking about growth in the economy being significantly below what we consider to be its potential.
<START>I don’t want people to infer from the risk statement that we’re expecting a double-dip recession to come along.<END>
So if there’s a way that we can make that clear in the wording of our statement, I would be more comfortable with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I support your recommendation.
<START>I support the part on the no change in the rate enthusiastically but on the bias somewhat reluctantly.<END>
<START>It is literally true, as you pointed out in the first half of your discussion, that the balance of risks is more toward weakness than January 29-30, 2002Page 127 of 194inflation.<END>
And that is the other side of the coin.
But given the lag in the effects of the rate cuts already built in, it seems to me that some language could be put into the press release indicating that for policy purposes we think the risks, looking forward, are going to be balanced.
Part two of your discussion reminded me that I don’t think we’re doing ourselves a service by voting on a bias at these meetings.
I think we’d be better off if we just voted on the rate, did not vote on the bias, and therefore did not have a bias to announce.
Pretty soon we’re going to have to get into the area of game theory to figure out the dynamics
— CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We’re already there!
[Laughter] MR. MCTEER.
So I continue to hope that someday we’ll be able to get off that tiger.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
I support the recommendation, both parts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>A majority of the voting members appear to be in favor of holding the rate where it is and maintaining the balance of risks toward weakness.<END>
Would you read the appropriate directive language?
MR.
BERNARD.
This is from page 13 in the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 1¾ percent.” With regard to the balance of risks, the sentence reads:<END>
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks continue to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes Governor Bies Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Jordan Yes President McTeer Yes Governor Olson Yes President Santomero Yes President Stern Yes January 29-30, 2002Page 128 of 194CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Would you circulate the draft statement?
[Pause] Comments?
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
I would suggest that we change “business spending” to “business fixed investment” since we’ve agreed that the inventory part of spending might be dramatically in the other direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That’s an excellent suggestion.
Can we do that?
Let’s write in “business fixed investment.” VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I don’t have any big ax to grind, but my view is that the average American thinks of “business spending” as business spending and that “business fixed investment” is more the jargon of economists and market types.
I think the term “business spending” actually is better at explaining to real people what we’re talking about.
SEVERAL.
How about “capital spending”?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
That’s fine.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
In other words, “household and business capital spending”?
January 29-30, 2002Page 129 of 194MR. KOHN.
Yes, something like that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is that acceptable to you?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Sure.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does anybody else have any comments?
If not, I’ll assume that is acceptable.
Now we have the final item on our agenda, and I will turn the floor over to Governor Ferguson to lead the discussion.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you very much.
This item involves another step on our journey toward greater transparency, which we started several years ago.
The issues were raised in a memo that was distributed dated January 22.
I’d like to put to the Committee three questions, which are interrelated.
One is, Should we disclose the existence of dissents
—the tally of the vote on the target federal funds rate, if you will
—after each meeting?
The second question is, If so, what should we disclose?
On this question there are a number of options.
We could disclose just the vote itself
<START>—that the vote was unanimous or was 11 for and 1 against, for example.<END>
Alternatively, we could disclose the tally of the vote and the names of dissenters, if any.
The third question, which is related to the first two, is, How should we make this disclosure?
That obviously goes to the question of disclosing this information shortly after the meeting.
Should we include it in the statement released after each meeting, or should we have our Public Affairs staff disclose the tally and the name or names of any dissenters in response to questions from the press?
Our Public Affairs people talk to the press at about 2:15 p.m.
or so to release the statement.
<START>My recommendation on this matter was a close call in some ways, and in my memo I tried to lay out the arguments on both sides.<END>
I’ll just review them very briefly.
A number of reasons exist in favor of disclosing the tally, and possibly the names of any dissenters, around the January 29-30, 2002Page 130 of 194same time that we release the press statement after the meeting.
First, the information may be relevant to the markets in fully understanding our policy decisions.
When the existence of dissents comes out currently, it is certainly noted in the press and perhaps, though it’s hard to say, by certain market participants.
<START>Second, the absence of any disclosure of the vote immediately following a meeting has recently led both market participants and journalists, on occasion, to use a proxy to try to determine whether or not there were any dissents.<END>
And the proxy they seem to be using has been the number of Reserve Banks requesting a change in the discount rate.
That proxy sometimes is accurate, and sometimes it is not.
The third reason for disclosing the existence of dissents and the names of the dissenters is that we currently follow that practice with respect to the votes taken by the Board of Governors on discount rate actions.
We do indeed disclose the vote tally, and in the past when there were dissents, the names of the dissenters.
So this would be conforming the practice for FOMC votes to the practice that we currently use with respect to the votes taken by the Board on discount rate changes.
Also, other central banks do disclose their votes, and as far as I can tell from talking to them, that turns out not to have been very disturbing or disorienting to markets.
Additionally, we believe that our press office would be obliged to disclose the tally and the names of any dissenters in response to a direct question from the press.
<START>To date there have been no direct questions, but there is certainly a risk that someone who is either well versed on Freedom of Information issues or new to the press scene will ask a direct question and will get this information.<END>
That would leave us in the moderately awkward position of trying to explain why we hadn’t disclosed that type of information earlier.
<START>Finally, another argument in favor of making this disclosure at the same time that we release the press statement is that the Committee January 29-30, 2002Page 131 of 194clearly is willing to let the markets know about dissents because we put that information into the minutes.<END>
So it’s simply a question of timing.
Now let me go to the arguments against doing this.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
May I interrupt for just a second?
MR.
FERGUSON.
Sure.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think you ought to point out that our General Counsel thinks our legal requirement to release this information is unambiguous.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Yes, he does.
I’m looking to see if Virgil Mattingly is here.
SEVERAL.
He’s behind you.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Yes, that’s the reason I raised the point.
Virgil has told me that currently the situation is as follows:
The first time someone asks for this information, the press officer could say that a FOIA request would have to be filed.
But the second time anyone asks the question directly, we would be obliged to release the information.
So our room for maneuver, if you will, is somewhat more constrained than one might have thought earlier.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Why is that?
Why would we be obliged to release it immediately at the time of the second request?
MR.
FERGUSON.
Virgil, will you speak to that?
MR.
MATTINGLY.
There is a provision in FOIA that once an agency has disclosed a particular kind of information then that information has to be made available to the public immediately upon request.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thereafter.
MR.
MATTINGLY.
Yes, thereafter.
The act cannot be used to put people through the FOIA process for obtaining information when that information has already been determined to January 29-30, 2002Page 132 of 194be public.
There is a specific provision that says that, once an agency has acted on a request for a particular type of information, the agency has to make it available if there is reason to believe that others would be interested in that or similar information.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Supposing we argue that it is detrimental to our policymaking processes to do this and we take this issue to court
—is there any conceivable scenario that you can think of in which we would prevail?
MR.
MATTINGLY.
No. We had the ability to prevail until the Committee changed its practice with regard to the release of its policy decision.
Once you release the decision you must release the vote.
MR.
FERGUSON.
My understanding is that once we decided in 1994 to announce any change in the target federal funds rate shortly after our meetings, it brought this entire FOIA mechanism into play.
So, in response to a question we have to release the vote tally and how each individual voted.
MR.
MATTINGLY.
Correct.
MS.
MINEHAN.
And how timely this is done doesn’t enter into the equation?
<START>We can’t say that we will release the information but only at a point in time when it would tend not to be detrimental to our immediate operations?<END>
MR.
MATTINGLY.
Well, I don’t see how we could.
We would have to show that to release it before the minutes are released is going to cause the government financial harm.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Financial harm is the issue?
MR.
MATTINGLY.
Right.
The reason we didn’t have to release the directive before 1994 was that we argued, and prevailed, that we couldn’t release the directive before the Desk fully implemented the FOMC’s decision because it would cause the government financial harm.
<START>January 29-30, 2002Page 133 of 194Whether that was right or wrong, that’s what we argued, and the Court agreed to it.<END>
In 1994, when we initiated the practice of making the policy decision public, we abandoned that argument;
and once the decision is public, then the vote is public.
Now, we could make anyone who asks for the vote tally go through the process of filing a FOIA request;
using the act that way would get us ten days maybe before we would have to release the vote.
But we would be using the act in a way that it was not intended.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Now we have gotten this legal advice on the table.
There are arguments on the other side, and I don’t know if they outweigh the legal advice.
Most of the arguments on the other side go in the direction of the point that Cathy just raised, which is whether immediate disclosure might somehow or other feed back onto our decisionmaking processes in a detrimental way
—perhaps by making Committee members either more or less willing to dissent.
<START>Another argument one could make is that we are a very consensus-driven institution, and that has brought us a great deal of credibility and support in the markets and among the public at large.<END>
Therefore, disclosing the vote tally and the names of any dissenters at the same time that we disclose the statement regarding our policy decision would tend to undercut the consensus-driven nature of our decision.
The simultaneous disclosure of the decision and the vote would put a great deal of focus on the dissenters as opposed to the majority view and thereby dilute the strength of the majority view, if you will.
The other argument against immediate disclosure, and it should be very clearly on the table, is that this is a bit of a slippery slope.
<START>Once we disclose the existence of a dissent and the name of the dissenter, let’s say through our press office, some excitement will arise.<END>
There will be a bit of frenzy among the press to arrange to talk to that individual and find out why he or she dissented on the vote.
Following our meetings we have a two- or three-day “blackout” period during which we do not January 29-30, 2002Page 134 of 194talk to the press, and that gives us some protection.
But once we are outside that period, it’s going to require a great deal of discipline on the part of a dissenter who wants to respect the consensus-driven nature of the FOMC’s decisionmaking process to manage what could be a fairly tough press interaction without undermining the majority view.
<START>So, there are very legitimate arguments on the other side.<END>
When I thought about this, I felt that it was an extremely close call.
But we do have these legal considerations that we’ve talked about as well.
So, those are the issues on the table.
I think in part we have a process issue, but as Virgil has indicated, we also are dealing with a somewhat broader but more focused legal issue as well.
I believe the main points have been made.
A number of others might emerge during the course of our discussion.
At this stage, I think the best approach is to open this up for general discussion among us and get perspectives on how you think we ought to proceed now that you’ve been briefed on the matter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I was sitting on the fence until I heard the legal opinion.
And what struck me is that the real choices are whether we change our practice now or whether we do it essentially in response to other people’s actions.
If I thought that we could go on indefinitely the way we are, frankly I would think seriously about not releasing the vote tally because in fact nobody has been pressing us to do so.
And it doesn’t strike me as a “market necessary” issue.
It’s not obvious to me how much the market would benefit from this information.
<START>But I must say that given the legal opinion, which strikes me as pretty much overwhelming, I don’t see how we can avoid doing what you suggest.<END>
So that’s where I would come out.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Okay.
President Jordan.
January 29-30, 2002Page 135 of 194MR. JORDAN.
I would have preferred to leave our practice as it was.
But now I see this as a done deal because we’re going to release minutes in six or seven weeks that will reflect this discussion.
So now I’m going to have to decide whether I want to vote against this and have the press disclose that I’m against transparency!
[Laughter] I really wish that this item had not been on the agenda.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Well, the Secretary always writes the minutes very carefully.
And I say this quite seriously:
You ought to vote for what you think is right.
We can manage the fact that we had a discussion about ongoing issues regarding transparency.
If you feel despite this legal opinion and other considerations that this is still not something you want to do, then please be driven by that.
Don’t be driven by what might happen six weeks or so from now because I feel certain that we can manage that aspect.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I’d like to pick up on the slippery slope point that you talked about.
I don’t think we can consider this from the perspective of whether we do or do not want to make the vote public.
I believe we want to think about the world as it will exist under the new scenario and examine that a bit to see whether or not there are mechanisms in place or that need to be put in place to deal with that alternative scenario.
Specifically, I could see a world in which we in stepwise fashion announce the vote without attribution by name, as you suggest in the first part of your proposal.
Then the press will try to figure out exactly who voted in what way and how it will be announced.
Then there is a realization that in fact we have to release the vote with names and then the press will immediately go to the person or persons in question for a documentation of the dissenting position.
In that case we would go to step three, which becomes the vote, the name or names and the point-counterpoint being part of the debate associated with the announcement.
<START>In truth we’re going to land at the end of that slippery slope very quickly, as the January 29-30, 2002Page 136 of 194press tries to figure out what to make of what we have done.<END>
So it’s more than a question of whether we release the vote.
It’s really about how we are going to change the mechanism of communication associated with this process.
When we announce a formal vote that involves dissenters by name, we almost of necessity have to set up the majority view and the minority view and be prepared, if you will, for at least some documentation or discussion of those views.
That takes this a lot further than the question of whether we should slip into our press statement a sentence that says in effect:
“By the way the Committee approved this decision by a vote of X and Y.” Given that the law says we have to disclose the vote as soon as somebody asks for it, the only issue is whether we are proceeding down the administrative path in such a manner that the disclosure is a credible way of presenting our views regarding the appropriate monetary policy.
And that’s a lot harder issue to assess.
MR.
PARRY.
Could Virgil answer the question, Is there a step 1?
Weren’t you saying that we’d have to release both the tally and the names of any dissenters?
MR.
MATTINGLY.
If we have a request under the Freedom of Information Act, yes.
MR.
PARRY.
Okay, so there isn’t really….
MR.
SANTOMERO.
There is a kind of conceptual step 1, right?
MR.
PARRY.
Yes.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
That step is deciding just to disclose the vote tally.
And then people will try to identify the dissenter or dissenters.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
May I ask a follow-up question to counsel?
MR.
FERGUSON.
Sure.
January 29-30, 2002Page 137 of 194VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
<START>Let’s say I dissent, which I don’t plan to do, and the press asks me why I dissented.<END>
Is there a FOIA obligation for me to explain that?
Or can I explain it when I choose to explain it or when the Committee chooses to have me explain it?
MR.
MATTINGLY.
Under the Committee’s current procedures, when the Committee releases the minutes the reason for your dissent is in the minutes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I thought a member need not put the reason for his dissent in the minutes.
MR.
MATTINGLY.
He need not.
But if he chooses to, of course
— CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
But I think that’s the question that’s being asked, is it not?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
No. He understood the question I asked.
My question was, Do I have to answer inquiries about the reason for my dissent as soon as somebody from the press asks for it?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I see.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
And the answer to that I gather is “no.” MR. MATTINGLY.
The answer is “no.” MR. PARRY.
But that’s not a great deal of comfort.
MR.
FERGUSON.
No, it’s not.
May I respond to a point that President Santomero raised?
We have a process now of disclosing the existence of contrary views, including the strength and nature of those views, in the minutes.
I do not think anything we’ve talked about here would change that process.
Certainly I am not putting on the table that we do anything other than disclose the majority consensus view in our official statement.
<START>Also, with regard to the slippery slope issue, as all of you who have been on the Committee for some time know, we are still struggling with the question of at what point we should release the minutes.<END>
So we January 29-30, 2002Page 138 of 194might come back to that question, though not at this meeting.
But that could be a way to handle the issue of when and how we disclose minority-majority positions.
There is one other fact that I should put on the table.
When we looked into this issue, one thing we reviewed was the nature of the press coverage
—and as far as we could tell the market reaction
—to the release of the vote and the names of dissenters on discount rate actions, which by definition means Board members.
Actually, the press coverage was surprisingly muted.
Those votes with dissents were primarily 5 to 1 votes, or occasionally 5 to 2 votes when there were seven Board members.
<START>The press coverage typically just reflected the fact that Governor X voted against this change in the discount rate or, for example, that Governor X has long been on record as thinking that rates should not continue to rise or decline.<END>
And there seemed to be no market reaction.
<START>So as we think about the frenzy and excitement, it may become muted over time.<END>
The first time it could be quite exciting.
<START>But after a while, if an individual has a long record of perspectives that differ somewhat from the majority view and chooses to dissent, it could be that the press coverage will be straightforward.<END>
It may simply be reported that Board member X or Reserve Bank president Y
—who has long been on record as not favoring whatever the decision was
—dissented.
<START>So the evidence does not suggest that there will be an ongoing frenzy and excitement with a focus on dissents.<END>
Past press coverage of dissents suggests that there will be a passing observation but not too much excitement about them.
<START>That’s not a prediction of the future, but there is some reason to be optimistic that, if we manage ourselves well, the press will eventually manage itself well.<END>
MR.
MOSKOW.
Roger, when was the last time that we had dissents on a discount rate action?
MR.
FERGUSON.
The last time I saw was 1991.
January 29-30, 2002Page 139 of 194MS. MINEHAN.
Yes.
MR.
MOSKOW.
So that was before our current practice of releasing a statement
— which does get a lot of attention
—that began in 1994.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Things certainly have changed.
MR.
MOSKOW.
And all the wire services pick up our decision quite promptly.
MR.
FERGUSON.
That’s absolutely true.
But the other side of the coin is that in that earlier period the discount rate was the only signal about decisions on interest rate movements that was made public.
Everything else had to be gathered from trying to interpret the operations of the Desk.
So there was certainly some focus on discount rate actions.
The news articles were as long and as abundant as they are now.
So it has played both ways.
There was certainly a desire to find out what was going on, and in a sense that was the only signal that the Federal Reserve gave.
So the situation was different but not totally different from today.
President Parry, you’re the next one on my list.
MR.
PARRY.
Well, I wish we had never started down this road as well.
But I am uncomfortable about releasing the vote tally, including the name of a dissenter, by itself.
The important information is really not found in the numerical tally but in the direction and the rationale for any dissents.
Simply reporting the existence of a dissent after an FOMC meeting without revealing its motivation could add noise to markets unless it is clarified.
Even if dissenters are identified, it seems untenable that further questions about the direction and rationale of their dissenting vote could be left unanswered until the release of the minutes, especially given the typical six-week lag in their release.
In the interim, the pressure for disclosure would be intense, and the possibility of erroneous speculation would be counterproductive.
I also would like to know a bit more about the practices of other central January 29-30, 2002Page 140 of 194banks.
For example, the Bank of England doesn’t release the vote tally along with the press release announcing its decision.
That is made public only with the release of the minutes, which of course occurs two weeks later.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
FOIA is an American law.
MR.
PARRY.
Exactly.
MR.
FERGUSON.
That’s right.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
I came in here expecting to resist this for all of the reasons that Bob Parry just summarized.
But what I’m hearing is that it’s the law of the land, and I believe this institution needs to follow the spirit as well as the letter of the law.
So I think we have to do it.
But to come back to something that you said, Roger, this raises a question about the timing of the release of the minutes for the meeting.
So if we do this, I think we need to address that issue at a fairly early date because that’s the only way we’re going to provide the full picture with a balance regarding the views on the Committee.
MR.
PARRY.
Al, do you mean we have to release the names or release the names and the rationale?
MR.
BROADDUS.
As I understood it, to abide by the spirit of the law we should release the dissenters and the names of the dissenters but not the argument, right?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That’s correct.
MR.
MATTINGLY.
You’re not required to release the argument.
MR.
BROADDUS.
We’re not required to do that.
But we are required, essentially, to do the other?
MR.
MATTINGLY.
Correct.
January 29-30, 2002Page 141 of 194MR. BROADDUS.
All I’m saying is that I think we have to recognize that and do it.
But if we do that, then we need to get the full argument on the table as quickly as possible.
<START>That’s because, even if the dissenters don’t give their rationale for dissenting, the focus is going to be on those dissents.<END>
So at that point the picture becomes unbalanced, and in my view we need to get a fuller accounting out as soon as we can.
MR.
FERGUSON.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Given this discussion, I believe as Al does that things have changed here.
But I think releasing the vote and identifying who dissents without context is counterproductive.
I think it is harmful.
As you said, we have a consensus;
we have someone who disagrees with it, and the consensus carries.
That consensus is really the message of the FOMC.
And to have “noise,” as someone characterized it, without any explanation is not better transparency.
Perhaps it does lead to more of a slippery slope, but I really don’t see how we can go this way without releasing the minutes a lot sooner than we do now because that’s the only way we can get dissents into the context of the whole discussion.
<START>That would be helpful, whereas just to disclose the vote and indicate that we had a dissent but not say why is counterproductive in my opinion.<END>
MR.
FERGUSON.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Most of the points I wanted to make have been made, so I won’t repeat them.
<START>But building on what Tom just said, couldn’t we make the argument that if we were to release the minutes a bit earlier, perhaps in ten days or two weeks, that that would be satisfactory?<END>
<START>I’d suggest that we give ourselves more time to think about this question and even work more on the legal issues and then perhaps come back in another meeting or two and discuss it further.<END>
I think it could be argued that to proceed with the proposal that is on the table at the moment might harm the decisionmaking process significantly.
So, if in fact we have the option January 29-30, 2002Page 142 of 194of coming back to this issue with the prospect of releasing the minutes on a more timely basis
— in a week or two
—would that not reasonably pass muster?
Couldn’t we delay the release of the vote tally for that short a period of time in order to get the decision in the right perspective and be sure that we don’t harm the process?
MR.
FERGUSON.
Chairman Greenspan.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
May I make a suggestion?
In listening to this discussion, it is evident that this is a very involved situation.
Therefore, I think it probably would be wise for us to have a more thorough set of options and integrate into the paper the legal imperatives, which it didn’t have.
One option that we do have is essentially to fend off all requests until we are legally bound to release this information, and then decide what to do.
Alternatively, we could move up the release of the minutes to virtual real time if that’s even remotely feasible.
MR.
KOHN.
Wow!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Did you faint?
[Laughter] MS. MINEHAN.
Our next retirement party will be Don’s!
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
But before we reach a decision
—and I think it’s rather obvious that this is an important decision that should not be made in haste
—I think it’s worthy of further thought.
We don’t have to make a decision today.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Certainly after this discussion I strongly agree with that.
What I think we need to do now, having seen that this issue is in a sense more complex than anyone thought originally, is to come back with a fuller range of options.
One option we can consider
— and it’s something I’ve been opposed to until now, but I may have to rethink it
—is moving up the release date of the minutes.
We need to see what processes we can change to try to get the minutes closer to real time, understanding with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York what it January 29-30, 2002Page 143 of 194means to be closer to real time.
But I think the mindset we should have going into this is that in some sense we’re stuck in a very awkward position.
We don’t want to be embarrassed later so we’re trying to get ahead of the game here.
However, I do believe that we owe the Committee between now and the next meeting an effort to develop a fuller set of options and a better understanding of what we actually can do.
I don’t understand
—well, I do understand what the Bank of England has to do to get its minutes out within two weeks, and it’s far different from what we do now.
So we have to look at this more closely.
I never regret having to make a tough decision, but this tough decision deserves more thought than we could give it at the present time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You know, there is an option we haven’t discussed.
We have essentially two sets of disclosures with respect to every meeting.
One is the minutes, and the other is the transcript.
<START>I’m not recommending this necessarily, but we could probably produce summary minutes within twenty-four hours.<END>
So we’d have three documents covering each meeting.
We would then have six weeks or so to produce the full minutes.
MR.
FERGUSON.
There are a number of options, and we really do have to think about them.
But we need to realize that we are going to be in a position where we have to disclose dissenters earlier than we currently do.
<START>The message that I’m taking from this discussion is that we would prefer to do that in such a way that it creates context, reduces the press excitement, and makes the release of information as contemporaneous to the meeting as possible and not six weeks after a meeting.<END>
But I sense strongly that this notion of just disclosing the tally has left everyone somewhat uneasy.
There are a number of hands in the air.
Why don’t we start with Mike Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I agree completely that we should delay this decision and study the options further.
I would like to know how quickly we could produce minutes of the same quality January 29-30, 2002Page 144 of 194that we put out now.
And in addition to the criteria you were laying out, Roger, I would suggest two more.
I think we also have to do this in a way that does not have a chilling effect on people’s willingness to dissent at a meeting and in a way that does not detract from the consensus-driven nature of the deliberations of this body.
That consensus-driven nature is something that I believe has served us very well over the years and I would certainly like to do everything we can to maintain it.
MR.
FERGUSON.
We absolutely don’t want to destroy that.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
I’ll await the next round of discussion on this.
MR.
FERGUSON.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
<START>Given the legal opinion that’s on the table, it seems to me that the issue is rather narrow.<END>
First of all, we need to know whether minutes in two weeks, for example, satisfy the law.
would And if there’s a view that it wouldn’t, then we might as well take minutes in two weeks off the table because that’s not going to do the job.
Second, it seems to me that there are two options here
—we can wait until we get a FOIA request, or we can get ahead of the game and do something before a request.
I would favor the latter, getting ahead of the game.
If we’re going to get ahead of the game, there are two ways to do that.
One is to announce in advance this change in practice.
Another is to announce it at the time the first dissent comes along.
I would be in favor of the former way rather than waiting until there’s a dissent.
<START>Also, I think there would be an advantage if we could close this issue at our next meeting.<END>
We could then say that we discussed it along with the usual business conducted at the beginning of each year, which includes the reviews of the authorizations and directives regarding Desk operations.
We can wrap this into the normal review of practices and procedures and have it look as routine as possible and try to take some of the surprise out of it.
January 29-30, 2002Page 145 of 194MR. FERGUSON.
As I said, I think we can manage that.
<START>Also, I believe you’re probably right that if we’re going to maintain credibility and trust, it’s better for us to be ahead of the game as opposed to being caught in an awkward position.<END>
So this is a question of being thoughtful about how to be ahead of the game, I think.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Roger, could I speak to that?
MR.
FERGUSON.
Yes, please.
MS.
MINEHAN.
We all maintain a lot of data that we have found over the years are subject to a FOIA request.
Having data that are “FOIA-able” in one form or another and not releasing those data in the absence of such a request is not illegal.
That’s not something we have to be ashamed about.
<START>We don’t have to feel that just because information exists we’re wrong not to release it.<END>
I think we need to look at what makes the Committee function best and justify our decisions in that context.
And if we are required to disclose this vote tally, given the information we already make available to the public, we need to figure out a way to do so in a fashion that works best in terms of the Committee’s effectiveness.
I don’t think having not released data that are subject to FOIA is a problem.
MR.
FERGUSON.
I agree with that.
We may look at the various options and decide that none of them makes us feel comfortable and we will just take the risk of waiting.
That’s a decision for the Committee.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
If the goal of this is to increase understanding and transparency, I’m a little uncomfortable saying that we would have a press officer provide this information in response to a question
—even if that were to happen today
—because that means that we don’t control the release of the information.
One of the things we might want to have our press people do
—I’m volunteering them for this
—is to look at some of the practices corporations employed when they January 29-30, 2002Page 146 of 194adopted fair disclosure regulations a year ago.
That made a lot of companies look closely at how disclosures were made, including how the Internet is used for information purposes.
<START>One of the risks of having the wire services pick up information such as this versus putting it in a formal document is that the spin on it is controlled by the wire services.<END>
Another thing a lot of companies do, even though a number of actions may be taken at one board meeting, is to issue separate press releases.
Perhaps we could look at doing something along those lines.
On the day of our meeting we could release our policy statement
—and we call it that
—and then at the appropriate time, as the Chairman was alluding to, we could have other releases.
That may be another way to handle it.
The message in the policy statement is what we want to get out.
It gives people some knowledge about our decision;
it represents our consensus and our main conclusions.
And then the other information is released at a later point
—in a day or within the next couple of days
—and it’s called something else.
The people who want to see that can see it, but it doesn’t have the strength nor get the attention that the policy statement does.
At any rate, there might be some things we can learn from the way corporations handle disclosures.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole does raise an interesting question.
When a FOIA request is presented, there’s often a significant time lag before an institution responds because there’s the matter of getting the information together.
Is there any reasonable standard whereby we could conceivably put out the minutes, say, two weeks later as a means of being responsive to that request?
MR.
MATTINGLY.
I’d have to look at that.
But there is a prescribed timetable;
you have ten or fifteen days in which you have to make a response to a FOIA request.
So if you could get the minutes out within that time period, technically you could follow that procedure.
January 29-30, 2002Page 147 of 194CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
So that may be one option.
MR.
KOHN.
That’s only the first time, though, isn’t it?
MR.
PARRY.
That’s the first time.
MR.
MATTINGLY.
No, technically
—I’d have to look at this more closely
—you can do it for every vote at every meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That’s important to know
—whether we have that option
— in this particular discussion.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
When I saw the questions being presented I couldn’t help think back to thirty years ago when I was working on the staff of a Republican Congressman from Minnesota.
I spent a remarkable amount of time considering the issue of the Fed’s independence and answering questions about whether or not Fed secrecy was in fact an indication that it was being managed by a secret one-world conspiracy.
Art Rolnick and I were talking earlier about a program in which he participated roughly twenty-eight years ago, when a woman jumped up at a small business seminar and raised that question again.
One of the things I’m very pleased about is that in my current role, where all of my attention is focused on the Federal Reserve, I’m not hearing those allegations anymore, and I think that there are at least two reasons for that.
One is that people are generally happy with our country’s economic performance, and the Fed gets a good deal of credit for that.
Second, I think the increased transparency that we’ve achieved thus far has been helpful.
We’ve removed some of the mystery about policy and the Federal Reserve.
In my view the ultimate issue here is preserving the role and the independence of the Fed.
As a public body we balance fairly delicately what information we release and how we release it.
On the basis of that balance, I probably would be inclined not to release anything on the vote January 29-30, 2002Page 148 of 194tally.
However, Virgil’s comment on the legal aspects fairly well forces the question as I see it.
There are two parts to the question of how to proceed.
One relates to the market response, and I will leave to those of you who have been around longer than I have to understand how best to manage that.
But with respect to whether to lead or to follow on the issue, I’m reminded of the guidance of an old-time Minnesota politician
—Gary Stern probably knows the person I mean
— who said that when you’re being run out of town on a rail, pick up a flag and lead the charge!
[Laughter] There is some value to getting out in front
—not to respond but to lead
—as long as we know we’re going that way.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Well, let me close the discussion if I might, Mr. Chairman.
I think we have some marching orders here, to which Don, Virgil, and I
—and perhaps we’ll get some other volunteers
—will respond.
We’ll have to try to come back to this Committee by the March meeting with a range of options.
If it’s all right with you, Mr. Chairman, I may reconstitute in an informal way that subgroup of presidents and Board members who looked at the last round of transparency issues and give them a chance to be an early sounding board on what we come up with.
Let me close by telling you about my thoughts when I found myself in the position of having to decide whether or not to send out a memo on this issue to the Committee.
<START>I knew it was much more complicated than it seemed, and I shared much of Jerry’s perspective in that I wished I hadn’t thought of this problem without having a solution to it.<END>
But I decided to proceed and put the issue to the Committee as opposed to vetoing it myself, in effect, by keeping it secret.
And I think by and large that was the right decision.
I think we will, as Governor Olson said, end up in the right place and do what is good for everybody.
I don’t regret raising this, though I know it’s one of the hardest non-monetary-policy decisions we might have to make as a January 29-30, 2002Page 149 of 194Committee.
But I am highly confident that, after the discussion we’ve had today and the one we’ll have in March, we will get to a very good place.
Thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That March meeting is scheduled for March 19.
This meeting is adjourned, and we will have some interesting luncheon conversations.
First of all, Don Winn will do, as he puts it, “an abbreviated legislative report.” Then Brian Madigan will discuss the Lombard facility.
Let’s go eat.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 147
