Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 17-18, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, December 17, 1984, at 3:00 p.m. andcontinuing on Tuesday, December 18, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMs. SegerMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey and Morris, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City and Boston,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Kohn, Lang,Lindsey, Prell, Siegman, Stern, andZeisel, 1/ Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Attended Tuesday session only.12/17-18/84Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Garbarini, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of St. LouisMessrs. Balbach, Bisignano, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,Mr. Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco,Kansas City, Boston, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Broaddus, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofRichmondMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage is simply providing a list of the individuals who were present at a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 2.
 Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New York-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 17-18, 1984December 17--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes. Noobjection. We'll go to Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are agreeing and there is no indication of any disagreement.


Passage number 3.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the complete passage.


Passage number 4.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the question to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 5.
MR. WALLICH. Has anybody on the other side suggested anymodification [in our swap line agreements].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage states that someone is asking if anyone on the other side has suggested any modification in the swap line agreements. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention between parties.


Passage number 6.
MR. CROSS. Only these two technical modifications have beenproposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that only two technical modifications have been proposed, without any implicit disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to say the Bundesbankraised the question of whether it was worthwhile having the swap lineat all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "whether it was worthwhile having the swap line at all" suggests that there is disagreement or contention about the value or usefulness of the swap line.


Passage number 8.
MR. CROSS. They asked whether we were interested incontinuing it and I told them we were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a straightforward account of a conversation and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 9.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That was sheer bluff--a way ofgetting a message across.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply states that something was a bluff and a means of sending a message.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other discussion on this. If not, Iwill entertain a motion, other than Mr. Cross' motion, to renew theseswap agreements as amended.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing the possibility of entertaining a motion for renewing swap agreements, other than the motion made by Mr. Cross.


Passage number 11.
MR. WALLICH. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "So moved" is typically used in a motion during a meeting or discussion to indicate that someone agrees or supports the proposal. In this case, Mr. Wallich is expressing his agreement with whatever was previously said or proposed.


Passage number 12.
MR. MARTIN. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage simply states the speaker's title and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are approved. Mr.Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is approved without any objection.


Passage number 14.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Sternlight. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 15.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage as it does not present conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It is a request for comments or feedback, indicating an open and receptive tone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
MR. WALLICH. Peter, you said that non-reduction of thebudget deficit was not likely to have a great rate impact unless theeconomy rises. Does that imply that people believe that, yes, areduction of the budget deficit would have a substantial rate impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement is evident in the question asked by Mr. Wallich. He is questioning Peter's statement and suggesting that there is a belief among people that reducing the budget deficit would indeed have a substantial impact on interest rates.


Passage number 17.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think they believe that a significantreduction would have an impact, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight simply states his belief without any opposition or conflicting perspective being presented.


Passage number 18.
MR. BALLES. Peter, maybe this is the wrong time to beraising the question, but sometime before we get through here I'd liketo have somebody on the staff explain, if they can, what seems to begoing on in M1 with this latest big drop of over $7 billion. Are welooking at seasonal problems, reporting problems, or don't we know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for clarification or information.


Passage number 19.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I would say that there are at least12/17-18/84seasonal problems. But Steve might want to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply suggesting that there may be some seasonal problems, and he invites Steve to share his thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 20.
MR. AXILROD. We'll know better tomorrow when we get someconfirmation or not of the data for the last week. At the moment weexpect a fairly great rebound, though maybe not an entire rebound.And yet, having looked it over very carefully, I think there was aseasonal problem having to do with days ending with threes comparedwith four or five and the timing of the Social Security payment, whichI'm not sure was properly allowed for. So, I would expect a reboundin the week of the 18th and I'll be surprised if it isn't pretty big.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their expectation for a rebound in the data, but also mentioning a potential seasonal problem that may have affected the timing of the Social Security payment.


Passage number 21.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Based on some of those market surveys takenamong the larger banks, people in the market are looking for a sizablerebound from the $7 billion drop--on the order of $4 to $6 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply presenting information about market surveys and what people in the market are expecting. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
MR. PARTEE. So you want a $6 billion [leeway], Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is questioning or challenging the statement made by Peter about wanting a $6 billion leeway.


Passage number 23.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I would suggest $6 billion, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply making a suggestion of $6 billion.


Passage number 24.
MR. PARTEE. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "So moved" indicates agreement or affirmation, so there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 25.
MR. RICE. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Approved. We need to ratify thetransactions. Without objection, they're approved. Mr. Axilrod, youhave presented a little paper on a number of items that don't have tobe resolved now but should be resolved by the time we come to 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of approval and a request for resolution of certain items by a specific time.


Passage number 27.
MR. MARTIN. Steve, with regard to the question of rebasing:Are you saying, in the absence of new savings instruments or otherinstitutional changes, that if we were to select the midpoint of thefourth quarter or the midpoint of the year or something of that sort,that based on that rather hypothetical level we would tend to belocked in and have to, in effect, use that procedure in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question posed by Mr. Martin to Steve, seeking clarification on a specific topic (rebasing).


Passage number 28.
MR. AXILROD. No, I don't think the Committee is ever lockedin, but I think you would have to explain why you rebased this yearand not in earlier years when there may have been even bigger misses.And then, of course, you would have to explain why not rebase the nextyear. I don't think it locks you in to doing that each time at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod acknowledges that the committee is not locked in and simply asks for an explanation for the decision.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 29.
MR. WALLICH. It would seem to me that it locks us in, in thesense that we're accepting the path of the previous year, which may ormay not have been right. But if you extrapolate this [procedure] intothe distant future, we'll always be on the midpoint of every pastcone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates disagreement or contention as the speaker suggests that following the same path as the previous year may not necessarily be the right approach. They express doubt about the effectiveness of continuing with the same procedure in the future.


Passage number 30.
MR. AXILROD. In that sense, yes. I thought Governor Martinwas asking the practical question of whether we could be forced insome sense to make the same decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Axilrod is stating that there is agreement in the sense that Governor Martin was asking a practical question. There is no indication of contention or disagreement between the two.


Passage number 31.
MR. MARTIN. Precedent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes the name "Mr. Martin" and the word "precedent." There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 32.
MS. HORN. In principle, we [would] never base it on themidpoint unless we were willing to argue that we had reasonabletargets, or what we might in retrospect judge to have been reasonabletargets, in the previous year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a principle and providing a condition for when it would be acceptable to base something on the midpoint. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 33.
MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, whatever the money growth was,it was associated with a GNP result. And we would have to be sayingalso that we found the GNP result to be inadequate, I think, torebase. The other comment I had is that this is putting a lot ofemphasis on the midpoint. My recollection is that we have notemphasized the midpoint of the ranges. We have said that it's a rangebecause we don't know where in the range would be the appropriatenumber. Of all years, this one we came closer to being within our12/17-18/84ranges for everything than any other year I can recall. So, thisburning issue is not really much of an issue this year, is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with the idea that the midpoint of the ranges should not be emphasized and that the current year's ranges have been met.


Passage number 34.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We seem to be talking about this littlematter of the base, which I suppose is the simplest to talk about. Wedon't have to make decisions on any of these issues today. We're justexchanging some preliminary views, so why don't we stay on thisparticular question for the moment. Frank, were you on this questionor something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply suggests focusing on the topic of the base for the moment and asks Frank for his input.


Passage number 35.
[MR. MORRIS]. I was on the other operating procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the speaker, Mr. Morris, was using a different operating procedure.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's stay on this one since westarted with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a neutral statement suggesting continuity of the topic being discussed.


Passage number 37.
MR. BOEHNE. I'd like to pursue the operating side too. Onthe issue of rebasing, it seems to me that's why we have some width inthe ranges. I don't recall that we have said that the midpoint wasbetter than the upper or the lower limits. What we generally havesaid is "Here's the range and there might be certain [circumstances]that would take us to the top end, or maybe even a little over, or tothe bottom. So, the idea of making the midpoint sacrosanct in any wayis probably too mechanistic--or at least too mechanistic compared tohow we've been operating in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is explaining the concept of rebasing and stating that the midpoint of the range is not necessarily considered to be better than the upper or lower limits. He is suggesting that the decision of where to set the target within the range should be based on certain circumstances and not treated as a fixed rule.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
MR. RICE. Haven't we said, though, that we expected aparticular aggregate to come in at around the midpoint, or above themidpoint, or below the midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the words "above the midpoint" and "below the midpoint" implies that there is a difference of opinion or uncertainty about where the particular aggregate will actually come in.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sometimes we have and sometimes we havenot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states two different situations without indicating any conflict or disagreement between them.


Passage number 40.
MR. RICE. Well, more recently we've stated what we expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is simply explaining what they have stated recently.


Passage number 41.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not for all aggregates all the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that not all aggregates are applicable at all times, indicating a general statement rather than any opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 42.
MR. AXILROD. In July, Mr. Chairman, the Committee and yourreport were silent on M1; it was in February when there was a[passing] mention that [growth around] the midpoint [would beappropriate], depending upon velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the historical timeline and mentioning the mention of growth around the midpoint.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We said] in July that we expected M3 andcredit to be above [their ranges].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention as it simply states a previous expectation.


Passage number 44.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there is even less of a casefor making a shift in 1985 based on the 1984 results--both for thereasons that Chuck gave and for the embarrassment we would have if wedidn't make a downward correction in M3. I just don't see any way wecould present anything as drastic as this to the public and to theCongress in a selective way. Down the road we could be facing anaccumulation of many misses and it would not be an easy job to stickto this; and, certainly, we can't stick to it selectively. It seemsto me that it would be a great mistake to depart from our policy ofbasing on the actual outcome rather than on the earlier year'stargets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a cautious stance towards making a shift based on the 1984 results and discussing potential challenges in presenting and implementing such a shift in policy.


Passage number 45.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have said from time to time inthe past--and I'm not sure whether we said it ex ante or ex post--that12/17-18/84high growth or low growth in the earlier part of the year was finebecause it made up for fairly slow or fairly rapid growth in theprevious year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 46.
MR. MARTIN. That raises the question of the presentation--the geometry that is so bedeviling in using that cone. When we startoff above or below the line so drawn, if we could express it in termsof some kind of plus or minus a parallel line--.SPEAKER(.). Yes, I saw them in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing a topic and building upon each other's ideas without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 47.
MR. PARTEE. What are those parallel lines. I wasn't clearas to what they were. They're upward sloping.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question seeking clarification.


Passage number 48.
MR. AXILROD. They're sloped on the midpoint--5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about something being sloped at a specific percentage.


Passage number 49.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see. You get the end point and then drawthem back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement of understanding, without any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Congratulations. I thought the staffwould never do that. I tried 3 or 4 years ago and could never get thestaff to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "I thought the staff would never do that" suggests that there was a previous expectation or disbelief that the staff would perform the mentioned action.


Passage number 51.
MR. GRAMLEY. You see they didn't throw the cone out. Theyjust put some parallel lines around it. It makes everybody feel good;you can take your pick that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about how the cone was handled.


Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think once before we drew M1 that way.Does anybody else want to comment on this rebasing question. I havenot detected a lot of sympathy for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating their own observation and inviting others to share their thoughts on the matter. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 53.
MR. MARTIN. I would agree with Tony that it looks as thoughit's a major move. It's hard to explain. I don't think it is a verygood idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, agrees with Tony's opinion but also expresses his own opinion that it is not a good idea. However, this does not indicate a disagreement between the two individuals.


Passage number 54.
MR. BLACK. It's hard to explain that you're aiming at a rateof growth from someplace you aren't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Black regarding the difficulty of explaining a particular concept.


Passage number 55.
MR. RICE. The presentational problems are insurmountable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Rice is simply stating that the presentational problems cannot be overcome.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any context or information that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 57.
 If we continue to get $7 billion declinesin M1 for the next few weeks--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that would suggest contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a potential scenario and does not involve conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 58.
 Yes, you might have to do--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] something even less thanthat. Nobody else has comments on this question. We had a couple ofpeople who wanted to talk about the operating procedure. Mr. Morrisand Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply describes that there were a couple of people who wanted to discuss the operating procedure, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention among them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the memorandum thatSteve wrote. I'm not very enchanted with the idea of solving thisproblem through automaticity. It seems to me that that would be astep backwards toward the kind of interest rate volatility we think wehave gotten away from. But I do think that in a situation where theManager finds that he cannot attain his total reserve path and at thesame time produce the assumed level of borrowings--which is the casewe had this summer--there is an incompatibility in the instructions to12/17-18/84the Manager and it ought to be resolved not in some automatic way butby having a conference call to the Committee. I suspect we may wellhave the opposite case in '85 at some point, with total reservesgrowing faster than the original projection because the Manager isjust pushing in nonborrowed reserves at an increased rate in order tomeet the borrowing projection. I would have the Committee decide--onthe basis of what is happening to interest rates, the economy, themoney supply, the exchange rate, and everything else--how we shoulddeal with this incompatibility in the instructions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses disagreement with the idea of solving the problem through automaticity. He believes that the issue should be resolved through a conference call to the Committee, rather than a predetermined automatic solution.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure what you're getting at.There is no instruction on total reserves, the way we have it now.Maybe there should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any clear contention or disagreement. Instead, it reflects confusion or uncertainty about the topic being discussed and suggests the possibility of considering an alternative approach.


Passage number 61.
MR. MORRIS. The total reserve path comes from theCommittee's objective with respect to the aggregates. [Requiredreserves are] plotted out first and then the Manager puts in the[excess reserve allowance] and then the assumed borrowing level issubtracted to form a nonborrowed reserve path. So, although we've[not] talked about a total reserves path, that's implicit in the wholeoperation. The problem this summer was that the Desk couldn't hit thetotal reserve path because it was following a nonborrowed path thatwas related to a level of borrowing that the market was not doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 62.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Wasn't the more meaningfulincompatibility this summer the fact that we weren't getting the fedfunds rate that one normally would associate with the nonborrowedreserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  

Explanation: The passage is a statement of fact and does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 63.
 And that was because of the changes--MR. MORRIS. That was a product of the banks' aversion tousing the discount window, which was reflected in a lower-than-expected level of borrowing relative to the interest rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the reason for a lower-than-expected level of borrowing relative to the interest rate.


Passage number 64.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what would you do about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple question and does not express contention or disagreement. It is neutral and seeks someone's opinion or solution to a given situation.


Passage number 65.
MR. MORRIS. My thought is that we'd have a conference calland the Manager would say that we have a situation in which the banksappear to be averse to borrowing from the window and as a consequencethey're [bidding] up the funds rate and we're not getting the level ofborrowing that we expected to get. The question to the Committee thenwould be: Do we want to reduce the borrowing level or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a description of a situation and poses a question for discussion.


Passage number 66.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have to have a conference call;we have a meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is no need for a conference call because there is already a meeting.


Passage number 67.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, we discussed that at a meeting and decidedto let it roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "we discussed that at a meeting and decided to let it roll" suggests that the decision was made and agreed upon without any disagreement.


Passage number 68.
MR. MORRIS. I'm talking about in between meetings, if wehave an incompatibility in the instructions by this definition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a singular statement by Mr. Morris discussing a specific topic.


Passage number 69.
MR. MARTIN. But if the FOMC had chosen some percentage [ofautomaticity], say, 25 or 50, the Committee would know a priori whatform the implementation would take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing a hypothetical scenario and making a statement about what the committee would know in that situation.


Passage number 70.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but there may be times when we might wantto adjust the procedure and times when we might not, depending uponthe circumstances. I'm rather disenchanted with automatic adjustments12/17-18/84after our experience of recent years. I'd be more comfortable with ajudgmental assessment as to what we ought to do to reach ourobjectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. MORRIS is expressing his personal opinion about automatic adjustments based on his experience. He suggests using judgmental assessment instead.


Passage number 71.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I fully understand. You hadthe chance during the summer in a meeting, whether or not we had aconference call. You had repeated chances in September, October--.How many times did we meet this fall. Nobody wanted to do anythingabout it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their confusion and stating that they had multiple opportunities to discuss the topic (a meeting or conference call) during the summer and in September and October, but nobody took action.


Passage number 72.
MR. AXILROD. The relevant meetings were July and August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. It simply states the time frame of the relevant meetings as being in July and August.


Passage number 73.
MR. MORRIS. I forget which meeting it was, but we had anunexpected rise in the funds rate. To my knowledge and myrecollection, nobody on this Committee contemplated the funds rategoing above 11-1/2 percent even though we had a 12 percent [upperlimit on the] range. That was not the expectation given in theBluebook as to what the course of action chosen by the Committee wouldproduce in the way of the funds rate. The funds rate rose from 10-1/2to 11-1/2 percent, not because of any overt decisions on the part ofthe Committee but because of the change in attitude on the part of thebanks to borrowing. Now, the question was: Should we have respondedto that by lowering the borrowing. That's my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their recollection and raising a question for discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that question. But I saythat at least once the Committee had a meeting and--for a while,anyway--said no. And the opposite happened this fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges understanding the question but presents a conflicting statement by saying that the Committee had a meeting where they said no, implying disagreement or contention. The statement "the opposite happened this fall" further reinforces the existence of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 75.
MR. MORRIS. I think it's quite clear with hindsight that weshould have said yes. But that is clearly hindsight. However, Iwould much prefer that sort of procedure to an automatic response onthe part of the Manager in putting in a certain amount of reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 76.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would agree with you on theautomaticity. I think there are problems with that. But, let's faceit: In practice there is a modest range of flexibility based onconsultations of the Manager and Steve Axilrod and the Chairman. Wehave recognized that, I think, by talking about some flexibility. Inparticular, at the last meeting we delegated some flexibility around amodest range. Basically, there are three people who make thosedecisions. I think it would be very awkward and difficult to have aconsultation every time. What we are seeing now, and I think it'sworking fairly well, is that when there is a need to make a largerchange in the borrowing, then the Chairman has a consultation. Idon't really see that there should be changes in practices for timesthat might require some more immediate, flexible, and minoradjustment. Those adjustments are done now basically. Sometimes theDesk waits a day or two before draining or adding reserves. There issome flexibility now based on the tripartite approach we're following,keeping an eye on interest rates as well as on hitting the reservepath. I'd agree with you: I don't particularly like the idea of evena partially automatic adjustment; it just seems to me that what we'redoing now makes a good deal of sense. I really do feel that we hadthe opportunity to take whatever action--a change in the borrowing--was necessary to get the funds rate that we were all thinking of. Inthat sense I agree with the Chairman; I think we had the opportunity.But the economic events were changing at the time--the economy seemedto be overheating and, therefore, we really didn't object to the fact12/17-18/84that we were getting a higher fed funds rate. The majority of theCommittee was comfortable enough with the situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea that there are problems with automaticity, and is explaining the current practices and flexibility in place within the Committee.


Passage number 77.
MR. MORRIS. Well, maybe I'm proposing something we'realready following. On the other hand, I think there is some merit inthinking of it in terms of a total reserves objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating his thoughts and considering the possibility that his proposal aligns with current practices.


Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've not focused on that aspect of itbecause reserves have been falling short for some time. They are wellbelow the mark. Mr. Boehne, I think, expressed a desire to talkearlier. I have a note here that Manufacturer's Hanover has cut itsprime rate to 10-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a series of statements about reserves falling short and a bank cutting its prime rate.


Passage number 79.
MR. BOEHNE. On this judgment versus rules debate, there aredifferent kinds of views as to how you can apply judgment. You canhave a judgmental approach which says that when things don't goaccording to plan you look at the money supply and reserves andforeign exchange and so on and then make a judgmental response towhatever the deviation is. In that kind of approach, in effect, ittakes positive evidence to make a change. Or you can have ajudgmental approach which says that if we were on an automaticresponse of some kind, this is the way we would go; now, are there anygood reasons why we might not want to go in that direction. So, inthat sense, you need negative information. In the way this is carriedout, is it more the first kind or the second kind or is it somewherein between. I'm not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different approaches to applying judgment in a specific context.


Passage number 80.
MR. AXILROD. The degree of automaticity we're suggesting isso minimal that I suspect it would hardly be seen in the market at allexcept that to a minor degree it might temper the timing, at themargin, of Mr. Sternlight's operations. Therefore, it is really moreof the second kind of indicator--that your judgment ought to be inthis direction and here's a small step in a way that might even bereversed in the next two weeks if the aggregates pop back up. Atleast I have in mind more of the second kind of approach, in spirit.It wasn't that you would stop it, but it's so small that it isn'tgoing to have any very significant effect until it really accumulatessubstantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a suggested minimal automaticity that would have a minor effect on timing and may be reversed in the future. The speaker is explaining their perspective on the approach, but there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 81.
MR. BOEHNE. So it's not really automaticity in the puresense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposition or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 82.
 It's a direction in which your judgment ought to be leaningand which you ought to follow unless there's a--MR. AXILROD. There's a small step in that direction but onethat I do not think will be noticeable in the market, given thevariations we've had in the borrowing/funds rate relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any explicit contention or disagreement. It is providing a statement and then adding a qualifier to it. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 83.
MR. BOEHNE. But in reality how does that differ from whathappens now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question seeking clarification.


Passage number 84.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it gets you started and it tones up yourthinking, I think. The word that comes to mind is "excuse," but Idon't mean it in a bad sense. It gives you a reason to be thinking inthat direction--to start something so that you don't say it's just afeeling in my gut that's moving me. It's a reason, in some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and stating that using an excuse can help to stimulate thinking and provide a reason for starting something.


Passage number 85.
MR. BOEHNE. So, it's really a fairly subtle shift from whathappens now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is neutral and simply provides information about a shift from the current situation.


Passage number 86.
12/17-18/84MR. AXILROD. That's all I had in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided is a statement by someone named Mr. Axilrod, and there is no indication of any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 87.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "Mr. Balles" without providing any information or context that could imply disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 88.
MR. BALLES. I would like to speak up in favor of some degreeof automatic response, as Steve set forth a good case for it in hispaper. In fact, the whole paper was a badly needed new look at ouroperating procedures in the sense of some general dissatisfaction bymany of us--with the benefit of hindsight now--with how the secondhalf turned out in terms of our money targets and interest rate levelsand similar matters. I would have to say, though, with respect to ourcurrent operating procedure or even the amendment to it that you areproposing, Steve, that I think we're still going to be subject to allthe weaknesses that we found way back in the 1960s with respect tofree reserves. Any given level of borrowing or any given level offree reserves is compatible with a wide range of interest rates, awide range of different economic outcomes, and a wide range ofpossible growth in the monetary aggregates. That's what weexperienced so many years ago. I'm afraid we're still working with atool that has those built-in disadvantages. So, while I personallywould be in favor of going along some sort of semi-automatic route ofthe type Steve described, I think we also ought to consider, as analternative to that, some semi-automatic targeting of nonborrowedreserves, which is after all closer to what we're really trying tocontrol--the monetary aggregates as our intermediate targets. Wedon't need to get back to a full automatic pilot. Even if we were togo back to nonborrowed reserves targeting, we could also introducesome semi-automaticity simply by making judgments as to the degree towhich the nonborrowed reserve path would be varied in response to adeviation of money from path. I'm pretty much convinced at this pointthat that kind of approach would be superior over the longer run thansomething hooked on the borrowing target. [The latter approach] mostrecently, as well as many years ago, has demonstrated the kinds ofweaknesses that concern many of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses support for some degree of automatic response, as argued by Steve in his paper. However, Mr. Balles also disagrees with the proposed amendment to the operating procedures, stating that it will still have the same weaknesses as the previous approach. He suggests considering targeting nonborrowed reserves instead, which he believes would be superior in the long run. Therefore, there is contention between Mr. Balles and Steve regarding the best approach to control the monetary aggregates.


Passage number 89.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since only "Mr. Black" is mentioned, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 90.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I end up very close to John Balleson this. I'd like to say first of all that I agree that Steve hasdone a very fine job on this memo and, as some of you might suspect, Ithink he is right in saying that M1, despite all its imperfections, isprobably still the best target. So, I would favor tightening up thetargeting procedures on that so that we could more nearly hit ourtargets, which leads me to favor, as he does, some degree ofautomaticity. I think Steve's suggestion of about 50 percent of anydeviation of required reserves from path would be a pretty good placeto start. But I still entertain hopes that someday we're going to getto a total reserve target and a penalty discount rate, because Ibelieve ultimately that that's the best hope we have for reallygetting to the point we want to go. I'd also like to mention thepoint that Steve made about the difference between a net borrowedreserve target and a fed funds target. I think that's a point thathas escaped many of us. There are some differences there; maybe theyare differences of degree. But if in fact there is a greater degreeof fluctuation in the federal funds rate under the borrowed reservetargeting, I think that can give us good information, as Stevesuggests, unless of course the change in the federal funds rate comesbecause of a shift in the borrowing function or something of that12/17-18/84sort. To me the main point that really comes out of this paper isthat it generally underscores the need for not less fluctuation in thefederal funds rate but more fluctuation in order to achieve ourtargets. And that in turn calls for more frequent and maybe largeradjustments in the borrowing target to reinforce these desirablemovements in the federal funds target. In short, I think that thepresent procedure, when we restrict the limit on fluctuations in thefederal funds rate, is not that much different from targeting thefederal funds rate. I would like to strengthen it so that we reallydo take more advantage of the differences that exist between those twobasic procedures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the points made by Steve and expresses support for tightening targeting procedures and implementing automaticity. The speaker also mentions the need for a total reserve target and a penalty discount rate. Additionally, the speaker agrees with Steve's point about the difference between a net borrowed reserve target and a fed funds target. Overall, the speaker's comments align with the ideas presented in the memo.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage, "Mr. Corrigan," does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement or introduction of a person's name.


Passage number 92.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I don't think I really want to changeanything, and I guess I have a couple of reasons. First of all, Ithink that this whole debate about automaticity and targetingprocedures and everything else is very germane as is this reliabilityquestion that Steve talks about in his memorandum. And on thereliability of M1, I must confess that I'm more skeptical, not less.In my judgment, these various equations under the best of conditionsdon't leave one very comfortable; and I would emphasize that thoseequations by definition are the best of conditions because among otherthings they incorporate all the historical data revisions. Apropos ofthat, even as we sit here today questioning what happened in the firsthalf and the second half of this year, I think there's at least a 50-50 chance that by the time the jury is in and all the revisions aremade M1 is going to look a lot different for the year 1984 than itlooks right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 93.
MR. PARTEE. The pattern within the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 94.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, the pattern within the year. In otherwords, the second half will be a good deal stronger and the first halfwill be a good deal weaker. I don't know that for certain but, as Isay, there is at least a 50-50 chance of that and that's just thefirst revision. There will be several others down the road. So, Ithink the question of the reliability of M1 just in the narrow andempirical sense of the numbers themselves is a very, very importantaspect of this question of automaticity. Partly for that reason butfor many others, as Tony and others have touched on, I think it wouldbe a mistake to make any move in the direction of a more automaticresponse no matter how marginal it may seem. Having said that, I toohave my frustrations--not so much with the apparatus, but in some veryreal ways with the environment within which it works. Clearly, atleast in my judgment, during this year and last year the Committee hasmoved in the direction of looking through reserves, M1, and all the Msand looking more--perhaps not in a systematic way but in a fairlydeliberate way--at the economy, exchange rates, prices, industrialproduction, and all the rest of it. And part of what we're seeing, inmy judgment, is nothing more than the fact that the economy on bothsides has surprised us in a significant way throughout this period.And because the economy has surprised us, we have found ourselves inthe position where the need to make these flexible adjustments hasseemed to the Committee as a whole to be a pressing need. I think thefact that those adjustments were made and the way that they were madeover the period as a whole basically constituted a pretty solidapproach to policy, recognizing that we're never going to be able to12/17-18/84fine-tune this; that's just not in the cards. Some of the frustrationthat we all feel at times I think has to do with the fact that theseadjustments are made in intermeeting periods and we all have ourpersonal subjective biases as to which are most important and whichare least important in the laundry list of things that we put into thedirective--whether it's the exchange rate, or M2, or M22, or the GNP,or whatever. And because our personal biases may differ a little interms of where the priorities lie, there may be differing degrees offrustration in terms of whether and how much of an adjustment is madein the borrowings target, particularly against the background of theappropriate inhibition against treating any of those intermeetingconsultations as a meeting [requiring] a vote on all the rest of theapparatus that could go with it. My bottom line, Mr. Chairman, isthat I think the apparatus works pretty well, particularly against thebackground of my personal skepticism about M1, and I think thefrustrations that we all feel at times are almost inevitable. Butcompared to the alternative, I think those frustrations are quitemanageable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their personal views and experiences, without contradicting or arguing against any other viewpoint.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 96.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a good deal ofsympathy for what Jerry has just said. On the other hand, it doesseem to me that Steve's paper made a pretty compelling case for somedegree of automatic response. I think that's particularly true whenthe demand for money is stable and we're not getting noise from otherfactors. I would really hate to see us get into a position of havingconference calls of the Committee to deal with very minor issues thatcome along from time to time. But having said that, I too have alittle hesitancy about the reliability of M1. Certainly, it's abetter aggregate than the others we've been dealing with, but we'vehad some variations in M1 recently--and over the past year in fact.Because of that, I would like to keep any degree of automaticity to aminimum. But the scenario in the regime that Steve has outlined inthis paper seems to be somewhat of a compromise between those whowould move to a fully automatic response and those who wouldn't changeit at all. I guess I would feel more comfortable if we had somedegree of automatic response, but I would have to admit that as I lookback over the past year I don't think policy would have been changedvery much at all if we had had this kind of automatic response. But,I think to fine-tune it a little would be in order.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. While the speaker expresses some hesitation and concerns about the reliability of M1 and the degree of automatic response, they ultimately express agreement with the idea of having some level of automatic response in monetary policy.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided, "Governor Gramley," does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 98.
MR. GRAMLEY. Let me make a clarifying point first, and thatis that there are at least two operating issues that we startedtalking about and they don't have anything to do with one anothernecessarily. One is the level of borrowing and whether or not thefederal funds rate in relation to the level of borrowing is where wethought it was going to be. And the other is how we respond tounexpected deviations of growth in M1 from the path laid out ahead oftime. Now these two happened to be closely related this summer, butthat was an accident. One has to deal with those two problems quiteseparately. I can easily think of an example in which the oppositesort of relationship began to develop between borrowing and thefederal funds rate and the kind of automaticity we're talking aboutwould have made things go in the wrong direction. The automaticityissue relates strictly to whether or not we respond more quickly and-13-12/17-18/84more sensitively to changes in growth of M1 relative to path than wehave in the past. I'm very much with Jerry on that and I would put itthis way: that we haven't been frozen in stone between FOMC meetings.We've evolved a procedure over the course of the past couple of yearsin which we instruct the Manager on what he's supposed to do whenthese deviations occur, and why, taking into account a whole lot ofthings. And in a world in which if money demand is stable from onequarter to the next it isn't necessarily stable from one month to thenext, I think that is a lot more sensible response to deviations ofmoney growth from the path than an automatic response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining two separate issues that are not necessarily related to each other. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 100.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think the word "automatic" ought to bebanned from this discussion because I don't think there's anythingautomatic really being proposed. What we're talking about is someprocedural rules that would be followed unless there is some reasonfor not following them, as is always the case with the Federal OpenMarket Committee. Before, we had a rule that we would provide thenonborrowed reserves consistent with the money growth we wanted to getand then borrowings automatically fell out. Now we set the level ofborrowing and the reserves automatically fall out--the reservesassociated with whatever the demand for money does and what occurs.What Steve is proposing is simply that one other way of dealing withthis as a rule for operating procedure would be to go between thesetwo extremes and split the difference. I think that makes a lot ofsense. And the reason that I think it makes a lot of sense is thatI've never known the time when in the first instance anyone could becertain enough that they ought to do something and, in fact, did it.We always have an ambiguous situation. It's always ambiguous. Youcould say in looking back as well as forward that maybe we ought tolet M1 growth fall off [its path] because, after all, the economy hasbeen strong and there are a lot of inflationary expectations outthere. And it could turn out to be wrong: The economy isn't strongand there isn't the inflation expectation. But by the time you'velearned that, a couple of months have gone by. It seems to me thatsome adjustment in the borrowing level to take account of the factthat M1 is falling off path is a reasonable thing to do. Now, as youall know, I've practically given up on having any view that anyone canlook forward with a degree of certainty and, therefore, I'm alwayslooking for the safer course. It would have been safer this summer,certainly, had we done it that way--and it might well be safer in theother direction looking forward in the next year--because we wouldhave had quicker adjustments. The funds rate would have droppedfaster had we followed the rule and it may go up faster if we followthe different procedural rule in the year ahead. And I think it's abetter way to go. But, again, it's nothing but a procedure. And ifthe Chairman or Steve or Peter or anybody else feels that there issomething odd that has accounted for this, there is no reason we can'tget together and say "Well, there's an oddity here; I think we oughtnot follow this rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 101.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the interest of accuracy, let meredescribe what I think our techniques have been during this period.You said the contrast was between (1) setting a nonborrowed reservepath, keeping it, and the borrowings would fall out and (2) settingthe borrowing and the nonborrowed reserves would fall out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying or providing a more accurate description of their techniques.


Passage number 102.
12/17-18/84MR. PARTEE. In the first instance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple reference or date without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 103.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The correction I wanted to make was this:That may be true in the first instance, but we have always madeadjustments either to the nonborrowed reserve path or now, conversely,to the borrowing, depending upon what the other was doing. You'retalking about some bias when you're talking about this technique. Butthese things that Steve is talking about are so small that they're waywithin the discretionary adjustments we were making anyway with eithertechnique. We make discretionary adjustments when the Committeepermits it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining how adjustments are made and discussing small size adjustments.


Passage number 104.
MR. PARTEE. I do think that one's attitude toward this isstrongly shaped by how much one believes in M1. In fact, I've kept atally so far and that exactly identifies the positions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their belief that one's attitude is influenced by how much they believe in M1. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 105.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to get back to that subject,too. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It simply mentions the need to return to a certain subject without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 106.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would start out withthe premise that maintaining as much flexibility as possible is themost desirable course for the Committee. It does, however, turn [outthat] the Chairman and the staff who work with this on a daily basishave a great deal of discretion, I think, within the very broaddirective that the Committee adopts for the intermeeting period.Having said that, however, I am attracted somewhat to Steve's proposalbecause of its directional content if you will. It seems to me it isso small that it will not alter policy, particularly in the public'sview or the market's view, but it will give the Committee someindication as to what the Desk is doing or what it's thinking about ona day-to-day or week-to-week basis. If the borrowing level wereadjusted by as much as $20 million or $50 million at a particulartime, then it's a clear indication that the people who are looking atit and making those judgments are indicating that money growth isdeviating from what they believe the Committee directed at its pastmeeting. And in that sense, it seems to me it would be very helpfulto me as a participant in this organization and would not do greatdamage in the sense of disrupting the markets or [producing] wideswings in the interest rates. As a result, I would be in favor ofmoving in this direction in the very modest way that Steve hasproposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without any context or additional information, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage involving Governor Wallich.


Passage number 108.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we seem to be having a low key version ofthe discussion of rules versus discretion. To me good discretion orgood judgment is always bound to be better than a mechanical rule.The question is whether good judgment is more likely than not. Wewent to automaticity in 1979 because we felt that in the pastdiscretion or judgment had caused us to move too little and too lateso, in effect, we forced our hand by automaticity. That, it seems tome, has not been our problem recently. We've had a great deal ofdiscretion and the discretion I think has been sound. So in terms ofrecent results, there isn't a great deal to be said for going back torules or automaticity. I do have a sense that this need not always bethe case. Sometimes judgment can be right; it can be wrong. Maybethere is always a danger in this Committee, as in others, of doingunpleasant things too late and too little. Against that I think one-15-12/17-18/84can guard by having a small injection of automaticity. The upshot ofmy points is that we have fewer meetings a year than we used to haveand we don't particularly want to have conference calls, but Icertainly wouldn't want to go back to where our hands were tiedexcessively and where the automaticity of the rule got the better ofour judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 110.
MR. BLACK. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, but I was so busy awhile ago making a case for automaticity that I neglected to say thatI did not mean to rule out discretionary adjustments in the borrowingtargets. I think those we've made recently have been veryappropriate. I would want to augment the automatic part of it, if wevote for that, with discretionary movements such as we've had, if itappears those are desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is expressing agreement with the discretionary adjustments that have recently been made and stating that he would like to augment the automatic part with similar discretionary movements if they are deemed desirable.


Passage number 111.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, since only "Mr. Boykin" is provided as the text, it is difficult to determine any context or potential contention.


Passage number 112.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, unless I'm missing something, itseems to me the issue is not rules versus discretion but rather rulesfor exercising discretion. I think the discretionary aspect iscertainly there--at least that's what I'm interpreting Steve to besaying. It's pretty much a confirmation of what has been going on butwith just a small amount of added comfort level to the staff in termsof doing what they have had to do. It seems to me that giving staffjust the slight amount of latitude that Steve's talking about makessense. I think anything excessive or any apparent trends or anythingunusual would certainly come to the Committee and would come veryquickly. I just think there's a certain degree of comfort level herethat would be helpful to the staff, but I don't think it would begiving anything away from the standpoint of what the Committee istrying to accomplish. My bottom line is that I don't have any realproblem with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for the idea of giving staff some discretion within certain rules.


Passage number 113.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 114.
MS. SEGER. I admit to being confused--to make a generalstatement. The second thing that strikes me is that whether or not Ithink M1 is important, there are a lot of Fed watchers who do. So,maybe it's like gold: It isn't the theoretical matter but whether alot of people assume it's important that makes it important. It'shard for me to divorce the slowdown in M1 growth from the verydramatic drop in total reserves. And just hearing Jerry Corrigan'sremarks about the slowdown in the economy--that this is what producedthe M1 slowdown--it is as if the Fed had nothing to do with theslowdown. I think it is pretty hard to argue that either we hadnothing to do with the slowdown in the economy or the slowdown in M1.Also, I heard in the past couple of meetings concern about allowingthe fed funds rate to drop much because then we might have to retracethe steps and jerk the economy around and or jerk the markets around;yet when the funds rate shot up from 10-1/2 percent or so to 11-3/4percent, which did jerk the markets tremendously, I didn't hear thesame kind of concern. So, again, I don't know the answer to this, butsomewhere along the line I think we've got to make some changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Seger, expresses confusion and disagreement with the idea that M1 is important. She also questions the role of the Fed in the slowdown of the economy and M1 growth. Additionally, she highlights a contradiction in the Fed's attitude towards interest rates and market movements. Overall, Ms. Seger presents a skeptical viewpoint and suggests the need for changes.


Passage number 115.
MR. CORRIGAN. Let me just clarify [my comment]. I think youmisunderstood me. What I was saying was that when all is said and-16-12/17-18/84done the slowdown in M1 that everybody is so concerned about right nowmight not even be there in the final figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply trying to clarify his previous comment and stating his belief that the slowdown in M1 may not actually be present in the final figures.


Passage number 116.
MS. SEGER. Yes, but I think the slowdown in the economy isreal. That's all I'm saying. And I think there is some associationbetween that and what happened to monetary policy, particularly if youwant to look at total reserve creation since late spring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Seger is simply expressing her belief that there is a slowdown in the economy and a potential association between that and monetary policy.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as only the name "Mr. Keehn" is mentioned. There is no statement or context provided to indicate any form of dispute or disagreement.


Passage number 118.
MR. KEEHN. It seems to me that for many of the reasons thathave been stated these are the kinds of decisions that lend themselvesto judgment based on a variety of circumstances that can change verysignificantly from time to time and it's very hard to prejudge them.The only other thing I might add is that moving to some kind ofmechanical procedure, which I think is what this suggests, is a bit ofa slippery slope. If we begin to move in this direction and becomevery mechanical, it opens up the possibility that our critics wouldsuggest that the whole procedure runs itself from a higher level ofmechanical procedure than we're using. So, I would be very much infavor of staying with the procedures we're presently using.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the difficulty of making decisions and cautioning against implementing a more mechanical procedure.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 120.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, on this issue I would line up withGovernor Wallich, Governor Partee, and Bob Boykin. I think thatSteve's proposal is very little different from what we're doing now.I don't see the lines closely drawn between judgment and automaticity.It seems to me that as long as we limit the automatic changes--especially on the low end--to 25 percent rather than 50 percent, theresult would be little different from the procedures that we'refollowing. That is especially true if you keep in mind how flexiblethis Committee has been all along. In my experience since I've beenon this Committee, there has been no reluctance to superimposejudgment on any kind of arrangement that we had agreed to earlier.So, I'm confident that judgment, and hopefully good judgment, willalways be there superimposed upon any slight automaticity that weagree to go with. And I think the advantage of 25 percent automaticchanges is that it keeps us going in the right direction without over-committing us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Governor Wallich, Governor Partee, and Bob Boykin and stating that they do not see much difference between the proposal and the current procedures they are following. They also express confidence in the Committee's ability to exercise judgment and flexibility.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody is willing to impose judgment,so long as it's their judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

The statement suggests that people are only willing to pass judgment when it aligns with their own beliefs or opinions. This implies a disagreement or conflict between individuals who hold different judgments or perspectives.


Passage number 122.
MR. MARTIN. Well, it seems to me that Steve's paperindicates that the reason for this proposal--other than the fact thatproposals in Washington never die, they just come back around after awhile--is that he detects a tendency to accommodate in part undesiredswings in money demand. I suppose that is a more eloquent way ofsaying that we tend to be a little too late in our movements,depending in part on the direction of the so-called undesired swings.If that's true, then it seems to me that there is merit in thisproposal in terms of "expectability." One would know as a member ofthis Committee, within these very small gradations, the move thatwould take place. I have confidence in not only my own judgment butin that of the Chairman, vis-a-vis his immediate comment here. AndI'm sure he would in appropriate circumstances overrule the rule.What we're talking about are small gradations. In the example given,-17-12/17-18/84if you start at $650 million of borrowing, the $70 million [change]for the $2 billion deviation from what I take is a quarterly path,gets us what--25 or 30 basis points change in the fed funds rate, orsomething of that sort and a 25 basis points change in M1 [growth] or50 basis points or something like that. We're talking about finitegradations of change, whatever the numbers are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their perspective and interpretation of Steve's paper and expressing confidence in the proposal.


Passage number 123.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you think they're that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is an incomplete fragment, making it difficult to determine the full meaning or context. It seems to express doubt or skepticism about something, but there is not enough information to provide a clear analysis.


Passage number 124.
MR. PARTEE. No, I don't think it's that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 125.
MR. MARTIN. It wouldn't get you that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin simply expresses his opinion that something would not provide a significant benefit.


Passage number 126.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The rule of thumb is a $100 millionborrowing level change gives you 1/4 point [on the funds rate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a rule of thumb regarding the relationship between the borrowing level change and the funds rate.


Passage number 127.
MR. MARTIN. Well, these are small gradations. And it seemsto me that that argues for building in some technique useful in[making] the judgment. If we adopt this, I think this Committeeshould from time-to-time set that percentage [rather than] simplyaccept 50 or 25 percent, because isn't it true that the impact wouldvary depending on the level at which borrowing started. So, I wouldsay this is a good idea, but let's have some setting of thepercentage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is suggesting that the committee should set the percentage instead of accepting a fixed percentage like 50 or 25 percent. He is indicating agreement with the idea but suggesting an additional step to be taken.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just for my own edification: When you saythe result is $25 million, what are you assuming that's related to--a$1 billion change in M1 or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or asking for further information to understand the context of the mentioned result.


Passage number 129.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I was assuming a 7 percent reserverequirement on transactions accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod, stating his assumption about a 7 percent reserve requirement on transactions accounts. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and how big a change in Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 131.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It simply mentions a person's name, Mr. Axilrod, without any further context that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 132.
 I used as an example that a $2 billion changein M1 produces--MR. PARTEE. $35 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states an example without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 133.
MR. AXILROD. --$140 million on required reserves. Half ofthat is $70 million and 25 percent of it is $35 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states mathematical calculations without expressing any conflicting opinions or conflicting information.


Passage number 134.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And you would react every two weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 135.
MR. AXILROD. What I had in mind was: [Suppose] you had anonborrowed path based on $1 billion [of borrowings] and in this two-week period it began to appear that M1 was running $2 billion below[path]; M2 and M3 were not behaving so differently to override it--that, of course, would be in there. And the Manager wouldn't reducenonborrowed by the full amount [implied by] the shortfall in M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a hypothetical scenario being discussed.


Passage number 136.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A few people commented, favorably orunfavorably, on what they thought of M1. Does anyone else wish tomake comments on what they think of M1. Unless you have changed yourmind, you don't need to raise your hand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for additional comments on the topic of M1.


Passage number 137.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to miss thisopportunity. I would simply say that several times around this table-18-12/17-18/84in the past few years I've heard the statement that now M1 hasrestored its normal velocity relationship. And I've always noted thatthis turned out to be a very temporary phenomenon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply pointing out a recurring observation they have made in the past.


Passage number 138.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What about credit velocity, Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question about credit velocity to Frank.


Passage number 139.
MR. MORRIS. I also note that, beginning next year, theminimum deposit on Super NOW accounts drops down to $1,000. I don'tknow what impact that is going to have. I don't see much of amarketing effort around New England to do this, although there's a lotof activity in the money market deposit accounts. A lot of the bankshave already announced that they're going down to a $1,000 [minimum]on money market deposit accounts. But I think M2 could be impacted.[Unintelligible] after a few months in which the gap between what wewould have expected M1 velocity should be and the actual drops down toclose to the normal range. I think we ought to consider this, untilwe have a lot more evidence, as sort of a random distribution ofvelocity for Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and observations about the impact of the minimum deposit on Super NOW accounts and the potential impact on M2 velocity.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as no passage or context is provided.


Passage number 141.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'd just like to remind us that we're goingthrough a period now in which the money numbers have been weak and theeconomy is weak. So we say to ourselves "Oh, I wish we hadn't letthat happen." But the safer course is not always the one of eitherslowing down money growth at this point too fast, or speeding it up atthis point too slowly. I want to take you back to that period fromOctober of 1981 until April of 1982 in which we had a growth rate ofM1 in the range of 9 to 10 percent. Had we permitted the kind ofgrowth that the economy needed to turn around, it would have been 15percent. The safer course in that case was not to resist the growthof M1 but to let it happen. Now, that was a case in point in whichthe money demand function that we were using was just miles off track.And I don't think we should decide that just because M1 has beenbehaving reasonably well roughly since the middle of 1983--we have alittle less than 18 months' experience--that this number is now goingto be a safe guide for the future. I don't think it will be. I agreewith Frank entirely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and explaining their reasoning.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement mentioned in the given passage as there is no mention of any conflicting ideas or opposing opinions.


Passage number 143.
MR. BOYKIN. I didn't comment on M1. I would not be preparedto restore it to its original grandeur. On the other hand, Lyle, Ithink more of it than I have in recent times. I feel it's probably asgood an indicator as we have now. So, I would put a little moreemphasis on M1 now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin simply states his own opinion and perspective on M1 without mentioning any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 144.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the passage fragment "Mr. Balles" is provided without any additional information or context, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 145.
MR. BALLES. Well, I'd like to concur with Steve's assessmentof what has been happening to M1 recently. There is never anyindicator that's going to be perfect. I think M1 has exhibited somestability recently, more than it did in the earlier period. Butwhenever I hear this criticism of M1, I have to ask: What are thealternatives. And the alternatives--such as M2 or M3--are even worseas far as I can tell. And the worst one of all in my personal opinionis the "look at everything" approach, which generally leads toconfusion and indecision and action that is taken much too late.-19-12/17-18/84There's a tendency when one looks at everything to fail to distinguishbetween the leading indicators and the current indicators and end upnot doing anything right. So, given the alternatives, I would stillcome out for putting more emphasis on M1 than many of you. I thinkthat will guide us better than these others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker in the passage expresses agreement with Steve's assessment and then explains his preference for putting more emphasis on M1 as compared to other alternatives. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many people would like to put primaryemphasis on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention or discuss any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 147.
MR. PARTEE. Of the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: This passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 148.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, of everything. We're not decidinganything today. Who would put primary emphasis on M1 in the conductof open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing that there is no decision or emphasis being made on anything, including the topic of M1 in open market operations.


Passage number 149.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, isn't that what we're doing now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Gramley is simply asking a question to confirm if their current actions align with the speaker's previous statement. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 150.
MR. RICE. No, I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 151.
MR. PARTEE. No, no. [Unintelligible] among the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The word "No" suggests agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 152.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I see a few hands go up weakly and thenthey go down again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply describes the action of a few hands going up weakly and then going down again.


Passage number 153.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But what you're really saying is apolicy with the emphasis on M1 and the mechanical feedback--the sameas from October '79 to the end of '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply describing a policy with an emphasis on M1 and the mechanical feedback, similar to the time period mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [It would] certainly go in that direction,but whether or not it's mechanical--. Who would put primary emphasison Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "whether or not it's mechanical" implies a disagreement or uncertainty about whether something is mechanical or not. Additionally, the phrase "Who would put primary emphasis on ML" suggests a disagreement or debate about the importance or priority of machine learning (ML) in a certain context.


Passage number 155.
MS. SEGER. Versus the Ms or including total reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents two options, "Versus the Ms" and "including total reserves," without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everything. Primary emphasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states the word "Everything" without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 157.
MR. PARTEE. The economy, inflation--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage as it only mentions the topics of the economy and inflation without any specific contrasting or conflicting views.


Passage number 158.
MR. BOYKIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the actual content of the passage. The mention of "MR. BOYKIN" does not provide enough context to make a judgment.


Passage number 159.
 It would be awfully important, but I would stillwant to keep my eyes open to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I said primary; I didn't say exclusive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the importance of something and clarifying that their preference is to prioritize it while still remaining open to other possibilities.


Passage number 160.
MR. BOYKIN. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 161.
MR. KEEHN. It has a role involving something from which wemake a judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement being made by Mr. Keehn about a role that involves making a judgment.


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Primary relative to anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Primary relative to anything else" does not contain any specific information or context, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 163.
MS. SEGER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response from Ms. Seger is an affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 164.
MR. WALLICH. It's a matter of the magnitudes of everythingelse. If the economy collapses, I would not go with M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 165.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, fortunately, we don't have to doanything about this today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence expresses a sense of relief or reassurance, suggesting that there is no immediate action required at the present moment.


Passage number 166.
12/17-18/84MR. GRAMLEY. Merry Christmas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a message or greeting from someone named Mr. Gramley, wishing the reader a Merry Christmas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 167.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not very happy with this proposal ofMr. Axilrod's. I'll tell you this: It's Mickey Mouse in my opinion.I don't see anything the matter with it, but it's trivial in a way.Let me give you two reasons why. I would point out that the moneysupply has been steadier when we depressed its importance and theautomatic responses we have given to [the aggregates]. Not so manymonths ago we were being praised by the monetarists for this new waywe had found to keep the money supply steady. I at least amsuspicious that it's not entirely accidental--that any reaction wemake to it of a sharp kind is after the fact and affects things with alag. And it may send things off in another direction. So you getsine curves instead of stability. Nobody has talked much about thefact that we are working with economic projections and I find, just asa pragmatic judgment, that the Committee puts tremendous weight onthem. The economic projections are consistently unreliable in termsof the ex post judgment that's made about what the satisfactoryquarter-to-quarter movement is in the economy. And I think that'sjust a fact of life; it's not that the projections are any worse thananybody else's. You can't project the economy quarter-to-quarter orhalf year-to-half year with a degree of sensitivity that is requiredex post to make everybody happy. That's another way of saying youcan't fine-tune on the basis of economic projections.I find the Axilrod approach--I call it the Axilrod approachthough he was responding to a request--a little narrow because it'sfocusing on whatever M, M1 presumably. Maybe the more relevantquestion, or at least as relevant a question, is whether we shouldn'tbe putting more weight on other indicators of what is happening. Wehave an exchange rate that in my judgment is wildly out of line withthe needs of this economy over a period of time. And it should havebeen telling us something for a long period. We've had commodityprices falling rather sharply for six months now, I guess, during aperiod when economic projections were pointing in quite a differentdirection. Commodity pricing didn't prove to be the worst economicindicator in the world. And it tells you something in that it makes apolicy difference as well. How well you do it in the first[unintelligible]. The only reason I would worry about the Axilrodproposal is that I wonder whether we'd be kidding ourselves by makingthis little automatic rule, if I may call it that, [and if] that wouldinhibit making discretionary changes. It is so minor in and of itselfthat it doesn't do much. And if the Committee sits around and says"We have this automatic response mechanism so that's all we're goingto do"--if that's the psychology of it--we may not be responding oftenor fast enough. I don't know whether it would work out that way, butI'd be a little suspicious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses dissatisfaction with the proposal and raises concerns about its effectiveness and potential limitations. They also question the focus on a specific indicator and suggest that other indicators should be considered. Overall, the speaker's tone is skeptical and suggests disagreement with the proposal.


Passage number 168.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, when we made a 100 percentadjustment we did have these ad hoc adjustments made and I think weshould continue those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there were ad hoc adjustments made in the past and suggests that they should continue.


Passage number 169.
 And if this is Mickey Mouse then I'd like tokick it up to 100 percent and then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree. You can argue the opposite. Weused to do it 100 percent.SPEAKER(.). We'll have to go for Pluto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I agree" indicates that there is agreement between the speakers.


Passage number 170.
-21-12/17-18/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this [unintelligible]. But theremust be something drastic about doing more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker is stating that there must be something drastic about doing more than just the given math equation, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 171.
MR. PARTEE. Certainly in the past we've found that we had toadjust by more than the change in required reserves in order to getthe desired change in the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 172.
MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I'm not able to understand the context of the passage you provided ("MR. RICE"). Could you please provide more information or the actual passage?


Passage number 173.
 No, that's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without any additional context.


Passage number 174.
 Oh no, we are--MR. PARTEE. This is just a portion of the change in requiredreserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing concern or surprise.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] you're getting a wigglein M1, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is unintelligible, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 176.
MR. AXILROD. I don't know if it's of interest, Mr. Chairman,but I did work out--I couldn't do it dynamically--what thehypothetical borrowing at 100 percent in "automatic" adjustment wouldhave been between Committee meetings starting over each Committeemeeting and not assuming any adjustment in the figure. And what thisshows is that in June and the first half of July this hypotheticallevel of borrowing would have been about $100 and some odd millionabove the $1 billion that was used consistently in that period for thepath. The actual turned out to be a shade under $1 billion. But inthe last half of July and the first half of August, with a 100 percentadjustment the hypothetical level of borrowing would have been onaverage $350 million less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply presenting an analysis of hypothetical borrowing levels. There is no conflicting opinion or argument being presented.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $350 million less than the $1.1 billionthat we didn't make the previous time or than the $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provides information about a specific amount of money ($350 million) being less than two other amounts ($1.1 billion and $1 billion). There is no statement of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 178.
MR. AXILROD. No, the billion--always carrying it at thebillion. I didn't know how to assume what was going on. And then in[the second half of] August and September we began lowering the levelof borrowing judgmentally, so the last half of August was $1 billionand then September 12th it was $900 million and September 26th, $850million. The [respective] hypothetical levels would have been $870,$680, and $760 million--so, running a little lower still. And then inOctober when we had been running with $750 or $700 million, thehypothetical would have varied between $65 and $505 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining a series of actions and hypothetical levels.


Passage number 179.
 And thenin November--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only $65 million--practically noborrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 180.
MR. AXILROD. Practically no borrowing, yes. And then inNovember, they're very close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any explicit contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement about borrowing practices.


Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's with 100 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact without presenting opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 182.
MR. AXILROD. That's with 100 percent. That's just the wholedrop in required reserves against Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 183.
MR. PARTEE. Because September was the way it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply presents a fact about the month of September without expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 184.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "Yes" by Mr. Axilrod implies that there is a disagreement or contradiction to a previous statement or question. It indicates that he holds a different viewpoint or opinion.


Passage number 185.
-22-12/17-18/84MR. CORRIGAN. What would have happened if the federal fundsrate went all over the place. Then the money supply would have beenall over the place too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a hypothetical scenario without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 186.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as the text only provides the name "MR. AXILROD."


Passage number 187.
 Well, I guess what would have happened is thatthe funds rate, instead of rising in the course of July and August,would have been back down closer to the 10, 10-1/2 percent area, butthat's--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We wouldn't let it go down to $65million, I presume. We would cut the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a hypothetical situation without any conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 188.
MR. AXILROD. I assume the judgment would override.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I assume the judgment would override" suggests that the speaker is making an assumption rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 189.
MR. BLACK. Jerry, I think that's an empirical issue. Thereis reason to suppose that but, if the market saw us hitting what theythought we ought to hit a little more regularly, I'm not sure thatwe'd have that wild a gyration. We might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is expressing his idea and reasoning, but there is no clear disagreement or conflict present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
 But I don't think it wouldhurt a lot if we did have it in the federal funds rate--MR. CORRIGAN. Well, in the abstract that might be right.But on the basis of experience I see nothing that suggests that onecan disentangle the behavior of the federal funds rate from theseother short- and long-term rates. Now, in theory, they should be ableto be disentangled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is disagreement between the two individuals. The speaker initially suggests that having the federal funds rate would not cause much harm. However, Mr. Corrigan disagrees based on his experience, stating that the behavior of the federal funds rate cannot be disentangled from other short- and long-term rates.


Passage number 191.
MR. GRAMLEY. That was the theory proposed in October of1979; it just didn't work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a theory proposed in October of 1979 that did not work.


Passage number 192.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's what we tried. And look at thebehavior of the money market and the bond market and the mortgagemarket and everything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and giving examples.


Passage number 193.
MR. PARTEE. They survived.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "they survived," without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 194.
MR. CORRIGAN. Barely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement from Mr. Corrigan without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 195.
MR. GRAMLEY. Recall also that in the first half of this yearwe had growth rates in one month as low as 1/2 percent and in anothermonth as high as 13 percent. And unless those are anticipated--thoserates were surprises, and monthly variations of that kind are alwaysto some degree a surprise--we are going to be accompanying them withvery, very large variations of interest rates. I really can't see whyanybody would want to go back to the kind of policy we pursued in thefall of '79 and the fall of '82, given the success of what hashappened since.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and expressing their own opinion about the success of the current policy compared to previous policies.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the success of what has happenedsince depends upon what happens in the coming months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a cause and effect relationship between past events and future events. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 197.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, yes. I'm by no means ruling out thatwith a monetary policy as ideal as any human brain can conceive, givenour knowledge, that we're still going to have variations in economicactivity. There's just no way that I could buy the argument that themain reason why we had this dramatic slowdown in the economy wasbecause of high interest rates in the spring. I just don't believethat for a moment. Some of it is; the decline in housing surely is.But [with] the increase in the saving rate of 1/2 percentage point or-23-12/17-18/84so in the third quarter, why would you so argue when consumer creditcontinues to grow. This tremendous drop in net exports surely can'tbe assigned primarily to the rise in interest rates in the spring.It's a much broader phenomenon there. We can't provide a perfectmonetary policy. There's no way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, disagrees with the argument that the main reason for the dramatic slowdown in the economy was because of high interest rates in the spring. He argues that there are other factors at play, such as the decline in housing and the increase in the saving rate. Therefore, there is disagreement regarding the cause of the economic slowdown.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can provide a perfect monetary policyif you say we just can't provide a perfect economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they can provide a perfect monetary policy, but someone else argues that it is not possible to have a perfect economy.


Passage number 199.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, all right; I'll accept that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is simply stating that he accepts the given statement or proposal without any objection.


Passage number 200.
MR. CORRIGAN. There's another point, too, on this businessof chasing M1 around. Don't forget that since the experience between[October] '79 and early '82 we've had a heck of a lot more depositderegulation in the banking system and there's a potential implicationin terms of the behavior of the real economy. The credit quality ofbanks and thrifts in the kind of interest rate environment thedepository institutions are operating in is, if anything, worse thanit was in that earlier period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a point and acknowledging a potential implication.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 201.
 I don't claim to--MR. BOEHNE. On the one hand, this is somewhat Mickey Mouseand, on the other hand, it takes us all the way back to 1979. I havea feeling that it's probably a little more than Mickey Mouse and notquite as dramatic as going back to '79. Whether one is for this oragainst it, it seems to me we're talking in extremes here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement or differing opinions about the topic being discussed. One hand, they describe it as "Mickey Mouse," which suggests it is trivial or insignificant. On the other hand, they argue that it is not as dramatic as going back to 1979. This indicates a divergence of viewpoints or perspectives. Additionally, the speaker mentions that regardless of one's stance, the discussion seems to involve extremes, further highlighting the presence of disagreement.


Passage number 202.
MR. PARTEE. Go right down the middle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a neutral statement expressing a suggestion to go in a certain direction.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline, [after my] having given agreat endorsement to all business forecasts, would you like to deliverone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a neutral statement or question.


Passage number 204.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, with my usual confidence I will plungeahead. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of confidence.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 205.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One of the questions that arises [with]the kind of outlook you forecast for next year--whatever thereliability of that may be--is where the risks lie. And is itsatisfactory or does it itself imply that one ought to be going for ahigher or theoretically lower [outcome]. Where do you lean on policywith a forecast of that sort, if you believe it. It doesn't tell mewhat the risks are on one side or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the reliability and satisfaction of the forecast and is unsure of the risks involved in the suggested policy.


Passage number 206.
MR. PARTEE. I wonder if Jim has any comments about therisks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement asking for Jim's comments on the risks.


Passage number 207.
MR. KICHLINE. I think the risks on inflation have beenchanging to the more favorable side as time has gone on. In fact,there are many people--at least on the Research Division staff here--who would like to argue the case for lower rates of inflation in 1985than in 1984. In particular, the profit margin is extraordinarilyhigh and rather difficult to explain. Virtually all the models andpast behavior would suggest a lower profit margin than has been inplace for some time. If that profit margin were to begin to erode abit, one could very readily take a posture of lower rates ofinflation. In the shorter run the risks on the energy side--and Tedand I talked a little about this on the oil side--seem to be downrather than up as well. So, I would tilt the inflation side down a-24-12/17-18/84bit leaving real activity alone. On real activity I think the risksare fairly well balanced. We have quite a moderate picture, really.In thinking about real investment, in particular, this year we'reexpecting close to a 15 percent annual rate of increase in businessfixed investment. We have 6 percent for next year. That's consistentwith the Merrill-Lynch and McGraw-Hill surveys and it's consistentwith the orders [figures]. Who knows what the tax proposals will do.They can cut either way. But essentially it's quite a moderatepicture at the moment, and I think the risks there are reasonably wellbalanced up and down. I would take the same view on the consumersector, although in the very short run it is confusing to us. So, Ithink the real side risks are fairly well balanced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their opinion on the risks of inflation and real activity, but there is no indication of conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On this profit margin question, I have avery vague impression from looking at the figures, though not closely.You can confirm it on the basis of a lot of careful work, I'm sure.Why do I hear so many complaints from businessmen--pretty much acrossthe board it appears, though it may not be across the board--thatprofit margins are under pressure. They say "I'd love to raiseprices; I can't do it because of imports." But the [overall]impression is that profit margins are awful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their vague impression and wonders why there are complaints from businessmen about profit margins.


Passage number 209.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, they came back very strongly. And, asyou know, profits as a percent of GNP are at very high levels in anhistorical perspective and they've stayed there. It's quite clearthat there are many industries suffering substantially, but I thinkthere is a severe distribution problem; it depends upon the nature ofthe industry and the degree to which it's subject to the importcompetition. I would only say that when you look at the aggregatenumbers relative to GNP and other more narrow measures of profitmargins they are really quite strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting a statement about profits as a percentage of GNP and acknowledging that there are industries suffering, but attributing it to a distribution problem rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 210.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] the manufacturingindustry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is unclear and unintelligible. Therefore, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 211.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. What we don't see, however, in our ownforecast is very much growth from here on out. So, I think what mayhave been happening is that there was this surge in profits in '83 andthat has tapered off in '84. We think especially in the latter halfwe may be seeing some sick profit numbers. And next year in thestaff's forecast, given the rate of growth of the real economy andprices, we have virtually no growth in profits. So, I think, one ofthe problems here is what businessmen are thinking about--continuedvery strong growth or maintenance of a high level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Kichline discussing the lack of expected growth in profits.


Passage number 212.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're looking at so-called economicprofits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given statement simply mentions that the reader is looking at so-called economic profits. It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 213.
MR. KICHLINE. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kichline is correct.


Passage number 214.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did you see that article in theSunday New York Times yesterday. The automobile quotas are costingthe consumer $10 to $13 billion dollars, of which $6 billion or moreincreases corporate profits in the automobile industry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states information about the impact of automobile quotas on consumers and corporate profits without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mean above the [unintelligible] incorporate profits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions profits being incorporated, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing statements.


Passage number 216.
-25-12/17-18/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No. What they argue is that some ofit went into overtime which could have been handled more economically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that there is a possibility of handling overtime more economically.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I mean the $6 billion figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Well, I mean the $6 billion figure" does not show any disagreement or contention. It simply implies that the speaker is referring to the specific figure of $6 billion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 218.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. The $6 billion increasescorporate profit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement about the $6 billion increase in corporate profit implies that there are differing opinions or perspectives on the matter. Some may argue that a $6 billion increase in corporate profit is positive, while others may disagree and argue that it is excessive or unfair.


Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage so I can assist you further.


Passage number 220.
]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe you assume they will only breakeven.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a possibility or assumption.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You haven't any evidence, I presume, buthow much gossip is there on what these tax proposals are doing. Yousay theoretically they might increase it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification about the level of gossip and speculation regarding the potential impact of the tax proposals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 222.
 I understand that, but Ihaven't heard a--MR. KICHLINE. No, we're agnostic in the forecast. Wehaven't taken a position. If you believed something were going tohappen along the lines of the Administration's proposal, I think therewould be an incentive to accelerate equipment purchases to get thefavorable depreciation and the tax credit. It's a bit risky on thestructures side. If you were into a standard tax shelter partnershiptrying to turn over commercial buildings, I don't know that you'd wantto touch that at all. Basically, it can cut either way. I would saythe overriding feature is a healthy dose of uncertainty. And that israther unhealthy in this environment. There is a lot of uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kichline, states that they are agnostic in the forecast and haven't taken a position. However, they mention that there would be an incentive for equipment purchases if something were to happen along the lines of the Administration's proposal. This suggests a difference in opinion or outlook on the potential impact of the proposal. Additionally, Mr. Kichline mentions that it is risky on the structures side and questions the viability of standard tax shelter partnerships for commercial buildings. These contrasting views indicate a level of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On depreciation: If you invest next year,that accelerated depreciation continues through the life of thatinvestment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the continued application of accelerated depreciation throughout the life of an investment made in the following year. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 224.
MR. KICHLINE. That's what the Administration has said: thatthere would be liberal transition rules. Their own numbers, at least[based on] talking to them, [suggest] that in the aggregate theirproposals would raise the cost of capital about 10 to 12 percent overthe life of an investment. So, it's a substantial potential change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Kichline disagrees with the Administration's claim that there would be liberal transition rules and argues that the cost of capital would actually increase by 10 to 12 percent over the life of an investment.


Passage number 225.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If everything is indexed on inflationin this new tax proposal, presumably it will take a less high level ofinterest rates to prevent the economy from overheating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply states a hypothetical situation and makes a presumption based on that situation.


Passage number 226.
MR. MORRIS. All the anecdotal evidence I hear in New Englandindicates that it has had the effect in the short run of putting a lotof investment plans on the shelf until this is resolved. I don't knowwhether that is true nationally or not, but that's the word I get fromindustrial people. They will wait and see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply presents the anecdotal evidence that investment plans have been put on hold until a certain issue is resolved. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I get, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "That's what I get, too" does not show any contention or disagreement. It rather suggests agreement or confirmation with a previous statement or experience.


Passage number 228.
MR. RICE. Especially long-term investments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing long-term investments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 229.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I think the people who are sayingthis have an ax to grind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "the people who are saying this have an ax to grind" suggests that there is contention or disagreement present. It implies that the people making the statement have a personal bias or ulterior motive, potentially leading to a disagreement among different perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 230.
MR. RICE. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 231.
12/17-18/84MR. CORRIGAN. Do you people have any feel at all as to howmuch of housing starts and residential construction outlays in recentquarters is for what would be considered second houses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 232.
MR. KICHLINE. I don't know that we have a good feel forthat. There are some scattered [signs] but it's very hard to breakout of current starts figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kichline is expressing uncertainty about having a good understanding of something and mentioning the difficulty in obtaining accurate information.


Passage number 233.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think the dollar figure would be even moreimportant because if one looks at all these recreational areas aroundthe country, one sees very, very expensive houses and condos and soforth. They seem to be springing up all over the place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan about the importance of the dollar figure in relation to expensive houses and condos in recreational areas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 234.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it is very confusing. For example, Ibelieve the Administration's proposal is that [a taxpayer] couldn'tdeduct more than $5,000 above investment income for interest chargeson something other than a primary residence. What that really does isto induce people to take out big loans on their primary residence.And there are other incentives in terms of tax-adjusted returns, butthe proposal doesn't adjust the interest paid on a primary residence.In effect, that gives a primary residence preferential treatment andwill build in incentives to leverage highly that part of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline believes that the Administration's proposal gives preferential treatment to primary residences and creates incentives for people to take out big loans on their primary residences.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Coming back to the more basicquestion that I guess you asked: If you assume [3] percent realgrowth in '85, you said that the risks of deviating either on the downside or the up side are about even in your opinion. Isn't it truethat if there were a major change in the dollar, that would heavilyweight the risks on the down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be disagreement regarding the risks associated with a major change in the dollar. While one person may believe it would heavily weight the risks on the downside, others may have a different opinion.


Passage number 236.
MR. KICHLINE. Which way is the dollar going. If it goes up,it would be applying more restraint on the domestic economy. Andthat's one of the features of our forecast; we've knocked a few tenthsoff our forecast because we have been assuming in our recent forecasta higher value of the dollar [than we had earlier]. So, in effect, itis draining off income abroad. It's a depressing influence on thedomestic economy. I think, Ted, that the assumption in this forecastis about an 8 percent decline in the value of the dollar over thecourse of 1985 from current levels. Now, if it were to go down muchmore than that, we'd be talking about lessened restraint on realactivity and a better export picture than we're now talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 237.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that would show [up] more in thefollowing year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating a hypothetical situation or possibility.


Passage number 238.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, it depends obviously on when it occurs.If it occurred sooner, then you'd get more of it in the 12-monthperiod than if it occurred later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Truman is simply stating that the amount of something (unspecified) would vary depending on when it occurs within a 12-month period.


Passage number 239.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Just out of curiosity, how do you getsomething as precise as an 8 percent assumption. You used to do 10 or15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 240.
MR. TRUMAN. Approximately the same way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward answer or clarification without any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 241.
MR. BOEHNE. On this trade business, some of the people in myDistrict say that even if we got a drop in the dollar of somesubstantial magnitude, that might prevent the further erosion of12/17-18/84business but it wouldn't any time soon or maybe a very long time outin the future cause a turnaround in their business. They say thatthose companies that are now exporting to the United States wouldadjust their profit margins or their profits somewhere else to hang onto this newly acquired share of the market at least for a while. So,it would seem to me that the risks of this really speeding up theeconomy in 1985, even if we got a big drop in the dollar, [are slim];it probably wouldn't happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any apparent contention or disagreement. It presents the viewpoint of some people in the speaker's district regarding the potential impact of a drop in the dollar on trade business.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming in the trade balancenext year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention as it simply asks for clarification on what assumptions are being made regarding the trade balance in the next year.


Passage number 243.
MR. TRUMAN. I can't remember the number exactly. It's $125billion on average for the year and approximately the same on thecurrent account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states a specific number and follows it up by mentioning that it is approximately the same on the current account.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying no further deterioration inthe trade balance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "You're saying no further deterioration in the trade balance" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a position without contradicting or opposing any other statement or viewpoint.


Passage number 245.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, yes, on average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there is agreement on average.


Passage number 246.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're assuming in New York $150billion on the current account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact or assumption about the amount of money spent in New York on the current account.


Passage number 247.
MR. TRUMAN. Our current account at the end of the year goesto $140 billion. On President Boehne's comment: In aggregate terms Ithink the hardest thing to predict is the lag structure of the[effects of] exchange rate changes. Most equations do say that thereis some lag in this, which I think one could say is a manifestation ofexactly that phenomenon, even assuming some absorption of an exchangerate [change] in foreign profit margins. One way to interpret lags inthese equations is that it's not until the exchange rate has gone downor up and stayed there that you get the impact of those exchange ratechanges on real trade flows. And it is for that reason that one canbe quite skeptical about the precise timing for any given exchangerate change--even a permanent exchange rate change--or how fast itwould show through. There are equations around--in fact the CommerceDepartment uses a technique where they assume that almost all of theadjustment comes in a very short period of time. And that's what ledthem at one point to make very much more optimistic assumptions intheir projections on the current account and the trade balance than wewere making at that time because they assumed that there was nothingleft in the pipeline. With a forecast of the type that we have--justan 8 percent decline against the background of a 12 percent increaselast year--in some sense you have more in the pipeline than you'remaking up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 248.
 So it's necessarily the case, at least on the exchangerate side, that you will have some net negative impact most of theyear just with the [unintelligible] exchange rate adjustment of thetype we would--MR. MORRIS. What are the interest rate implications of an 8percent decline in the value of the dollar in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact, that there will be a net negative impact most of the year due to exchange rate adjustments. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 249.
MR. TRUMAN. There are some components of that in the priceforecast, though less than last time, as Jim said, and also in thereal forecast to the extent that interest rate projections are somehowrelated to the demand-for-money equations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there are components of the price forecast that are related to the interest rate projections and demand-for-money equations.


Passage number 250.
-28-12/17-18/84 -29-MR. AXILROD. If you get more economic activity and priceswith the same money supply, we'd have to say you'll get somewhathigher interest rates than you're thinking of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting a hypothetical scenario and stating that, in that scenario, higher economic activity and prices would result in somewhat higher interest rates.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else want to deliverthemselves of a comment at this point. If not, we'll come back andmake more pregnant comments in the morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone else has a comment and mentions that they will make more comments in the morning if not.


Passage number 252.
[Meeting recessed]12/17-18/84December 18, 1984--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline, what do you have for us thismorning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 253.
MR. KICHLINE. With a smile, housing starts are virtuallyunchanged, staying at the depressed October level of 1.53 millionunits. Permits rose about 11 percent, however. Personal income isreported to have been up 0.7 percent in November following a downwardrevised 0.4 percent increase in October. At the same time, personalconsumption expenditures on this release, which will go into the flashnumbers of the Commerce Department, on their calculation rose 0.9percent in November following a 0.2 percent decline in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about housing starts, permits, personal income, and personal consumption expenditures.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, why don't you go ahead andsay what you want to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply inviting Mr. Axilrod to share his thoughts or opinions.


Passage number 255.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, the three alternatives thatwe presented to the Committee in the Bluebook all encompass somerecovery of M1 growth from the reduced pace we've had, at least [basedon] these present and concurrent seasonals for the second half of theyear. The middle one, alternative B, as the chart following page 7 inthe Bluebook shows, would aim at getting M1 to a place that'srelatively high in the tentative range adopted in July for 1985.Alternative A, which has an 8 percent growth for M1 suggested, wouldtend to move M1 above that cone. But the parallel dotted lines areintended to show a range of variation around a 5-1/2 percent growthrate over the year 1985, and it would be well within those parallellines.We view the specification of alternative B, which is about a6-3/4 percent rate of growth in M1 from November to March, with anassumption for December on the order of 7 percent, as roughlyattainable with current money market conditions. And I might add thatthose current conditions when we were doing the Bluebook were a bittighter than the present money market conditions. That is, we viewedthat M1 growth as attainable with borrowing of around $400 million andthe funds rate around 8-3/4 percent. In the last several days thefunds rate has been below 8-1/2 percent; yesterday it was below 8percent and this morning it is very close to 7 percent, just about 7-1/16 percent. So, in fact, alternative B calls for somewhat tightermoney market conditions than those that have evolved in the lastcouple of days, given market attitudes and expectations. We think thedriving force behind the increase in M1 demand that would lead to thisgrowth under the specified reserve and money market conditions is thefact that we expect growth in the economy to be a little more rapid inthe first quarter than it has been in the third and fourth quarters.And we are expecting, finally, to get some effects from the drop ininterest rates that has occurred in recent months, which work with theusual lag. At the same time, Mr. Chairman, we expect growth in M2 andM3 to slow from the recent pace under the conditions of alternative B,largely because we expect a drop in interest rates on money marketdeposit accounts and money market funds as they finally catch up withthis drop in market rates. So, we would expect a substantial slowingin growth of those aggregates in the MMDAs and money market funds.Alternative C is an effort to put the Committee at the middle of this4 to 7 percent range. It is our view, given the projections we have12/17-18/84of the economy, that this would require a somewhat higher fed fundsrate and tighter reserve positions than alternative B.I ought to add, Mr. Chairman, that I do have some additionalmonetary figures for the week that we haven't published, the week ofDecember 10. I don't have any data for the following week now, but Iwill have some later. We had expected an increase of almost $5billion in M1 for that week and it now appears to be $3.6 billion,somewhat less of an increase. So, it looks like December will belower unless the figures for the 17th, which we'll have later, turnout to be stronger than our expectations. It is a somewhat moremoderate M1 picture for December as of this moment than we had at thetime this document was written.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining different alternatives for M1 growth and their implications.


Passage number 256.
MR. CORRIGAN. What's your best guess now for that number forthe month as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage contains a question asking for a best guess, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 257.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I'd really rather wait until a littlelater when I get [some data for] the 17th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. December will turn out to be lower unlessit's higher. That's about what that projection is worth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a contradictory statement. By saying "December will turn out to be lower unless it's higher," it implies uncertainty and contradiction in the projection.


Passage number 259.
MR. AXILROD. The only other thing I should mention, Mr.Chairman, is that we did suggest some bracketed language in theoperating paragraph of the directive because the Committee had in thelast directive wanted to take account of the shortfall in M1 growth inOctober and in the fourth quarter relative to the 6 percent it haddecided on early in the quarter. We have suggested language thatwould continue [to convey] some of that concern. If you adoptedalternative B, for example, it would permit more rapid growth in M1--above the 6-3/4 percent--from November to March should you want tocontinue to take account of the fact that M1 did come in quite a lotlower than the original [objective of] 6 percent. Alternative A insome sense tends to allow for that more than alternative B and wewouldn't consider that language necessary if the specifications wereas high as those of alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting some bracketed language in the operating paragraph of the directive and discussing the implications of adopting different alternatives.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the time has come for some generalreactions but before you do that I would like to suggest that youcomment on several specific things. We are approaching the time for[setting] long-term ranges for 1985. Indeed, in a couple of weeks weare going to be in 1985. We have some preliminary long-term rangesfor 1985 and I think you ought to put your comments in the context ofwhat you think the appropriate longer-term ranges should be in ageneral way, whether similar to or the same as we had in July or, ifdifferent, in what respect different. In the same vein, [views] aboutthe relative weight of some of these monetary aggregates or otherfactors might be relevant. You can add anything on operatingtechniques that we discussed a bit yesterday; that would be relevanttoo.We also are going to have to present some forecasts for nextyear and we will get those between this meeting and the next meeting.Let me make a couple of comments on that. There is a question ofwhere we're going and, at this long distance from the end of nextyear, where we want to go. We have a projection of a little less than3 percent [real GNP growth] next year, if you take the staff estimate.-31-12/17-18/84That presumably is based upon certain assumptions as to monetarygrowth. The assumption on interest rates seems to keep changing frommeeting to meeting and getting lower, I would think, consistent withthose monetary growth estimates. In any event, we're going to have toput forward a projection. And I think that we should consider at thisstage at least, since we're making up policy, where we want to be, asthey say, as well as where we think we're going to be. If you takethe staff's 3 percent [real GNP growth forecast] as a starting point,is that satisfactory or not. I would put it this way: I would haveto be persuaded that that's the ideal outcome for next year. It seemsto me that the economy has a little more room to grow than that,ideally. Now, I'm not saying we can arrange this all ideally. But ifwe don't think it is going to grow 3 percent or faster, say 4 percent,I guess the question that arises is: Why aren't we easing. And whatare the things that are inhibiting that, if any. Maybe there aresome. If we were in a strongly inflationary period, for instance, Iguess that would be an obvious inhibition. Is that where we are. Isthat a risk. I think some commentary about that would be desirablejust in the sense of where the risks are in the economy. As abenchmark, if you are in agreement about taking that 3 percent as abenchmark, Mr. Kichline says that in his judgment the risks [to thatforecast] are evenly balanced. I'd like some comment as to whetherthat's what you think they are in some economic sense. I thinkthere's a question of whether the implications are equally balancedand whether the risks and dangers in the larger sense of overshoots orundershoots from, let's say, 3 percent or wherever you think we'regoing, are evenly balanced. That comes back to the question of whatthe risks are of inciting inflation on the one side, I suppose,against inciting [growth] considerably weaker than 3 percent. Andsome of those quarterly figures that are already in the staff'sprojection are quite anemic. What are various bits of economicinformation including, I suppose, the condition of the oil market,commodity markets, gold markets, and exchange rates telling us aboutthat.Finally, I think some discussion of how this all fits into alarger world setting is relevant. The United States certainly hasbeen propelling, I think almost single-handedly, the world expansionfor the past two years. There are not strong signs of self-propellinggrowth abroad that I can see at the moment. Japan seems to be slowingdown a bit from a relatively rapid rate of growth. Europe seems to betalking about--with the help of a large amount of exports to theUnited States--a growth pattern probably barely sufficient to keepunemployment from rising further. That means growth of maybe 2-1/2percent. But are we looking at prospects in the United States that ina sense remove a motor from world growth and what are the implicationsof that. Who's going to make it up, if anybody. If nobody is, what'sthe implication for policy. I think this inevitably gets involvedwith the exchange rate question because the strength of the dollar andthe converse weakness of other currencies--particularly as thataffects prices of imported raw materials, especially oil--and theinflationary impact it has in varying degrees in other countries is afactor in their own policy direction and policy mix and certainly isan inhibition on their monetary policy in terms of moving in anexpansionary direction. So, with all those questions on the table,let me open up the [discussion]. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a series of questions and topics for discussion, rather than presenting any specific contention or disagreement.


Passage number 261.
12/17-18/84MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's forecast istoo pessimistic on growth. I would expect growth to be more like 4percent than 3 percent, primarily coming in the first half, because Ithink we're going to get a very big response to the decline ininterest rates that has already taken place. I think we have toremember that the economy and M1 respond with a lag to a decline ininterest rates. We're already seeing some beginning signs such as therise in permits. We've already had a couple of months of increase innew home sales. There is some auguring that the consumer is comingout of his summer lull, particularly the new car sales in the first 10days in December. The only sector I'm concerned about is capitalspending because of the impact of the tax program--that is, thediscussions suggest that the tax program will not go through. I don'treally think we have a very good fix now on whether we're going to getan impact--at least a short-run impact--on capital spending plans ornot. I would assume that that will be resolved pretty quickly by thePresident's State of the Union and budget messages. He will have totake a position one way or the other on accelerated depreciation andthe investment tax credit. And if he should take the position ofrejecting the Treasury's program, I think the decline in interestrates will reinforce the extraordinary incentives and produce anothergreat upsurge in capital spending. So, I'm very optimistic about thefirst half--much more so than the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is some disagreement about the staff's forecast being too pessimistic, there is no contention or argument in this passage. The speaker simply presents their own viewpoint and supports it with evidence and reasoning.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you unhappy about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about the speaker's feelings or opinions, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 263.
MR. MORRIS. No. I think we can handle a 4 percent growthrate. The big problem, or the big imponderable, is what is going tohappen to productivity growth. I've been very optimistic onproductivity, but I must say I haven't gotten much statisticalcomfort. My optimism is relying on the intuitive rather than thestatistical because the big jump in employment in the last two monthsin an economy that's not growing very rapidly surely leads me toexpect very poor productivity numbers for the fourth quarter. But I'mnot sure that we're going to get in 1985 the pretty good productivityperformance that would make a 4 percent real growth rate very easy toattain without putting inflationary strains on the economy. If wedon't get it--if we get a poor productivity record--then I'd have tochange my mind on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply one person expressing their thoughts and uncertainties about productivity growth.


Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'd want to put a lot of emphasis on M1,I bet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply expresses a belief or assumption about the importance of emphasizing M1.


Passage number 265.
MR. MORRIS. No, sir. As I say, I've concluded that M1velocity is a random walk and I think we have to look at other things.If we ever get back to a point where M1 velocity becomes reliableagain, I'd be quite delighted. But I think it would hazardous for usto make the assumption that that time is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion and conclusion about M1 velocity without contradicting any other points or opinions.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not thinking of radical differencesin the ranges for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating that there will not be radical differences in the ranges for next year. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 267.
MR. MORRIS. No, I think the ranges for next year arecompatible with, say, an 8-1/2 percent nominal GNP rise, within whichI think a 4 percent real growth rate would be comfortably encompassed.So, if we're going to continue to have targets for the aggregates, Idon't see any reason to change any of the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his opinion about the ranges for next year and stating that he sees no reason to change them.


Passage number 268.
-33-12/17-18/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 269.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me respond to thequestions to us in the order you raised them. First of all, in termsof the tentative ranges for 1985: They look fine to me; I don't seeany particular reason at this point to change them. On the questionof relative weights and operating techniques: As I mentionedyesterday, I'm not dissatisfied with our operating techniques. Infact, despite the surprises we've had in the economy, I think theperformance of monetary policy, as best I can judge it over the pastyear or maybe two years, probably has been as good as you can get it.Despite the fact that M1 growth has popped around, 1984 is the firstyear that I can remember, Steve, where we've never actually goneoutside the cone; we've been in the cone for the whole year. Youraised the question yesterday, Mr. Chairman, about primary emphasis onM1. Part of the problem is that nobody knows quite what that means.I do think that in the fullness of time and over long enough periodsof time the behavior of M1 should get a relatively heavy amount ofweight, which I think it gets. But I don't think it should getprimary weight if that means chasing it around in the short run.Again, looked at in the fullness of time, the behavior of M1 even for1984 at 5 percent or so doesn't seem to me to be very far fromsomething that I would consider quite acceptable.On the question of the forecast: In general, I'm prettyclose to Frank. I certainly have been quite wrong in terms of mynear-term expectations for the last couple of months. But as best Ican weed through everything, I still think that the prospects for 1985are on the stronger side of the staff's forecast, which is fine to me.If I were to try and articulate an optimal--I shouldn't say optimalbut rather acceptable--set of goals for 1985, something in the area of4 percent real growth with an inflation rate holding about where it islooks like a pretty result from my point of view. One thing I wouldstress, though, is that by a lot of standards inflation, even if itwere to stay at 4 percent, is still high. Indeed, when you look atwhat has happened this year, there is still a question as to whyinflation is as high as it is, not why it's as low as it is. I thinkthat has to remain a consideration in our minds, particularly goingout into 1985. As Jim pointed out yesterday, the pressures fromprofit margins are going to increase at least in a behavioral way.Whether they can reflect themselves in higher prices is anothersubject. I think the two wild cards of note, in terms of the economicoutlook, are the trade situation and the tax policy questions. Thestaff forecast and most other forecasts basically are saying that thetrade position will stay about where it is right now. I don't know ifthat's a safe bet or not. Certainly, as a general proposition, thatsituation continues to be a source of great uncertainty in my mind.And I don't know how to judge the uncertainties coming out of allthese tax policy questions. My hunch is that they will hurt ratherthan help. The one other point I would make is that I now have thesense that--reflecting the relatively good performance of wages andprices and maybe especially wages--we may in this period have achievedsomething of a more permanent downward shift in inflationaryexpectations and in the yield curve. That, again, I think can be apositive development in terms of the real economy in 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The phrase "Governor Rice" is a neutral term referring to a specific individual. Without further context or information, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement involved.


Passage number 271.
12/17-18/84MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll try to answer all ofyour questions in order as well. But first I'd like to say a wordabout the forecast. Unlike Frank and Jerry, I'm very comfortable withthe staff's forecast; I think it's just about on target. I do not seeany danger of a recession. I don't see any of the usual signs orconditions prevailing which usually precede a recession. On thecontrary, the basic conditions appear to exist for continued moderateexpansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 272.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just be clear. When you say you'recomfortable with the forecast, that means you're comfortable with itas a forecast. And is it also desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "And is it also desirable" suggests that the speaker is questioning whether being comfortable with the forecast is also desirable.


Passage number 273.
MR. RICE. That means I agree with it as a forecast. If I'mtaking too long to get to it, I guess I could give you a "yes" or"no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is simply expressing his agreement with a forecast.


Passage number 274.
 "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I just wanted to be sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply wants to clarify something and express their assurance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 275.
MR. RICE. Although there are good reasons for expecting a 3percent rate of expansion next year, again unlike Frank and Jerry, Idon't see anything in the economy that's going to spark an expansionat a rate beyond 3 percent. It may be, as Frank suggested a momentago, that the recent decline in interest rates has been of such amagnitude as to stimulate further expansion. The decline of thefederal funds rate to around 7 percent, as we had today, is somethingI had not anticipated. And I'm sure the staff forecast is not basedon interest rates at these levels. So, one question is whether thefunds rate and other short-term rates should stay in the 7 percentarea or not. With rates in that area Frank may well have a good pointabout sparking a faster rate of expansion. But if they don't stayaround that level--if funds rates go back up to where they were a fewweeks ago or to the 8-3/4 percent rate recorded two days ago and theshort-term market rates associated with that go to 9 percent, I reallydon't see what is going to spark a faster rate of expansion. I don'tsee it in consumer expenditures; I don't see it in the variouscomponents of investment; I don't see it in net exports. I don't knowwhere it would come from.As the Chairman put it, if the staff forecast is about right,the question arises as to whether that is satisfactory. And my answeris that if that is absolutely the best we can do without inflation,yes, I would settle for a 3 percent rate of expansion. However, I'mnot sure that that is the highest rate of growth that is consistentwith low inflation. I'm not at all sure. My own inclination is totry for a higher rate. I'm not at all sure that 4 percent is a ratethat is consistent with low inflation; 4 percent growth may be toohigh and may result in capacity or resource pressures. But I think weought to try to pull for the highest rate of growth that is consistentwith low inflation and keeping the risks of igniting inflationaryexpectations very low. I think we're in a good position to do thatright now because the Federal Reserve has an unusual amount ofcredibility. And I think it's a time that we could use some of thecredibility in the interest of getting some further growth. To put itsimply: We can play it safe or we can take some risks toward moregrowth. I don't think the risks will be high. As a matter of fact,as I've already suggested, the moment we see some danger of capacityor resource pressures or wage/price pressures developing or the moment12/17-18/84we see some ignition of inflationary expectations we can and shouldpull back. Now, let me say that I'm simply trying to suggest anattitude we might take. How does this translate into policy. As Isaid earlier, interest rates have come down much more in recent weeksthan I had thought they would. I'm perfectly prepared, with interestrates at this level, to sit back and wait and see what happens and notpush them any further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, disagrees with Frank and Jerry's belief that there will be a faster rate of expansion beyond 3 percent. He argues that there is nothing in the economy that suggests a faster rate of expansion, and he doesn't see it in consumer expenditures, investment, or net exports. He also questions whether a 3 percent rate of expansion is satisfactory and expresses his inclination to try for a higher rate.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say this level, I think maybe weought to discount today's federal funds rate for the purpose of thisdiscussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a suggestion or idea for consideration, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 277.
 It's the last analysis, but--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 278.
 7 percent in the--MR. RICE. What I'm trying to convey is a feeling that thingshave eased quite a bit, and a lot of what I'm saying applies to aninterest rate level that was higher than I thought was good for theeconomy. So, I would be prepared to sit back and see what effect this[easing] has for a while. And if it isn't producing some kind ofsupport for the economy, why then I'd be in favor of easing somewhatfurther. But what I'm saying doesn't translate into doing somethingwild and pushing interest rates way, way down. That's not what I'mtalking about; I'm talking about a cautious, probing attitude. We cantalk about how to do that, which means numbers like "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and reasoning, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 279.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "B," okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No contention or disagreement can be identified in the given passage.


Passage number 280.
MR. RICE. To answer you question about M1: I'm impressedwith what the staff has found about the increased reliability of M1.If it has become more reliable in the last 18 months, let's recognizeit. That is not to say rehabilitate it completely but recognize itand perhaps consider putting it on equal footing with the otheraggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing approval and agreement with the increased reliability of M1 and suggesting it should be recognized and possibly given equal importance as other aggregates.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have it on equal footing right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We have it on equal footing right now" implies that both parties have the same standing or level playing field.


Passage number 282.
MR. RICE. No, I've never hear anybody say it's on equalfooting or is given equal weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice simply states that he has never heard anyone say that something is on equal footing or given equal weight.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two meetings ago we put it ratherexplicitly on equal footing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that something was put on equal footing during a meeting, without mentioning any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 284.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the way the directive iswritten and that's the way the markets are interpreting it now. Ifanything, they're giving it more [weight].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the directive and how it is being interpreted in the markets. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 285.
MR. RICE. Well, the markets were giving it more. We'resaying we are giving it more importance, even more importance than amonth ago. The markets have long since been giving it greaterimportance than we have. Anyhow, if everybody agrees that we put iton equal footing with the other aggregates, that's as far as I'd liketo go at the present time on M1. As for the ranges for next year, I'mcomfortable with the ranges that we've established. However, if weimplement this probing attitude that I've suggested we should pushfor, we should be prepared to see growth in the upper parts of thoseranges. Is there something I haven't covered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is expressing his views and preferences regarding the importance and ranges of certain aggregates, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 286.
-36-12/17-18/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you and Mr. Corrigan started out bysaying you were going to answer all my questions. You haven'tanswered the international questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement indicating frustration about unanswered questions.


Passage number 287.
MR. RICE. Oh, yes. What I'm suggesting is to try to get asfast a rate of growth [as is consistent with low inflation], whichmeans lower interest rates. And lower interest rates are veryconsistent with what needs to be done on the international side. As amatter of fact, I think one could make a case for easing monetarypolicy purely on the exchange rate situation now because of itseffects on and ramifications for our domestic economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that lower interest rates are beneficial and consistent with what needs to be done on the international side, specifically in relation to the exchange rate situation and its effects on the domestic economy.


Passage number 288.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the given information. The passage only mentions "Governor Martin" but does not provide any details or context about the governor's actions, statements, or relationships with others.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Governor Partee's actions or statements, so there is no contention or disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 290.
MR. PARTEE. Well, there are a lot of things out there in '85that are going to happen that we don't have any notion of today. It'slooking pretty far ahead and I think all we can do is go on the basisof central tendencies and realize that there will be many surprises towhich we'll have to react as the year goes on. I would say that as wego through the third year of expansion, I would have a presumptionthat the risks are on the side of falling short rather than going overthe rate of growth. As the expansion gets older it gets a little moredubious, a little more treacherous to continue to project that we willfollow along those lines. In particular, there are two things thatbother me about the outlook. The first--and I somewhat tentativelysubmit it to you--is that there has been a considerable incomeredistribution in the country both because of the tax changes andbecause of interest rates. As a result, I'm not sure that we cancount on the personal saving rate dropping as it does in theprojection. The staff didn't know why it went up, so they are puttingit back down again. But if I look around for a reason why it mightnot go down, it would be that this is becoming a society that is verydivided in terms of income results and wealth effects and that kind ofthing, and I would expect a higher saving rate because of the factthat a lot of people are prosperous. Now, that doesn't necessarilymean more consumer credit because I would submit that the people whoborrow are usually not the ones who have the wealth. They are theones who need to do the spending. And that makes me somewhatsympathetic to Preston's point that maybe housing won't do so well andmaybe automobiles won't do so well as the year goes on.The second and even more disturbing thing to me is the effectof net imports on the economy that we've seen this past year. Itreally has sapped the strength of the economic expansion as this yearhas progressed. The projection says net imports aren't going to go upmuch more and it could be right, but I really can't see that thesituation has changed. It seems to me that the rising tide of importsis just not in the process [of stopping] unless something happens tostop it; it's going to grow and grow more and that's going to sap thestrength of the economy as the year goes on. So my inclination,without having a specific forecast, would be to say that the chancesare, if anything, that we'll end up on the low side rather than on thehigh side of an inadequate forecast. The growth rate specified forthe year is inadequate. It's inadequate in terms of capacityutilization, which doesn't do a thing as the year goes on; it stays at-39-12/17-18/8482 or a little below 82, as I recall. And it's inadequate in terms ofthe kinds of stimuli we need in order to get increasing capitalspending. Profits aren't going to be doing much according to theforecast; markets aren't going to be improving. We're almost certainto have a gradual shutting off in the business investment expansionwith this kind of forecast. So, I think we ought to have in mind 4percent. I would have said 4-1/2 percent real growth from the fourthquarter to the fourth quarter. I think this kind of forecast is toopoor to come forward with, especially when we recognize that we mayfall short.I don't know about interest rates. I've given up forecastinginterest rates or even saying what they ought to be because there areso many variables in the equations. For example, someone commented--Ithink it was Jerry--that maybe inflationary expectations have changed.If they have, these interest rates aren't going to stimulate anything.We are going to [need] lower interest rates because [the currentrates] just won't bring forth the demand for credit to spend if peoplehave a lower expectation for inflation and, therefore, a loweranticipation of what they will realize in terms of profit payoffs orappreciation payoffs on the investments they have made. Therefore, Ijust don't know where interest rates ought to be. I've had thatfeeling now for some while and it has grown as the years go on. Thatreinforces my view that we really have to look at the monetaryaggregates, not interest rates, as what we hope to control. I'mtrying to remember to answer the Chairman's questions, although he'sleft the room. My view is that M1 ought to have primary importanceamong the monetary aggregates. That has been my view and there is nochange in it. I must say it was strengthened a little by Steve'sanalysis yesterday but I have felt that for some time and I continueto feel it. I don't know, but I suppose we have selective memories.Lyle can remember the times when M1 didn't tell us anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the forecast, stating that there are several factors that could lead to falling short of the projected rate of growth. The speaker also expresses uncertainty about the future of interest rates and argues for prioritizing the M1 monetary aggregate.


Passage number 291.
 I canremember the times when it did--MR. GRAMLEY. The two of us make a great team.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses harmony or agreement between two individuals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 292.
MR. PARTEE. --and somehow the latter times strike me asbeing more important. But we always have to be very careful in usingM1 because there can be--as there was, I think, in 1982--shifts in thedemand for money and we have to be sensitive to that. We don't wantto ride our money supply target without regard to what is happening inother elements of the economy or in other aggregates or credit or inmarket conditions. But among the aggregates I think it is the mostreliable and the one that we ought to put the most confidence in. Iagree with Pres that we ought to reconsider the long-range targets for1985. I'm inclined to think that we ought to put M1 growth back to 4to 8 percent as it was for this year both because we have room for 4to 4-1/2 percent real growth in the economy and because we've fallen alittle short. One way to make the adjustment for the base drift wouldbe to say "All right, we had growth a little lower than we expectedthis year and we'll take a little higher growth next year if necessaryto bring about this 4 to 4-1/2 percent real expansion in the economy.I think that makes a lot of sense. And I don't think in that contextthat it would be taken as a backing away from our inflation fightingattitude; I think it would be quite acceptable.I also agree, and I've never said this before in a meeting,that we ought to pay considerable attention to the exchange rate and12/17-18/84we ought to do what we can to bring the exchange rate down. That alsowould suggest, other things equal, that when we can we ought to dothings in the money sector that are apt to produce somewhat lowerinterest rates. By "other things equal" I mean if lowering ratesisn't producing some kind of a calamitous result internally. I don'tknow whether it's going to bring the dollar down; certainly, it hasn'tso far. But I suppose the weight of the evidence over time is thatlower interest rates in this country might tend to do that. Iwouldn't say we should make the exchange rate the target of policy[unintelligible] or something like that, but I'm very disturbed aboutthis import situation. I think it's just going to have to be dealtwith. If the exchange rate does come down--remembering also that acharacteristic later on in periods of expansion is that we start toget more inflationary pressures--with lower exchange rates goingthrough the third year of expansion, it seems to me that prices mightbe on the high side of the staff forecast. I guess I'd be prepared tomake some price concession for getting the exchange rate down becauseI think it's that important a problem. I think I've answered all thequestions, so I'll end at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with some ideas (such as reconsidering long-range targets for 1985 and paying attention to the exchange rate), but also expresses caution and suggests that lowering interest rates may not be effective in bringing down the exchange rate. Additionally, the speaker expresses concern about the import situation and suggests that concessions may need to be made on prices in order to address the problem.


Passage number 293.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
MS. HORN. I believe the staff forecast represents what isprobably the most likely outcome. I'm still uneasy about the outlook,particularly for the next couple of quarters. The pause or the growthslowdown has been greater than I expected and greater than a lot of usexpected. In analyzing that, I came up with a couple of events thatin retrospect maybe weren't so surprising to me and a couple of eventsthat caused me to focus anew on some existing issues in the economy.The ones I put in the class of maybe being more [surprises of] timingrather than real surprises would be consumer spending and thedeterioration in the trade accounts. Those may well smooth out overtime. A couple [of developments] lead me to a new focus on oldissues. One is that I really do find surprising the extent to whichthe slowing in the national growth rate is represented in a stallingout of the economic recovery in the Midwest. To use the Ohio statenumbers as representative of the Fourth District, employment in Ohiohasn't risen all year and unemployment is now beginning to inchupward. If you look at business in our area, particularly heavymanufacturing, you see the marking down of expectations. They stillthink the national recovery is going on but they don't think it'sgoing to be reflected in their business, particularly in thetraditional capital goods area. So, they're focusing instead onexpansion of cost cutting and survival now.The second set of issues, which I find particularlyworrisome, are those surrounding the situation in the farming, mining,and energy sectors. I really see little in recent developments tosuggest the end of the income squeeze in these areas. Of course, notsurprisingly in that respect--because really only time will deal withthose problems--I think the time [will come] to write down some of theinflated asset prices from some of the decisions that were taken undera different set of economic [conditions]. But this remains a problemin many small towns and even some large ones in that we really don'tsee the spillover, if you will, of the national recovery even if we doexpect it to continue on at about the 3 percent rate.-41-12/17-18/84I have two comments specifically on whether I think the 3percent rate is adequate or not. I'd like to comment on both 1985 andthen a bit beyond that. I think probably there is room for more than3 percent growth in 1985; I might say 3 to 4 percent. But as we lookat the long-term trend of the economy and, therefore, at whatproductivity increases are likely to be, I'm one of those people whoare very impressed by some of the productivity stories I hear. Someof the remarkable cost-cutting stories and productivity changes thatwe have seen in our District are really very exciting. But they dotake time to have their effect and I think they take more investmentin order to have their effect, and the time periods can be significantbefore we really reap the full benefit of this. So, as I look beyond1985, I wouldn't like to place too heavy a bet on a really significantchange in the productivity numbers. For that reason, if we're talkingpublicly about something bigger than 3 percent next year, I'd like tobe sure we don't put ourselves in the position where that sounds likemore than 3 percent forevermore, because the forevermore numbers Itend to be more comfortable with are in the 2 to 3 percent range. Ithink if we get involved in more than the 2 to 3 percent range longterm, we're counting on a faster quickening of some of theproductivity improvements or we're counting on continued enormousnumbers of imports to mop up the large demand, and I wouldn't like tobe betting on those too far into the future. As far as the longer-term ranges, particularly the M1 range, as I look at them now they arenot unreasonable in line with what I just discussed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement or unease about the outlook for the economy, particularly for the next couple of quarters. They also express surprise about the slowing growth rate in the Midwest and the impact on employment and business. Additionally, they express concern about the farming, mining, and energy sectors and question the adequacy of a 3 percent growth rate.


Passage number 295.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage as it is incomplete. Please provide the complete passage for a more accurate analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the Board staff forecast isabout right in terms of the level of economic activity, but I wouldside very much with Pres and Chuck and Emmett on the risks on that,particularly concerning Chuck's last point. I am fearful that theforeign trade deficit is going to take a bigger bite out of ourproduction and employment than we probably have assumed. If there'sany risk, this strength of the dollar in the face of the narrowinginterest rate differentials has impressed me a lot and that's where Iwould think the main risk lies. I think Jerry made a very importantpoint on the inflation side in saying we ought not to be complacentabout an inflation rate of 4 percent. I remember that in 1971 whenPresident Nixon put on the wage and price controls that [level ofinflation] was serious enough to be a national calamity. By the sametoken, I think we can pretty well count in our own productive capacitythat which is abroad since we have such an open economy now that we'renot apt to hit bottlenecks quite as quickly; I think the threat offoreign competition and actual foreign foreign competition have beenone of the key reasons why inflation has not risen as much in thisupswing as some of us thought earlier that it would. Jim said aboutthe risk of inflation that he thought it would be less next year; Iwould guess it would be roughly about the same, but certainly lessthan I earlier thought it would be at this stage.On the long-run targets, I would come out about where Karendid and would leave those ranges unchanged. So far as the aggregatesare concerned, I'll take a page from Orwell's Animal Farm and say thatall aggregates are created equal but some are more equal than othersand I would emphasize M1 since I think it really, despite itslimitations, conveys more information than all the others do andcertainly more than any one of them does. To your fourth question-42-12/17-18/84about whether 2.9 or 3 percent growth is satisfactory or not, I thinkEmmett gave the appropriate answer when he said that that's fine ifthat's all we can get without inflation. Historically, our long-rungrowth rate has been around 3-1/2 percent and 3 percent would not bethat unusual at this stage of a recovery. But in the peculiarcircumstances in which we have found ourselves, I believe that weprobably could stand a little more than that. But anything muchbeyond 3-1/2 percent or so I think would spell problems for us downthe road.And to your final question about how this fits into the worldsituation: If we don't provide the impetus for expanding world trade,who is going to do it. I suppose that foreign economies look a littlebetter now than they did the last time we met but they still don'tlook very strong. So, I would expect we're going to have to carry thebrunt of that burden; and for that reason I would agree with Chuckthat we ought to take a little harder look at exchange rates this timethan we've traditionally done around this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses agreement with some points made by others (Pres, Chuck, Emmett), but also voices concerns and disagrees with others (Jerry, Jim). He raises the issue of the foreign trade deficit and the strength of the dollar as potential risks to economic activity. He also disagrees with Jim's prediction of lower inflation next year, stating that it would be roughly the same or less than previously thought. Additionally, he suggests that more emphasis should be placed on M1 as an aggregate measure. Overall, there are differing opinions and perspectives expressed in the passage.


Passage number 297.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not any contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions the name "Governor Wallich" without providing any additional information or context to analyze.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With all this talk about getting thedollar lower and improving the trade balance, let me just introduceanother complication. If we don't have a big trade imbalance and abig capital inflow from abroad, how are we going to finance the budgetdeficit. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just introducing a complication and posing a question.


Passage number 299.
MR. FORRESTAL. Let me start with the ranges, Mr. Chairman.I don't think there is any need to do anything at this time about M1or M2. I think 7 percent at the top of the range for M1 is sufficientto allow for adequate growth in 1985, provided we keep inflation aboutwhere it is and provided that we don't have an unusually low level ofvelocity. We should not lose sight of the fact--and I think we needto remind ourselves--that 1984 was a pretty good year. I think we didvery, very well in terms of growth and, certainly, we did well interms of inflation. And if you believe, as I guess I still believebut with a greater degree of uncertainty, that what we are in now is apause and not a permanent decline in the economy, I really don't thinkwe need to do anything with the ranges for M1 and M2. I guess we'renot giving a lot of weight to M3 but I wouldn't be concerned if wemoved that range up a bit to reflect the reality of what happened in1984, though I really don't care all that much about it.With respect to the staff forecast, I think it's a littlepessimistic in terms of growth. I think that growth will probably bearound 4 percent, but I believe that's good. I would not be terriblycomfortable with 2.9 percent growth for '85; that's a bit anemic. Ithink we can support 4 percent without reigniting inflationaryexpectations. Why do I think we might get greater growth. I thinkthe saving rate is somewhat important and, unlike others, I believethe consumer is going to break out of this pattern of saving to someextent and we're going to get a return of the consumer to themarketplace. We've seen some evidence of that already in terms of theNovember retail sales. Perhaps I'm just reflecting my own Districtwhere retail sales are holding up pretty well and, in fact, someretailers are even changing their forecasts. I should say that someare moving them down as well. The deficit, of course, is still withus and that is having a stimulative effect on the economy, obviously.I think that we have eased considerably. We have had a drop in short-term rates of roughly 300 basis points. I think that's still going towork its way through the economy. We're expecting more rapid growth;we had more rapid growth of M1 in November. I don't know what Steveis going to tell us about December, but the last number I saw was 6 or7 percent growth in December. So, I think those things are still inthe pipeline and are going to push us to healthier growth--and byhealthier I mean 4 percent in 1985. With that greater growth I wouldexpect a little higher inflation than the staff is forecasting. The12/17-18/84other thing that I looked at that I think is rather interesting is thefact that long-term rates have not moved down all that much. What isthat telling us. Is it indicating a revival of inflationaryexpectations on the part of markets or does it suggest an expectationof greater economic growth. I think it's probably the latter. Ithink the markets are looking for healthier growth in the long run.The other thing that influences me to some extent is the money numbersthat I'm seeing from the private forecasters, who are suggesting afairly healthy growth in M1 in the first quarter of '85.With respect to the dollar, as others have said, this tradeimbalance is a very, very distressing feature of the economy. And ifwe want to get the dollar down, or at least to help the dollar comedown, I suppose one could argue that monetary ease is the way to doit. However, if we do that, the thing I'm concerned about is first ofall that we haven't seen the dollar come down at all as a result ofthe decline in the differential between rates abroad and in the UnitedStates. Interest rates have come down here. I would have expectedthe dollar to come off but it didn't. And the question in my mind is:If we ease policy to bring the dollar down, are we going to reigniteinflationary expectations, increase interest rates again, and thenbring the dollar back to where it was. In other words, we may get theopposite effect of what we anticipate. So, I'm not sure there is verymuch we can do on the monetary policy side with respect to the dollar.I really just don't know.One other thing I want to mention is that in terms of the taxproposal, I think--as others have said as well--that it can cut eitherway. I find it very difficult to get people to say which way they aregoing to jump: whether they are going to accelerate their businessfixed investment upon anticipation of being grandfathered or whetherthey are going to hold back. It could go either way, so that is anuncertainty.With respect to the operating techniques that you askedabout, Mr. Chairman, I wouldn't know how to answer your question aboutplacing primary emphasis. I think M1 deserves a lot of attentionamong the aggregates and I personally would pay more attention to M1than to the others. But I do think it is very important that we keepour eye on all of the other factors, including economic growth,interest rates, and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states the name "Mr. Boehne" without any additional information or context to suggest any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 301.
MR. BOEHNE. Based on very recent information, it seems to methat, at least in my District, the retail situation looks a littlebetter. It's nothing to write home about but I suspect December mightturn out to be a touch better than November. The more interestingpoint, as we go out into 1985, is that I believe the risks are on thedown side from the staff forecast for two broad reasons: One is justthe anatomy of a recovery and the second is the level of interestrates. The point has been made in several different ways, but thereis an anatomy to a recovery; there is a rhythm to it. That rhythm isnot constant from one recovery to another, but it usually starts withhousing and moves into consumption and then it gets a kick frominventories and then investment and so on. To count on a big boostcoming from consumption in the third year of a recovery it seems to meis at odds with that usual anatomy and that usual rhythm. It might12/17-18/84happen, but I don't think it's a good bet. In the second area,interest rates, I think most of us around the table say that we've hada drop in interest rates, we've eased and we feel good, so why don'twe just wait. It takes a little time; we know there are lags here. Idon't think we have lowered interest rates as much as we think we havein terms of the impact on the economy. I think we have seen a biggerdrop in nominal rates than we have in real rates. I think we areseeing a downward adjustment in inflationary expectations and I thinkinterest rates are still very high. There is nothing about an 8percent Treasury bill rate or a little more that is particularly low.And if you look at long-term rates, [they are up] there too. So, interms of interest rates, I think we still have fairly restrictiverestraint on the economy.So, for both those reasons--the anatomy of a recovery andinterest rates--the odds favor a weaker economy than the staff hasforecast. I think those kinds of risks are unacceptable, and I thinkthe forecast that the staff has put together is unacceptable. I don'tthink 3 percent, or 2.9 percent, is acceptable to us. I have a hardtime selling myself on it. I think it would be even more difficult tosell that to the public or the Congress or to our friends overseas.So, it seems to me, we have a forecast that is unacceptable. Therisks are unacceptable and the policy implication is to try to have asomewhat more stimulative monetary policy to at least move us in adirection that we find more acceptable. I have trouble pinpointing anumber but with all the hazards it seems to me something closer to 4percent or a little over in terms of real growth would be a much moresalable outlook and policy target.As far as the other questions: On the long-term ranges, Imust say that my doubts about the ranges that we agreed to last Julyare on the rise. I'm not at this point prepared in an outright way toadvocate raising them, but I think at a minimum we should indicatethat growth would be at the upper end and perhaps exceed the ranges,particularly in the first part of the year when we get into theparallel lines and the cone business. But between now and February, Imay very well change my mind and come down on the side of raising theupper limit both as a way of handling the undershoot and as a way ofproviding some breathing room to deal with the risks. As far as theweighting of the aggregates, I have never loved nor hated M1. I don'thave any particular loyalty to it; I'm very agnostic about it. But itdoes seem to me that it has looked a little better recently. Theseweekly gyrations are certainly funny, but it seems to me that the casethat M1 is better than it was a few months ago is a convincing case,so I would put it first among equals. I would give it an extra bowcompared to the other aggregates. I, too, think--and I don't thinkI've even ever thought this let alone said it, Chuck--that theexchange rates and the commodity prices are telling us something. Idon't know what kind of weight to assign to this but when so manysignals in the economy are going one way or another and the aggregatesto some extent are giving mixed signals, it seems to me that in aworld with that kind of uncertainty there is information to be gleanedfrom the exchange markets and from commodity prices. And I think bothof them tell us that our interest rates are too high.As far as the operating procedures are concerned, I'm muchhappier with the way we have been conducting ourselves in recentmonths than we were a couple of years ago when we were in a much more-47-12/17-18/84mechanistic mold. It does seem to me that while we ought to carry onmore or less as we have been with some equal to primary importance toMl and looking at borrowings, I would not keep both eyes on borrowing.I would look over at reserve growth and if we get ourselves in asituation where reserve growth either shoots way up or begins to falloff, it seems to me that, too, would be telling us something. I'm notfor any formal modification, but I think we've got to look at bothsides of how we get at this--both reserve growth as well as borrowing.I think that's everything, or at least all you want to hear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne disagrees with the staff forecast for two reasons: the anatomy of a recovery and the level of interest rates. He believes that the risks favor a weaker economy than the staff has forecasted and finds their forecast to be unacceptable. He argues for a more stimulative monetary policy and a higher target for real growth.


Passage number 302.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the actual content of the passage. Please provide the specific passage so that I can help you further.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 303.
MR. GRAMLEY. If I were to write down a forecast today, itwould look very much like the staff's with about 3 percent growth.And I would agree with the staff's judgment that the risks are roughlybalanced as to whether or not growth would exceed that or fall short.So, I don't agree with Frank or Jerry in that respect. My thinkinghas changed over the past several months and I hope it's not becausethe news has been coming in rather poorly. I think the worst way toforecast is to assume that tomorrow will be just like today. We allknow that we can do a lot better than that. But some things have beenhappening that have affected my own judgments. The most important isthe fact that the drag from the international sector is turning out tobe a lot larger, a lot more pervasive, and a lot more persistent thanI had anticipated. And the second is the evidence coming in over aseries of months suggesting that the process of very rapid growth inbusiness fixed investment is behind us.Turning to the desirability of this forecast, I certainlywould agree with those who say that it would be much more desirablefor growth to come out on the plus side of 3 percent than on the minusside. And I say this less for domestic reasons than internationalones. Growth of 3 percent is still above my estimate of potential.It's also above the staff's estimate, which is why we make furtherprogress in reducing unemployment with this forecast in 1985 accordingto the staff. But I don't think a 3 percent growth rate issatisfactory from the standpoint of the international economy. Thereis just no evidence of any developing dynamism or cumulation of therecovery in Western Europe. And if our economy grows at 3 percent orless, I think the risks increase that maybe the international economygenerally is going to begin to stall, with consequences that I thinkare quite serious. Let me just say a word or two about the exchangerates. I think all of us want to see a lower exchange rate and Iassume we all mean a lower real exchange rate. We all know that it'svery, very easy to produce a lower nominal exchange rate. All we haveto do is dump out money in buckets and gin up double digit inflationand the exchange rate will fall. All we would have to do is signalthat we intend to do that and we would get some anticipatorymovements, I'm sure. But what else we could do from the standpoint ofmonetary policy to bring the real exchange rate down, I don't know.If we foster more growth in the U.S. economy, will that raise or lowerthe exchange rate. I'm not sure. We're told that one of the reasonsthe exchange rate is as high as it is is because the investmentprospects look so much better here than they do in Western Europe. Ifwe lower interest rates in the short run, will that do the trick.Well, we've done that in recent weeks, and lo and behold the exchangerate turns around and goes back up again--according to some arguments,at least, because holders of dollars figure that interest rates have-48-12/17-18/84reached a temporary floor and may turn around and go back up again.I'd like to know what to do to bring the exchange rate down, and Ithink there is a way to do it, but the policy lever is not in ourhands. It's in the hands of those who set fiscal policy. What do wedo about the desire for more growth than 3 percent. If I may take apage out of your book, Mr. Chairman, let me remind us all thatforecasts are often inaccurate. It may happen that we will get moregrowth than that 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the statement "So, I don't agree with Frank or Jerry in that respect." The speaker is expressing disagreement with Frank and Jerry's judgment.


Passage number 304.
MR. PARTEE. Or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a statement by Mr. Partee, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 305.
MR. GRAMLEY. Or less, that's right. It's not clear at thispoint. I would note also that the staff forecast is for priceinflation in 1985 at about the same rate as in 1984. And, as has beenmentioned earlier, this is still above our long-run goal. But I wouldbe prepared, over time, to try to conduct monetary policy in a waythat would foster more growth than 3 percent if in fact evidence isproduced as time goes on that more than 3 percent is notmaterializing. Now, that to me doesn't call for any changes in theranges for the monetary aggregates in 1985. I don't like M1,particularly. Chuck and I are going to average one another out here.I wouldn't change the weight we give M1 in our implementation ofmonetary policy. But I can express my views on the ranges either interms of M2 or M1 and I get the same answer. We have ranges; I thinkwe ought to use them. That's what they are for. We don't have to hitthe midpoint; we rarely do. But the upper limit of the range for M1is 7 percent. If you add to that the 1-1/2 percent increase invelocity which is a trend increase independent of interest rates, thatgives you 8-1/2 percent in nominal GNP. And with a 4 percentinflation rate that gives you 4-1/2 percent real growth, if theexpansive forces are there. Or, with a 6 to 9 percent range for M2,an upper limit of 9 percent with no trend in the velocity of M2independent of interest rates gives you 9 percent nominal GNP. So, Ithink we ought to sit with these ranges; I'm happy with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their views and preferences on monetary policy, but there is no opposing viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 306.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Isn't it 6 to 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question asking for confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 307.
MR. MARTIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Although the passage does not provide enough context to determine the exact subject of contention or disagreement, it can be inferred that there is likely some form of disagreement. This is indicated by the presence of the word "yes" from Mr. Martin, which typically suggests a response to a statement or question, potentially in opposition. However, without further information, it is difficult to determine the specific nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 308.
MR. GRAMLEY. Make it 8-1/2 percent. Then my arguments forM1 and M2 are completely symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating that if the interest rate is set at 8-1/2 percent, then their arguments for M1 and M2 (presumably two different monetary policy measures) are completely symmetrical.


Passage number 309.
MR. PARTEE. They're exactly the same for the upper end ofboth ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple statement of fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the actual passage in question.


Passage number 311.
MR. KEEHN. Starting first with the economy: I would havesaid a month or six weeks ago that there was every opportunity that wecould fall back into a recession. And though the recent indicatorshave been somewhat ambiguous, [not] doing a lot, I certainly havechanged my view. I think there is every opportunity here to stabilizeand, indeed, to begin to come out a bit on the high side. With regardto the forecast, I think the staff's forecast is a very reasonableassessment of the way 1985 may actually work out, though some of theunderlying statistics in the forecast seem a little on the high side.For example, they are suggesting auto sales next year of about 11million. That would go back to the rate in 1978 which, if you-49-12/17-18/84remember, was a very, very strong year. I think that looks a littlehigh. Housing starts of 1.8 million also look a bit high. I thinkthe tax bill will cause considerable uncertainty in that area. Butnet, I think 3 percent is a reasonable assessment of what may workout. With regard to inflation, though I certainly agree with Jerrythat the level is high, on the current trend I think the news isuniformly good; I am extremely impressed on both the price and thewage side. People I talk with are simply unable to get priceincreases of any magnitude to stick at all, even in some of thetighter industries. On the wage side, people I've talked to say thatcontracts that have been renegotiated in 1984 are continuing veryfavorable trends--better than those that were renegotiated in 1983 interms of the length of the contract and the wage costs. I think theproductivity side of that is going to continue to be good and,therefore, most people are going to be able to go into 1985 withoutincreases of unit labor costs. I think the trends [in inflation] arevery, very positive. I would have said that is the most importantthing that we're trying to do. Even if we deliberately gun theaggregates to try to increase the growth beyond what is suggested, itseems to me we run a very substantial risk of losing what we havealready accomplished on the inflation front. So, that leads me to saythat I would leave the ranges where they are, based on what we knownow; things may change between now and February. There have been somecompelling arguments to raise them and I understand that; nonetheless,I would leave them where they are now.With regard to the relative weights, I would not be slavishto M1 but among the aggregates that we use it seems to me M1 has thegreatest reliability in terms of how we operate monetary policy and,therefore, I would place greater reliance on M1 next year than wehave. The risks here, and I think everybody has said it, arecertainly in the exchange rate and the balance of trade. Clearly,there are some excesses here that cannot continue. I don't know quitewhy they have continued as long as they have. An aside for a momenton the foreign trade side: As we look at the agricultural sector--andI won't spend any time on that--the conditions in the agriculturalsector are much, much worse than they have been. Indeed, we arefacing some very serious risks in that area. We think that the lossof the foreign market was the single most important cause of theproblems that the agricultural sector is currently dealing with. So,the risks as I look at '85 are in the exchange rate and balance oftrade areas. If that unwinds, particularly in a hurry, it could causesome unfortunate reactions. I hear what you're saying, Mr. Chairman,with regard to the need to have this imbalance to finance our fiscaldeficit. I wouldn't mind bringing that problem into greater exposureas a way of trying to get Congress to do a little more than they arelikely to do to bring down the fiscal deficit. Finally, on theinternational area, if we have continued growth of about the magnitudethat we're suggesting, if inflation remains at the level that weanticipate, and if rates continue to come down, it does seem to methat we ought to be providing the stimulus for a continuation of theworldwide recovery. Therefore, that would not, on balance, be a badperformance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Keehn discusses his views on the economy, inflation, monetary policy, exchange rates, and international performance. While he may express some caution or skepticism about certain forecasts or risks, there does not appear to be any clear contention or disagreement with the overall ideas being discussed.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have you prepared your swan song, Mr.Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking if Mr. Solomon has prepared his swan song.


Passage number 313.
-50-12/17-18/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe it would be more appropriate toskip it. I find Lyle Gramley's analytical reasoning very close tomine with one or two very minor exceptions, so I won't repeat. But itseems to me that there are too many uncertainties. They are unusuallyhigh in '85, higher really than in the first two years of recovery.[The outlook] is complicated now by the tax program, correction of thebudget deficit, the dollar, etc. Under those circumstances, since wecan't really know what the results of our actions will be, I would bein favor of very moderate moves--feeling our way as we go along.Under those circumstances, I obviously feel that we ought to maintainthe present operating approach and not return to any degree ofautomaticity, no matter how marginal, because I think that tends togive us a psychological framework that is not conducive. I haveabsolutely no ability to predict whether the present level of interestrates or a level 1/2 or 3/4 of a point lower is going to give us 3percent [growth] or give us 4 percent. So, I don't understand thepolicy implications of posing that question. I know there's a need topresent to the Congress some ranges. On the other hand, if theCongress is going to beat the heck out of us because we say 3 percentrather than 4 percent, what are they going to do when we have to tellthem about a dip in the economy coming along later. I don't thinkwe've abolished the business cycle. So I don't know if that meansthat much to me. Maybe I'm not being sensitive to the situation inWashington. But I don't have a clear view that 4 percent is that muchmore significantly desirable than 3 percent, although I certainlyagree that a 3+ percent is better than a 3- percent.The international case for some moderate easing is muchstronger than the domestic case. Even though I don't think that amoderate easing of rates is necessarily going to change exchangerates, I think in the very long run the level of interest rates willbe a very important determinant of exchange rates. In the short run Ithink a moderate easing may not have any significant effects. Butthere are other international objectives to be achieved from amoderate easing of interest rates. So, it seems to me that we oughtto maintain the ranges where they are and I think they're permittingenough growth in M1 and M2. I'm not quite sure why we continue toleave an M3 that seems to be misaligned on the low side year afteryear. From what my staff tells me I believe we have tended over arather longish period of time to see higher M3 than we would normallyexpect in relation to M2. I don't see any tactical problem or publicrelations problem in upping the M3 figure. I don't think it's[necessary] by any means, but I throw that out for what it's worth. Ithink I've touched on all the points that I find significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and beliefs about various economic factors, but there is no indication of a debate or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions "Mr. Guffey" without any further context or information.


Passage number 315.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Things are muchclearer to me now as I return to the room. Let me say that I'mgrateful to Jerry Corrigan for having captured, I think rather fully,my view of what will happen in '85 and what is appropriate to happenin '85. Let me just recap, because it has been a while since hespoke. With respect to the outlook for the economy, I believe thatthe staff forecast is a bit conservative; I would look for somethingmore in the range of about 4 percent in '85. And that comes from thefact that the interest rates have come down. Given the lag effect, Ithink that we're going to see the consumer come back into themarketplace in the first half and that the first half will be somewhat12/17-18/84stronger than is now being projected and the strength will carrythrough a good part of the year. As a result the 2.9 percent, Ithink, is a little low. I'd rather we focus someplace between 3 and 4percent, and closer to 4 percent for the year as a whole. Thequestion is whether that's an appropriate growth. I think we would beright on track if we could achieve that kind of performance in 1985.With regard to the ranges for 1985, I think what we adoptedin July would be quite appropriate and it seems to me that there islatitude within those ranges. However, I would also give somerecognition, Mr. Chairman, in your testimony or otherwise, to the factthat unless we rebase we would be in the upper half of that range ornear the top and perhaps even [above it] for '85 because of theshortfall we've experienced in 1984. With regard to your question onM1, some may have misunderstood what I said yesterday with respect tothe importance I would place on M1. I believe it has greaterinformational content than the other aggregates, either M2 or M3 orcredit. As a result, I would look at it a little more closely, butthat does not mean to suggest, along the lines of the question we wereasked yesterday, that I'd place primary weight on it. I would not dothat because I think the aggregates in and of themselves are only oneof several informational variables that we should be looking at in theeconomy and everything else. I think what we've been doing in themost recent past is quite appropriate. I wouldn't ignore M1; I'd justput a little more weight on it than I would on M2, M3, or credit.With regard to the exchange value of the dollar, everybodyhas spoken on the importance of moving its value to some lower level,and I think we all would agree that that would be helpful to theUnited States and in a sense helpful to the debtor nations around theworld. But I'm not convinced that we can do very much to correct thatproblem. As others have said, if we aggressively target monetarypolicy with that as an objective, it seems likely that it willbackfire on us and we'll be back with a problem at least as serious aswe have now and perhaps even more serious. The point I've come to isthat it certainly is not totally within the power of this Committee ormonetary policy to correct the excesses that now appear in thatmarket. To the extent that we run U.S. monetary policy in a way tobenefit our economic activity domestically, I think we have to leaveit to the politicians and to fiscal policy to do the remainder. Thatdoes not suggest that we shouldn't nudge interest rates a bit morewith that being one of the primary objectives. But if we were to setupon a course to correct the imbalances in the dollar vis-a-vis othercurrencies, I think we would be making a very great mistake. Andthat's said in the context of looking at my own District in whichagriculture plays an important part and, as Mr. Keehn has alreadyobserved, the dollar itself is perhaps the only remedy to thesituation--and it is a very serious one--that we find in theagricultural sector. But still, with that kind of background, I amnot convinced that what we do with monetary policy will affect theexchange rate in any long-term beneficial way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Throughout the passage, Mr. Guffey is expressing his own views and opinions on various topics, such as the outlook for the economy, the importance of M1, and the exchange value of the dollar. He does not explicitly disagree with anyone else's viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 316.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply introduces Mr. Balles without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 317.
MR. BALLES. Is 3 percent enough. Probably not. Is 3percent likely to be what we achieve. I think my staff would agreethat that's probably the best we can hope for, given the presentcircumstances. The reason I take that view is that we do have some-52-12/17-18/84barriers to getting higher than 3 percent in growth. Just yesterdaywhen the huge current account deficit of--what was it.--$32 billionfor the third quarter was announced, the Secretary of Commerce againpointed out, to his credit, that the real cause of this strong dollaragainst the huge trade deficit was the federal budget deficit. Unlessor until something is done about that, I'm afraid we're pretty limitedin our ability to bring down exchange rates and to eliminate thatgreat source of distortion in our whole economy. I continue to feelthat we're not capturing what the whole problem of the U.S. economy isby simply distinguishing between a 3 percent versus a 4 percenteconomic growth rate for next year. There are sectors of the economy--and we're all aware of them--that simply haven't participated in theupsurge of 1983 and 1984 and prospectively for 1985. That's true ofmany kinds of agriculture--as has already been observed around thetable--most parts of the mining industry, and the whole forestproducts industry. And many types of manufacturing that eithercompete against imported goods or that rely heavily on export marketshaven't participated in this prosperity; they wonder where theprosperity is. There's so much I'd like to see done in the U.S.economy, but as several people have already observed--Lyle Gramleyamong others--we simply don't have all the variables under ourcontrol. And those variables have to do with the huge size of thefederal budget deficit for starters. That has been exacerbatedfurther, I'm sorry to see, by the tax reform proposal, which has nowplaced an additional element of uncertainty out there in the businesscommunity. I keep hearing, quite recently now from our own board ofdirectors, that greater uncertainty hangs over the outlook forbusiness capital spending and for certain parts of the housingindustry, especially second homes which, if this tax reform goesthrough, would lose some of the present tax benefits in terms ofdeductibility of interest. It's frustrating in other words, Mr.Chairman, to want to do better and to think we could do better than 3percent but to realize--which is where I come out--that we don't haveour arms around all the problems in the sense of having the controlsat our fingertips.In terms of what we ought to do on the ranges for next year,I am a strong believer in M1, as I think you all know, and because ofthe undershoot in M1 we've seen thus far this year I think there is apossible case for rebasing even though it has been very unpopulararound this table so far. Simply put, it would permit us to bringdown the ostensible range of monetary growth for next year becausewe'd be taking off from a higher base. That is, a 4 to 7 percentrange would be appropriate in my view only if we were to rebase. I'mconcerned by the fact that I think the drop in interest rates, which Iwelcome, will have the effect of reducing the velocity of money in1985. Unless we're prepared to offset that, we could have anunintentionally restrictive effect on the economy, as was the case toa much larger extent in 1982 when we were too slow to recognize whatwas going on in the very sharp drop in the velocity of money thatyear. So, if we were to stick with the fourth quarter as the base forranges for next year's monetary growth, I would certainly hope thatyou would make it clear in your testimony that we would aim for theupper part, if not the upper end, of that 4 to 7 percent range. Iwould be a little happier if we could rebase and have a higher takeoffpoint for the 4 to 7 percent. If we don't do that and we're going touse the fourth quarter of this year as the base, which now seems-53-12/17-18/84likely given the views already expressed, then I too would favor, assome others have, moving to a 4 to 8 percent range.With respect to the world economy, I just don't know how muchfurther we can go than we have already in encouraging strong economicactivity abroad [through] this tremendous surge of imports we've hadin the United States. That has been good for other countries; it hasbeen perfectly bad for a lot of our own industries. And I for one amgoing to start worrying more about the health of our economy at homein 1985, in view of at least the four major depressed sectors I'vealready talked about. I think there's a real limit on our ability todo something about bringing down those exchange rates and interestrates without some major risks of over-expansion on the monetary side.Coming back to what Jerry Corrigan and some others have said: That 4percent inflation outlook is not exactly the best of all possibleworlds; I'd like to see the inflation rate somewhat lower than thatover a period of several years ahead. I come out, bottom line, thatwhile I recognize all of these things I'd like to do, I'm afraid thatuntil federal finances get straightened out we're pretty much limitedin our ability to do what many of us would otherwise like to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles believes that the federal budget deficit is limiting the ability to achieve higher growth rates, while others may not agree with this view.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you have not provided a complete passage or any context for me to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 319.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the economy,my own position would be that growth is likely to be closer to 4percent than to 2.9 or 3 percent. I don't say that with a great dealof confidence but that's where my bias seems to be. For one thing,I'm not entirely sure what the full effect will be of the ease thatwe've undertaken recently. I don't think we've seen the full effectof that. I think we're seeing some positive effects, but I'd be a bitcautious in terms of trying to do a whole lot more at this time untilwe can assess that a little better. Reference has been made to allthe uncertainties over which we have no control, uncertainties aboutwhich it is questionable exactly what, if anything, monetary policycould do.As for the long-term ranges for '85, they continue to lookokay to me. I don't have a strong view one way or the other on TonySolomon's point about the cosmetics of M3, but basically I'm satisfiedwith the tentative ranges that have been established. I do think M1is important. I wouldn't characterize it as primarily important. Itis something, though, that I would be inclined to pay a little moreattention to. On the operating procedures, as I tried to indicateyesterday, I think the conduct of operations has been really quitesatisfactory; if a slight adjustment would help the mechanical day-to-day process, I wouldn't have any really serious question about doingthat.On the exchange rate problems, I agree with the views thathave been expressed. It's one of the most serious issues that we haveout there. It's a very, very real dilemma because anything that we dowill cut both ways. I just have no satisfactory solution to suggest,although I have some feeling, much as John Balles said, that maybe weought to be trying to do something about that over which we do havesome control, which is our own domestic situation. My bottom line,Mr. Chairman, is that the word that keeps coming to me is patience. Ithink we're in a period now where patience is extremely important.There's always the desire to do something and I'm in favor of doing-54-12/17-18/84something provided that we get the desired result. Since I'm not surewhat doing something would mean, I would be inclined to be veryhesitant and, as Tony said, if we do anything, to do it very carefullyand in very small steps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own opinions and biases, but there is no disagreement with any specific statements mentioned.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Garbarini.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information regarding Mr. Garbarini or any disagreement or contention related to him.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 321.
MR. GARBARINI. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the forecast,the Board staff's analysis may very well be what we'll see next year.However, I believe the odds are somewhat more on the side of ashortfall. Why do I say that. Well, I guess we all have a tendencyto be parochial as well as having biases and in our District, althoughsignals are certainly mixed and this could be considered just a pause,I think we're seeing what was a relatively nice growth in employmentslowing considerably and at least two states have seen unemploymentbegin to rise. Also, while the tax proposal could easily cut bothways, in the short run it probably will have a tendency to causeuncertainty. And from our discussions with business people, theuncertainty is certainly leading to some inaction. With regard to thesatisfactoriness of 2.9 percent, I don't see it. I would prefer thatall my colleagues who think that it might be higher be correct. Ithink the 3 percent level is still not satisfactory.I am particularly interested in commenting on the operatingtechniques. I would certainly like to see M1 on an equal footing andwould have to say that I'd like to see it on the podium where it couldtalk to us. However, I would not leave it on that podium and let ittalk without paying attention to other things. In that regard, if Imay paraphrase the Chairman, I do not think it would be appropriate togive a Mickey Mouse signal by going to absolute weight on M1, if thatis not what is going to be done. And I don't hear around this tablethat that would be the case. I would say again that I believe itshould give us some great information.I share the concerns about the exchange rate and commodityprices, perhaps again [reflecting] parochial considerations in theMidwest. However, I am not sure that this body is in a position toeffect any real changes in that regard and any psychological changesthat we might see, if they were at the risk of inflation, I would notdo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Garbarini, disagrees with the Board staff's forecast and believes that there is a greater likelihood of a shortfall. He also expresses disagreement with the satisfactory level of 2.9 percent and believes that a higher percentage would be more desirable. Additionally, he disagrees with giving M1 absolute weight and suggests considering other factors as well. He also shares concerns about the exchange rate and commodity prices but questions the effectiveness of any real changes by the body.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 323.
MS. SEGER. I don't want to repeat what I have said the lastcouple of months about my concerns about the slowing economy becauseit would just be boring. I have hoped that the pause that we might begoing through would certainly disappear and that the growth rate wouldspeed up, but it hasn't so far. I've not felt that we really wererisking a recession, although I do think we were flirting with one orskating on thin ice, you might say, where we'd need a lot of good luckand a strong tail wind to get across in a hurry before the ice breaksthrough. And that's sort of the way I feel. I think the staffforecast that Jim and his people prepared is probably about right,given what our policies have been. I would like to see more in theway of economic growth, certainly. Also, I think the staff is relyingheavily on the revival of consumer spending and I would hate to lookat the advance monthly retail sales figure or the auto sales reportfor the first 10 days in December and conclude from that that-55-12/17-18/84consumers are back on a spending spree because I don't put much faithin either one of those statistics.In terms of what we should be shooting for, I would like tosee economic growth that's closer to 4 percent than to 3 percent. Thereasons are a whole long list. One is that if you look at ourcommodity prices just about any one I could pick--copper, lumber, oil,and even gold, which is getting down close to $300 an ounce--has beenweak and they are still weak. And I think having faster growth inthis economy first of all would stabilize some of these prices thathave been falling rapidly and in effect would help the industries thatproduce lumber or copper, for example. Also, I think that fastergrowth amazingly would help corporate profits--maybe not so amazingly,since that's the way it usually has happened in the past. When youget faster economic growth and more rapid growth in sales volume,since companies today tend to have a tremendous amount of more or lessfixed costs, the additional volume tends to drop through to the bottomline. That, in turn, relieves some of the pressure on businessmen orwomen to raise prices because their profits are rebounding without thebenefit of higher prices. Believe it or not, this also helpsproductivity. If you look at corporate balance sheets and incomestatements over the last 20 years in which this move toward a largerchunk of fixed cost and capital investment has occurred, when there ismore rapid growth and faster output, the person standing there is not[only] pushing a button that starts a machine but the machine [also]produces 10 percent more an hour and the one guy is still standingthere. This does tremendous things for productivity growth as well asfor profits. By the way, both of those factors, I think, would be apositive in the capital spending picture. With the negatives in thecapital spending picture--namely, the question mark about possible taxhikes or how the tax reform measures will actually shape up whenCongress and the Executive branch get through--I feel that theuncertainties have been forcing many businesses to set their plans onthe shelf until they see exactly what is going to materialize. But Ithink we can offset some of that uncertainty by having the betterprofit performance. And, for sure, a lower interest rate would helpto get some marginal projects, short payoff kinds of projects,approved and through the mill even with the uncertainties about taxes.It seems to me that we would have to change monetary policymore toward ease in order to achieve the 4 percent or 4 percent plusgrowth that I would like to see. There's no doubt about it. But ifwe did, then I think the declining interest rates would have someadditional benefits besides helping on the growth side--namely, westill have to deal with this problem of the fragility of the financialsystem worldwide and particularly in this country where we still havethrift institutions with big problems. We have the third world debtsituation which, as I understand it, has not gone away. I justvisited both Kansas City and Dallas and those people tell me there areproblems [in their regions] with agriculture and with the oilindustry. This is a minority view, but I also think lower interestrates would help on the dollar side. It may not help immediately, butif we drop our interest rates or pursue an easier monetary policyhere, then that would allow other countries to pursue an easiermonetary policy. Even if they matched us on the down side basis pointfor basis point, it still would help each of our economies even if thedifferential did not change at all. Ultimately, if that did lead to aspeed-up in the economic growth of, say, the major European countries,-56-12/17-18/84I think that should help our export situation and eventually mighteven have some positive impact on the so-called super dollar.Let's see, there's one other thing I wanted to mention.Should we emphasize M1, M2, or M17. As I indicated yesterday, I'm notparticularly a narrow monetarist; in fact, I'm not a monetarist atall. But I've talked to a lot of people who do follow what the Fed isdoing, the so-called Fed watchers. Many of them advise majorinvestors. They are movers and shakers on Wall Street and incommercial banking. And my feeling is that, as long as they think M1is important and they emphasize it and they hang around every Thursdayafternoon a little after 4:00 p.m. with bated breath waiting for thatnumber to come out, then it has achieved an importance even when wedon't want it to. Certainly, I would never argue that we should lookjust at M1, but I think we should pay plenty of attention to it andparticularly when we set the targets for next year make sure that thebands for M1 growth are adequate to give us some faster economicgrowth. I would argue, too, at least in the early part of the year,for viewing this in a parallel line fashion rather than as a cone justto broaden out those numbers and for suggesting that it's okay to hitthe upper end of the range rather than shooting for the midpoint orcruising at the low end. That's a lot; I think I've hit everything Iwanted to say. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing her concerns and opinions about the economy and monetary policy, but there is no indication of a disagreement with another party.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can have some coffee. Thepreliminary indications we have for the following week on the moneysupply are for a negative figure, which does not make December lookparticularly high at this point. Let's go have some coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests having coffee and mentions the preliminary indications for the following week's money supply.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 325.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may, I will make some preliminarycomments in reaction to the go-around this morning. Really, I justhave two. One is that I heard a lot of talk about getting the dollardown and there was a certain amount of talk that that may not be theeasiest thing to do. It worries me a little to talk too casuallyabout getting the dollar down, and I do think that we may have moredifficulties in the future than we have now with the dollar beginningto go down too fast. We have this basic dilemma of how to get thebudget financed, and we're going to have a big current account deficitno matter what happens for the next 12 months. Maybe to put it toostarkly, if we have a lack of confidence in the dollar, we're going tohave a real picnic in maintaining a decent level of interest rates ora degree of confidence in the inflation outlook in the next year. Ido think we have a problem internationally and much of it is of ourown making; and we have the disequilibrium in the budget. Perhaps thebest thing that can happen is along the lines of what Ms. Seger hassuggested: If there is a tendency for the dollar to decline, Isuspect that other countries will ease; and given that they haveenough room to ease, that might be healthy not only in their owncontext but if they expand a little more and have a little moreconfidence in their own currencies, that might over a period of timehelp to relieve the pressure on our trade position through greaterexpansion abroad and the dollar may come down in a healthieratmosphere. I simply am a bit sensitive to saying that it's anobjective of policy to get the dollar down regardless; I don't thinkthat puts us in a very good posture. I have no problem at all withthe view--and in fact I strongly believe--that the strength in the-57-12/17-18/84dollar gives us room to ease, all other things equal. And that oughtto be a factor in our considerations. In listening to most people, Iget the feeling there's more concern that growth will turn out alittle less than the staff has projected than a little more. Combinethat with a view that it would not be totally satisfactory even ifgrowth ended up precisely where the staff projected it, and it seemsto me that gives you a bias toward some degree of further easing.We've spent a long time discussing all these general problemsthis morning. Let me try to shorten the process now and see whetherI'm successful in that by suggesting something like alternative B sofar as those numbers are concerned. But I certainly wouldn't mindrounding them off, given a healthy skepticism as to whether we'regoing to meet any of these numbers anyway and how precisely we'regoing to meet them. Consistent with that--or maybe inconsistent withit as now written but I will assert consistent with that, particularlyif we're willing to see some greater growth than what we provide forhere, which I assume the directive will say--I would ease thepressures on reserve positions to the point of almost no pressure.Borrowing would be, let's say, on the order of $250 million. And I'dbe inclined to put down a federal funds rate range [of 6 to 10percent, which is] consistent with alternative A, since the currentrate is about halfway in between [the "A" and "B" ranges] now and I'mnot sure I'd want to contemplate the rate going up to 11 percent. Interms of the directive, without getting into the precise language, I'massuming some sentence along the lines of what we have in there now tothe effect that because of the shortfalls we've had, more rapid growthin M1--or we could say somewhat more rapid growth in the aggregatesgenerally--would be acceptable, particularly in the absence ofevidence of a strong rebound in economic activity and in view of thestrength of the dollar in the exchange markets. It would saysomething to the effect that we would accept more rapid [monetary]growth unless we saw the economy moving ahead more strongly--distinctly more strongly--than the projections suggest now, as long asthe dollar remains reasonably strong in the exchange markets. So, ingeneral terms, that would be a proposal to shoot at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of intentionally trying to get the dollar down, stating that it puts us in a bad posture.


Passage number 326.
MR. PARTEE. Would you round alternative B down on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking if alternative B should be rounded down on M1.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was thinking of rounding at leastthe M1 figure to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 328.
MR. PARTEE. It will be tough [to achieve], though. We nowhave indications that December [M1 growth] is sub-par. I think itwould be safer, in terms of reaching it, to make it 6-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Partee about the possibility of achieving a certain goal.


Passage number 329.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but this is November to March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "November to March" simply indicates a specific time period and does not introduce any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 330.
MR. PARTEE. And includes December as the first month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage states a fact without presenting any opposing viewpoints or disagreement. The inclusion of December as the first month is simply stated without any contention.


Passage number 331.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: 

It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in a passage without actually reading the passage. Please provide the passage in question for a more accurate response.


Passage number 332.
MR. GRAMLEY. Is your proposal that we start with $250million as the borrowing number. This isn't "B," then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's "B" on the monetary specifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's 'B' on the monetary specifications" simply states a fact without any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 334.
MR. GRAMLEY. Just take the aggregates specs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the instruction to "Just take the aggregates specs."


Passage number 335.
-58-12/17-18/84MR. PARTEE. And the money market specs of "A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply appears to be a series of numbers and abbreviations, which does not convey any argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 336.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am asserting, based upon lengthyeconomic analysis and a presumed shortfall in December, that we've gotto go with less pressures [on reserve positions] in order to even meet"B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a conclusion based on economic analysis and a presumed shortfall in December.


Passage number 337.
 "MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. "MR. PARTEE" simply responds with "yes" to a statement or question.


Passage number 338.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're assuming that if we start with$250 million, we'll get a funds rate of 8 to 8-1/2 percent orsomewhere in that range. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is not expressing disagreement or contention in this passage. They are simply making an assumption and confirming it with the word "right."


Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, of course, that would depend uponwhere the discount rate was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the answer to a question would depend on the discount rate.


Passage number 340.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, assuming no action of thediscount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My own guess--and other people tell me I'mwrong--is that it probably would be hanging around a little less than8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. The author mentions that other people tell them they are wrong, indicating differing opinions, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 342.
MR. GRAMLEY. May I ask where the assertion of $250 millionin borrowing being consistent with the specs of "B" comes from. Doesone assume that the economy is not as robust as the staff has forecastand, therefore, transactions demand for money balances does not growalong the lines that the staff has forecast. Or does one assume that,given the state of the economy, the money demand function has beenmisspecified or fallen or something so we get slower growth of M1. In[the latter] case why do you want to go in this direction. I justdon't follow the argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 343.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My argument is very simple. We've had aconstant shortfall all through the fall; we've consistently missed therelationship. And I didn't detect any ebullience about the economy inlistening to the discussion around the table, and people would rathersee it grow a bit faster than the projection rather than slower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker is expressing skepticism or disagreement with the current state of the economy and the projected growth rate. They believe that there has been a consistent shortfall and that people would prefer to see faster economic growth.


Passage number 344.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's true that the forecast hasconsistently been marked down, too, for the near-term quarters. Idon't know where we had the fourth quarter last June, but it certainlywasn't at 1.3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is making a statement about the forecast consistently being marked down, without any disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 345.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a question about the operating strategy.If we follow our operating strategy of focusing on borrowing and werun out of leeway, given current operating procedures and the currentdiscount rate, we really either have to change the discount rate orbegin to look at reserve growth rather than the borrowing to have anyadditional flexibility on the down side. Is that a properinterpretation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've got to look at reservegrowth at some point; we probably didn't look at it enough during thefall, as we were constrained by a borrowing number. And this is, ineffect, a reflection of it. You reduce the borrowing in view of thefact that there hasn't been reserve growth or you run out of [room toreduce borrowing] and I think at some point you just put in more-59-12/17-18/84reserves. If you don't, you run into this problem of things fallingaway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the need to consider reserve growth and the potential consequences of not doing so.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
MR. BOEHNE. Either you have to give more attention to thereserve growth or you have to lower the discount rate to have anyadditional downward leeway, or both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Either you have to give more attention to the reserve growth or you have to lower the discount rate" implies that there are different opinions or possibilities on how to address a certain issue. The mention of "or both" further indicates that there could be differing views on the best course of action.


Passage number 348.
MR. BLACK. I think what you've said is very sensible, Mr.Chairman. This illustrates quite well why I favor a total reservetarget. Under current procedures, we choose a borrowing level and weexpect a certain federal funds rate; and to predict what is going tohappen to the money supply necessitates a knowledge of the demandfunction for money that I don't think we will ever have. So, whetherthis will do what I want, I don't know. But if we were operating onthe total reserve target, I would feel that we knew what was going tohappen. And I was glad to hear you say that we need more emphasis ontotal reserves. I think that really is what has been our problemlately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing agreement with what the Chairman has said and stating his preference for a total reserve target. He is also highlighting the uncertainty and lack of predictability in current procedures and expressing his belief that operating on a total reserve target would provide more certainty and understanding of what will happen with the money supply.


Passage number 349.
MR. GRAMLEY. The staff's estimate of seasonal borrowing is$100 million and the staff says on page 9 of the Bluebook that thefrictional level of borrowing--I assume this means adjustmentborrowing--is now in the neighborhood of $150 to [$250] million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the staff's estimate of seasonal borrowing.


Passage number 350.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, but that meant both adjustment plusseasonal borrowing. It may not have been clear, but that's what wehad in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 351.
MR. GRAMLEY. But when borrowing is getting down, do you viewthe $250 million borrowing level, with $100 million in seasonal, [as]one that approaches the low end of the frictional amount of adjustmentborrowing. I think Ed's point is a really good one. If you don'tlower the discount rate, you really don't have any target at all.Interest rates could drop a ton.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Ed's point about the importance of lowering the discount rate and maintaining a target for interest rates.


Passage number 352.
MR. PARTEE. Except for growth in reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a fact about growth in reserves. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 353.
MR. GRAMLEY. But if you're willing to provide that kind ofgrowth in reserves--that is, if you start with a borrowing level whichis frictional, then what happens is that you just dump in whateverreserves are necessary. And if interest rates drop down to 6 percent,that's within the 6 to 10 percent range for the fed funds rate, sothen that's all right. It's not for me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Gramley expressing his opinion or perspective.


Passage number 354.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree: not for me. When the fedfunds rate drops down to, say, about 8-1/4 percent, there's going tobe such intense and widespread expectation in the market that adiscount rate cut will follow very shortly that it would be impossibleto resist that. So, unless the Board cuts the discount rate only aquarter of a point, when the second shoe drops then we're reallylooking at something that brings it down into the 8 percent range.Now, I realize that for good reasons you're reluctant to talk aboutwhat the Board might or might not do about discount rate changes. Butif we do go as far as $250 million--[not], say, $300 or $325 million--I think the pressure then becomes very strong for the second shoe todrop. It's hard to resist it. Whereas, if we go to the $300 or $325million level, at least to start with, then the pressure would not bequite as great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is describing their thoughts and analysis of the situation with the fed funds rate and potential discount rate changes. They are explaining their perspective and reasoning, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument present.


Passage number 355.
12/17-18/84MR. PARTEE. I'm prepared to support your proposal, Paul.It's getting so that this period of poor business news is extendingtoo long and I think we now have to probe. I don't, as I said, havemuch confidence in saying what kind of interest rates are appropriateor not. I think what we need is monetary expansion and we're notgetting it. If, in fact, that December 17th number holds up to be adecline, we're going to have a hard time [getting] any decent numberat all in the month of December. That will make another month in thislong string and I think we now ought to be more aggressive in seekingmonetary expansion. I'm not shocked at the idea of a frictional levelof borrowing at all, nor with a further significant drop in short-terminterest rates. And it may be that the discount rate would have tomove. I don't want to prejudge that, but it may be that it will haveto go [down]. So, I think it's a reasonable suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses agreement and support for Paul's proposal to seek monetary expansion. There is no evident disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 356.
MR. GRAMLEY. Should we not focus also on a number like M2,which went up 15 percent at an annual rate in November. I supposethis downward revision of M1 means perhaps some downward revision ofM2. The forecast that you have here for December is 13 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the focus should also be on M2, as it experienced a 15 percent increase in November. They speculate that the downward revision of M1 may lead to a downward revision of M2. The forecast for December is given as 13 percent.


Passage number 357.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Axilrod responds with a simple "Yes." Without any additional context or information, it is not clear what the question is that Mr. Axilrod is responding to or what the source of disagreement or contention may be. Therefore, based solely on the provided passage, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 358.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's been telling us that maybe what we'relooking at is a circumstance in which what monies would have gone intoNOW accounts earlier now are going into MMDAs, giving you the sameinterest rate effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about a possible circumstance without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing ideas.


Passage number 359.
MR. PARTEE. Well, except that I think the money is cominginto MMDAs and money market funds from the open market because of thestickiness in those rate levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply offers their opinion or observation about the source of money coming into MMDAs and money market funds.


Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose one can argue that in earlierdays it would have gone into M1 and given us a good boost in M1. Idon't think the most recent business news was so awful obviously inthe last month but it has been pretty sluggish for some time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement is merely expressing a personal opinion about the recent business news being sluggish.


Passage number 361.
MR. PARTEE. It was reported--I've forgotten whether it washere at the Open Market Committee meeting or at the Board briefing--that Commerce is not giving much weight to that November retail salesfigure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a report that Commerce (presumably the Department of Commerce) is not giving much weight to a November retail sales figure. There is no indication of differing opinions or arguments within the passage.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in fact, Commerce doesn't know whatthe fourth quarter will be, whatever number comes out tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the Commerce department does not know what the fourth quarter number will be, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 363.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think there is a danger ofoverreaction here. I feel very much the way Lyle does. We've had adeclining period of interest rates here for only the last threemonths. There are lags in the response of the economy and in theresponse of M1 to that change. I think we ought to give a lot ofweight to the fact that interest rates have declined substantiallyover a very short period of time and do a little more looking to seeif we're getting responses from what we've done before we take a majorfurther move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris expresses his agreement with Lyle's viewpoint and suggests caution before making any major further moves based on the recent decline in interest rates.


Passage number 364.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see anything very major here butit's a matter of taste, I suppose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is expressing a subjective opinion about a matter of taste, which does not necessarily imply contention or disagreement.


Passage number 365.
-61-12/17-18/84MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would support your proposal fora 7 percent M1 and a frictional borrowing level. We've had somerevisions in what a frictional level is; we are in a position ofmaking up for a shortfall that seems to be haunting us. We must beaware too that the way our decisionmaking has to go--properly go--isstructured by Congress [unintelligible] some decades past. We seem tobe after the fact and late. It seems to me that the kind of proposalthat you made gives us flexibility; we're not irrevocably committed toa large move. And I think it is timely, considering the data both onthe economy and the monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for the chairman's proposal and acknowledges the need to address a shortfall. There is no indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 366.
MR. WALLICH. Some kind of downward push on short-term ratesI think, is a good thing, but it depends very much what happens at thelong end. It depends also, of course, on whether it would have to bereversed. What are the chances of a sharp drop in the funds ratebeing followed by a rise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing factors that may influence the outcome, but they do not disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 367.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Sternlight may have a different view, but Imyself think that there's very little chance [of that] at thisparticular junction, looking over the next four or five or six weeks.But I really ought to say that if you're thinking of $250 million ofborrowing, the funds rate is going to rise from the 7 percent area;it's likely to be somewhere around 8-1/2 percent, given the presentdiscount rate. It's not the money market specs we worked out foralternative A. In our own minds [that entailed] an even lower levelof borrowing and somewhat higher excess reserves to drive the fundsrate further down. I thought I would add that minor point forclarity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own opinion and providing additional information for clarity.


Passage number 368.
MR. STERNLIGHT. To add to that, I think the $250 million ofborrowing is likely to give you a steady state kind of situation--afunds rate very close to the discount rate, although we're not reallyin a steady state and the market widely expects something to happen tothe discount rate. So, I expect $250 million of borrowing for thenext little while to be associated with fed funds trading closer to 8percent on average as the market broadly expects something on thediscount rate. As to the long-term rates, I think there will be aslight declining effect from lower short-rates. I wouldn't expect aperverse effect on this occasion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is expressing his own expectations and opinions about the borrowing and interest rate situation.


Passage number 369.
MR. WALLICH. There is the other question: Would one have toanticipate a substantial reversal at a later time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is posing a question and there is no indication of an opposing viewpoint or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 370.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the fundamental [issue], I think, isone's view of the basic strength of demand for goods and services andinflationary expectations. Among the staff, views differ very widelyon that. If you view our judgmental projections and compare them withstraight model projections, things will differ. Our forecast implied,essentially, as Governor Gramley mentioned, velocity of about 1-1/2percent for M1 next year. That is something like trend, probably.Taken literally, that would mean very little change in interest ratesover the course of the year--maybe up a little or maybe down a little.If your view of inflationary expectations and demand for goods andservices is even weaker than the staff forecast, then I would thinkinterest rates, in a sense, would be lower than that. It seems to mevery difficult to come to a judgment at this point on whether they aregoing to go up or down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that among the staff, views differ widely on the basic strength of demand for goods and services and inflationary expectations. Additionally, the speaker mentions that if one's view of inflationary expectations and demand is weaker than the staff forecast, interest rates would be lower. Therefore, there is contention and disagreement regarding the future direction of interest rates.


Passage number 371.
-62-12/17-18/84MR. WALLICH. But you wouldn't say that simply by putting inreserves now one would generate a situation that tended to reverseitself at a later time and made a rise in interest rates likely,independently of how the economy goes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement by Mr. Wallich without any contradictory points.


Passage number 372.
MR. AXILROD. It's hard for me ever to view it independentlyof how the economy goes. I really can't answer it independently ofthat, Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing personal difficulty in answering a question without considering the economy.


Passage number 373.
MR. MARTIN. But note the risks in what Steve has just said.We have a 7 percent target for M1; growth has been falling short oftarget from time to time. The instability in the velocity figurequarter-to- quarter is notable. Velocity can be 4 percent off, 5percent off, 7 percent off. [Unintelligible] an error of a hundredbasis points. If velocity is flat or even negative--and itconceivably can be negative, though obviously it's not the most likelyoutcome--then the 7 percent specification for M1 is not very high interms of velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement about the risks and potential issues related to the target for M1 growth and the volatility of velocity figures.


Passage number 374.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that's not the key issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without presenting any opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 375.
MR. PARTEE. I would like to argue for 6-1/2 percent, Pres,because I do think that [7 percent] implies too much for January andFebruary. Unless something really happens here, we're going to have 4or 5 percent [M1 growth] in December, and if we say 7 percent for the3-month period, that implies something in the very high single digitsfor January and February and I think that's pressing too hard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Partee is arguing for a lower percentage (6-1/2 percent) while referencing the higher percentage (7 percent) mentioned previously. He disagrees with the idea that the higher percentage implies significant growth in the following months and believes it is pressing too hard.


Passage number 376.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But why is it so important. Giventhe situation, the difference between 6-1/2 and 7 percent is going tohave relevance only if over a period of time--not the first few weeks,certainly--we find that we have significant money growth. Otherwise,it's not going to make any difference at all. What's going toinfluence everything in the next few weeks is the drop in theborrowing level and any type of change in the discount rate. So, Idon't think the fact that December is going to have slow growth is ofmuch importance, and I don't think the difference between 6-1/2 and 7percent has that much [relevance]. It's a small chance that we wouldbe up in that range where it's going to make a significant differenceof any kind later in the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just arithmetically, I guess what thatimplies is 4 percent growth in December and 8 percent in the otherthree months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the author's guess about the growth rate in December and the other three months.


Passage number 378.
MR. PARTEE. It's a 4-month span.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a 4-month span.


Passage number 379.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but if you get 4 percent in one monthand 8 percent in three months, you get 28; that divided by 4 is 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is presenting a mathematical calculation and does not involve any conflicting perspectives or opposing opinions.


Passage number 380.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the real decision that isfacing the Committee--I'm not talking now about the directive and whathappens over the period of a quarter, because we are working under asystem where there is substantial flexibility--is whether we want tosee in the very near term, say, in a week or so, as much of a drop [inthe funds rate]. I think Peter Sternlight is right, as I saidearlier, that [the proposed borrowing level] would take the rate downclose to the 8 percent level, even if arithmetically it should take it-63-12/17-18/84down to 8-1/2 percent or a shade above. The market psychology is suchthat it probably will drop to 8 percent because the markets will beexpecting a discount rate cut and the pressures will be enormous. So,therefore, does the Committee really want to see that much of a dropthat quickly. I think that's the most important issue we're facing,assuming we build the flexibility into the directive the way we havefor the last few intermeeting periods. My personal view is thatthat's too big a drop too suddenly. Personally, I would reduce theborrowing level maybe to the $300 or $325 million level. I'd make itmore gradual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal view and suggesting a more gradual reduction in the borrowing level. However, there is no mention of any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 381.
MR. GRAMLEY. What is the level of borrowing now, $400million. That's what we were targeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 382.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's averaging $260 million so far in thisperiod but we would expect to see some lull.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a fact about the average amount of money, and there is no opposing viewpoint or contradictory information provided.


Passage number 383.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's a fluky situation we're in now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 384.
MR. CORRIGAN. When the borrowing was $400 million, what didwe think was the steady state of federal funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 385.
MR. STERNLIGHT. About 8-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage is a statement of a specific percentage. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 386.
MR. PARTEE. Of course, it's a wild number between Christmasand New Year's anyway because of the statement date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is stating a fact about the wild number between Christmas and New Year's due to the statement date, without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne, I see you on the list inlonely splendor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply acknowledging Mr. Boehne's presence on a list, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 388.
MR. BOEHNE. I think we need to push the ease button againand I think your approach is reasonable. However, procedurally, Iwould prefer our easing to be accompanied by a drop in the discountrate. While I think in this period we need to pay a little moreattention to growth in reserves, I think not to change the discountrate would shift the emphasis too dramatically. So, I would prefer tosee it accompanied with a drop in the discount rate just on proceduralgrounds and I would prefer rounding M1 up to 7 percent. It doesn'toffend me if December M1 growth comes out at 4 percent to have 8percent in January and February. That doesn't strike me as too muchmoney growth in light of where we've been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, expresses his preference for easing while also suggesting a drop in the discount rate. He believes that not changing the discount rate would shift the emphasis too dramatically. This indicates a difference of opinion or contention within the passage.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 390.
MR. BALLES. Well, I generally support your proposal, Mr.Chairman. I'm generally in accord with the comments made by GovernorsMartin and Partee. I think it is time, as Ed Boehne has described it,to push the ease button again. I would remind you that at our Bank,at least, we expect this recent decline in interest rates to showthrough in an actual negative number for velocity. As well as one canguess this, we think we might see negative velocity for the full firsthalf of 1985. That would not surprise me. Therefore, I don't thinkwe should shy away from what would otherwise appear to be an unusuallylarge jump in the M1 numbers during that period of time. In fact, ifthere were a mood to go toward alternative A, I would even lean inthat direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for the proposal and agrees with the comments made by other individuals.


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 392.
-64-12/17-18/84MR. CORRIGAN. I don't have any problems with the monetaryspecifications of alternative B. I think shading to the 6-1/2 percentrather than the 7 percent for the reasons Chuck described may serveour interests better. I have just one other technical comment: Youmentioned in your clarifying sentence for the directive, Mr. Chairman,a reference to the economy and the exchange rate. I personally wouldprefer not to make an explicit reference to the exchange rate becausethe kind of scenario where there is some suspicion in the marketplacethat the Federal Reserve is trying to engineer the exchange ratereally scares me in terms of a precipitous drop in the exchange rate,with all that means. So, I would prefer not to put that in thedirective explicitly but leave it understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Corrigan agrees with alternative B and expresses a personal preference regarding the reference to the exchange rate in the directive.


Passage number 393.
 Now, on the moneymarket side--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Isn't it in there already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question and does not express any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 394.
MR. PARTEE. Not in that particular sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple clarification made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 395.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's put differently, but I think it's inthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 396.
MR. PARTEE. It's in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's in there" is a simple affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 397.
MR. BLACK. Line 85 on page 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 398.
MR. CORRIGAN. The way he was suggesting putting it in theoperative sentence was different. I thought you were saying, Mr.Chairman, put it in the sentence that is in capital letters on page12.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

The phrase "The way he was suggesting putting it in the operative sentence was different" suggests that there are differing opinions or suggestions on how to include the information in the sentence.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the title of Chairman Volcker without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 400.
 Well, I guess we do have an "internationalfinancial market conditions"--MR. CORRIGAN. That strikes me as a little different than anexplicit reference to the exchange rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 401.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was what I was thinking of. We had avery explicit reference in the [announcement of the latest reductionin the] discount rate. But, it's a matter of debate. I would phraseit in a way that to me is unfrightening--say, that we might easefurther if there is continuing strength in the exchange rate. Itwouldn't say we're pushing the exchange rate down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own perspective and suggesting a different wording, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 402.
MR. CORRIGAN. I perceive that situation as maybe being moretentative than others, but I would be concerned about how the marketmight react to that. On the substance of the money market part ofthis, I'm not allergic to tapping the ease button but I have a littleconcern about pushing the panic button. And principally for thosereasons, I would favor a more gradual approach, along the lines thatTony has suggested. I do, of course, view the economy as being atleast a little stronger than many others here. I could be right or Icould be wrong. On the other hand, if we can sneak in a furtherreduction in interest rates in a context in which I now believe therehas been some kind of downward step-shift in inflationaryexpectations, I think that's fine. But I would prefer to be a littlemore gentle about the package and I would lean toward Tony'ssuggestion of sneaking up on it rather than going for the brass ringat one shot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and preferences but does not directly disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 403.
-65-12/17-18/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That seems to me an excessive descriptionof the $50 million difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only presents a numerical calculation and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 404.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, I would see it as a more than $50 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No, I would see it as more than $50 million" is a direct response to a question or statement, indicating the speaker's personal perspective or opinion.


Passage number 405.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's this discount rate thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 406.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't think it's a question of a $50 milliondifference. If you go back to when the borrowing level was put at$400 million, the thought then was that the steady state fed fundsrate was 8-3/4 percent. If we were to go immediately to $250 million,I think the discount rate would have to go with it and it seems to mequite plausible that the fed funds rate could settle in at less than 8percent. So, you're talking basically about a 75 to 100 basis pointmove in terms of the operative implications of the fed funds rate.And that to me is just a very, very big step. I'd love to think thatwe could end up there, but I think it is a very big step.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and discussing potential implications of a change in the fed funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 407.
MR. AXILROD. Just as a technical comment, Mr. Chairman, noneof us is an expert on what the market is thinking, but it is not atall clear to me, under current market conditions--the way they werethe last two days--that a drop in the discount rate of 1/4 pointwouldn't be followed by some backup in market rates. It would beviewed as a disappointment relative to market expectations. I am notcertain where this complex of interest rates and borrowing would endup, but I would think it is possible that it could be 8 percent or ashade higher, depending a bit on how operations are conducted, as wellas the 8 percent or a shade lower that you suggested. It's just nottotally clear to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod disagrees with the suggestion that a drop in the discount rate would result in lower market rates. He believes that it could potentially lead to higher market rates instead.


Passage number 408.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll tell you something that isn'tperfectly clear to me: that there is a difference between $300 and$250 million, whether the discount rate is reduced or not. The Boardof Governors is going to have to decide about the discount rate. Wehad several applications in and, as you know, some were [submitted]with some vigor. I don't know how many minds were persuaded on theBoard of Governors. I would suggest that it isn't going to be verycritical. It's not very critical in my mind, whichever way it goes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of clarity about the difference between $300 million and $250 million, as well as stating their opinion that the decision about the discount rate is not very critical. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 409.
MR. MARTIN. Steve, isn't there a possibility that a 1/4point reduction in the discount rate might be interpreted as a lastact of the drama--that the market interpretation will be "All right,that is far as they are going to go".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question seeking clarification or confirmation from Steve.


Passage number 410.
MR. AXILROD. Certainly--or possibly as [far as] they aregoing to go for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing certainty or a strong possibility.


Passage number 411.
MR. MARTIN. Life goes on, I can see that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is simply making an observation that life continues despite something that may have happened or is happening. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 412.
MR. PARTEE. Just in the interest of clarity, I would thinkgoing for the brass ring, Jerry, would be to say we want an 8 percentincrease in reserves in general, regardless. That's going for thebrass ring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about what they believe going for the "brass ring" would mean in terms of increasing reserves.


Passage number 413.
MR. CORRIGAN. I would agree with that. Any of these thingsin a behavioral way postulates very substantial increases in reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 414.
-66-12/17-18/84MR. BOEHNE. Where is the funds rate now. We're kind ofsneaking up on something that we've already reached.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the current state of the funds rate.


Passage number 415.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The market sees it as 7 percent in anelastic way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement about how the market perceives something, so there is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 416.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what happened when you went in todrain some reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about the outcome of a specific action.


Passage number 417.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We drained some reserves. I didn't hearwhat happened to the funds rate, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply stating that reserves were drained and expressing his lack of knowledge about the funds rate.


Passage number 418.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since we're totally preoccupied with thisquestion, why don't we find out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The tone seems to suggest a collaborative approach to finding the answer to a question.


Passage number 419.
MR. PARTEE. We'll see what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee's statement "We'll see what happens" suggests a neutral or open-minded approach without expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 420.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know; it could work that way. Yes, itcould.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: be a possibility.


Passage number 421.
MR. PARTEE. As a matter of fact, the staff projection is fora good increase in money and we'll have a good increase in reserves ifthat occurs. But we have had a period of shortfalls that has beengoing on for quite a while. That's why I said "regardless.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating two different facts: the staff projection for a good increase in money and reserves, and the past period of shortfalls.


Passage number 422.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else would like to say something. Ms.Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone else would like to speak.


Passage number 423.
MS. SEGER. Well, I'm an ease advocate and I could certainlysupport you in alternative B and wouldn't be upset if you pushed overinto the dimensions of alternative A, using the $250 million or soborrowing target. Also, I'd keep an eye on total reserves to makesure that they go along and allow the kind of expansion we need. Irealize we don't set the discount rate here but I would like toencourage a discount rate cut of about 1/2 percentage point soon to gowith this because I'm afraid that if we don't, we are going to havethe market disappointment. Furthermore, if we cut it immediately, itwould nudge some of the commercial bankers who have been flirting withthe idea of cutting their prime rate into adopting the 1/2 percentagepoint cut that was launched yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger is expressing support for alternative B and a potential borrowing target, as well as suggesting a discount rate cut to align with the proposed actions.


Passage number 424.
MR. PARTEE. Did anybody else go today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is straightforward and does not involve any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard one way or another.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have not heard any information either supporting or opposing a particular issue.


Passage number 426.
MS. SEGER. They are waiting for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that someone named Ms. Seger is being waited for.


Passage number 427.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I checked at 10:10 a.m. and nobodyelse had gone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact without any conflicting views.


Passage number 428.
MS. SEGER. But I think this would push them to act.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is an individual's opinion without any conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 429.
MR. BLACK. What about that bank in St. Louis, Joe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 430.
MR. GRAMLEY. Let me start by calling attention to a coupleof things in the general paragraph that are nits, but I think theymight well be picked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement expressing the opinion of the speaker.


Passage number 431.
 In line 9 we have--12/17-18/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you looking at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 432.
MR. GRAMLEY. The general paragraphs [of the draftdirective]. In line 9 it has "largely reflecting a rebound in autoproduction." The immediate antecedent of that is "after two months ofdecline" and [unintelligible] would be a lot better. I'd start thesentence "After two months of decline, industrial production increasedsomewhat" and then follow with "reflecting." My next one is going tobe a little harder to swallow. On line 14 it says: "The informationon outlays and spending plans suggests substantially slower growth.""Substantially" has been put in this line even though the staffforecast, although it was revised down from 7-1/2 percent, is 6percent in real terms for the four quarters of 1985. I think what hashappened here is that there is confusion between the fourth quarter,which has been revised down an awful lot, and the longer-run future.The easier way to handle that is just to leave it the way it waswithout the word "substantially." I'm not going to fight about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is making suggestions and offering his opinion, but there is no indication of argument or disagreement.


Passage number 433.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Neither am I. Is anybody else going tofight about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that they are not going to fight about it and asks if anyone else is going to.


Passage number 434.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I must say that the slowing in businessfixed investment is one of the big disappointments. I don't know ifit fits into the exact flow of the data, but in that sense I think itis a major factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion or observation about the slowing in business fixed investment.


Passage number 435.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 436.
 My point is simply that this factor is not anawful lot different than it was the last time and to insert the word"substantially" now when the forecast has been revised down from agrowth rate of 7-1/2 percent to 6 percent in real terms sounds likenot quite--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Use "significantly".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of "significantly" instead of "substantially" implies that the author disagrees with the current forecast and believes that the growth rate has been revised down by a larger margin than is being acknowledged.


Passage number 437.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley's response suggests agreement and a positive sentiment.


Passage number 438.
MR. PARTEE. The increase in outlays went down quite a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the decrease in outlays.


Passage number 439.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the fourth quarter is going to be verylow. The shipments data both from domestic sources and based on theimport data for October would suggest a very slow fourth quarter. AndI thought putting in this word "substantially" maybe reflected a mix-up [between] what is ahead for the fourth quarter and what the outlookis for the more distant future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is providing information and discussing a possible mix-up in the use of the word "substantially." There is no indication of any disagreement or contention among individuals.


Passage number 440.
MR. AXILROD. We might have been being excessively specifichere but we were referring to the current quarter, the fourth quarter,in all this. We really were referring there to the substantialslowing that we're now projecting for the fourth quarter, takingaccount of the upward revision in the third quarter. That was revisedup to a 16 percent rate of growth from the 8 percent we had earlier.So, this is really [a substantial slowing in] the fourth quarter fromthe third quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining the projection for the fourth quarter, based on the revised growth rate in the third quarter.


Passage number 441.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER." This is simply a statement or mention of someone's position or title.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 442.
 I think if we say current information orinformation for current outlays and take out "plans"--12/17-18/84MR. PARTEE. It's the "spending plans" that's reallyconfusing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The mention of "spending plans" being confusing suggests that there is a disagreement or contention about the impact or clarity of these plans.


Passage number 443.
MR. MARTIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple acknowledgment or agreement, as Mr. Martin says "Yes" without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 444.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take out the "spending plans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It is a statement suggesting the removal of "spending plans".


Passage number 445.
"MR. GRAMLEY. That would do it. Then the "substantially" isneeded. On the more general issue, I don't want to push the easebutton again; we pushed it the last time. I think Bob Boykin'sprescription is the right one. What we need is a little patience. Weneed to remember that monetary policy works with very substantiallags. We've done a lot already. And I take some encouragement fromthis housing report that came out this morning. The rise in permitsis quite strong. Permits are not a forecasting device; they don'ttell you anything about what is going to happen in the future but theyare a lot better indicator of what is happening now than the startsfigures are. And to have the permits go up 11 percent, I think, meansthat we can be reasonably sure the process of a revival in housing ison the way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing agreement with Bob Boykin's prescription and suggesting that patience is needed in regards to monetary policy. They also share encouragement from a housing report and the rise in permits, implying a positive outlook.


Passage number 446.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Permits are, in fact, above starts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that permits are above starts.


Passage number 447.
MR. KICHLINE. Right. They were 1570, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline simply agrees with the information given.


Passage number 448.
MR. GRAMLEY. Starts were 1528; normally permits are about 93percent of starts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage presents factual information about the number of starts (1528) and the percentage of permits in relation to starts (approximately 93%). It does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 449.
MR. MARTIN. But what we're leaving out of the housingdiscussion is the considerable pressure by the central bank againstgrowth in mortgages and against savings and loan participation injoint ventures for builders--reserves and net worth requirementsagainst rates of growth. We've left that out entirely. The fundingis going to be a lot more difficult for the builder.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is suggesting that a significant factor, the pressure by the central bank against growth in mortgages and savings and loan participation, has been left out of the housing discussion. This implies a disagreement or differing perspective on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 450.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, next I want to say that I thought we weresupposed to be giving equal weight to M1 and M2 and I don't thinkwe're giving any weight to M2. In fact, the M2 path for the fourthquarter is substantially above what we decided it was going to be inSeptember and we're just throwing that out. Nobody is even talkingabout the fact that we had been expecting 7-1/2 percent growth and nowit's 11 percent plus. We ought to think about that. I think we oughtto ask ourselves whether or not some of the effects of the ease we'veput in are showing up in M2 instead of M1 and if that isn't just asgood in terms of what it does for easing conditions in credit markets.I don't think we have to go back to 8-3/4 percent on the funds ratebut I would like us to aim for somewhere around the 8 to 8-1/4 percentrange on the fed funds rate. I don't want to take back a lot of theease that's been put in, but I don't want to ease further. And Idon't know what borrowing number that would be associated with, but myguess is it would be around $325 million or thereabouts--maybe alittle less. That would be my prescription for policy now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing disagreement with the current approach to monetary policy. He believes that M2 (a measure of money supply) is being disregarded and suggests that it should be given equal weight to M1. He also disagrees with the decision to not consider the higher growth rate in M2 and questions whether the effects of the ease in monetary policy are showing up in M2 rather than M1. Mr. Gramley also proposes a different target range for the fed funds rate, indicating a differing opinion on the appropriate level of easing.


Passage number 451.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage, "Mr. Boykin," does not provide enough information for there to be contention or disagreement. It only mentions a person's name without any further details or context.


Passage number 452.
MR. BOYKIN. I would certainly agree with what Lyle says. Asyou said a little earlier, Mr. Chairman, you don't see much difference-69-12/17-18/84between $250 and $300 million [on borrowing]. Why don't we just gofor $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Boykin and Lyle agree on the statement made earlier, and Mr. Boykin suggests going for $300 million instead of $250 million without any opposition from anyone.


Passage number 453.
MR. BLACK. Do you agree with Lyle because he paid you atribute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for agreement or disagreement with Lyle's statement.


Passage number 454.
 Or is that an honest--MR. BOYKIN. No, I agree with Lyle because of his very astuteanalysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 455.
MR. GRAMLEY. I promised to give him a quarter if he saidthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about a promise to give someone a quarter if they said something.


Passage number 456.
MR. BLACK. I think you've each given each other a quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is expressing his opinion and there is no indication of an argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 457.
MR. BOYKIN. No, I just think he says it better than I can; Ijust agree with what he's saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with what someone else is saying, indicating there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 458.
MR. BLACK. Watch him, Lyle, because sometime he will pay youa tribute and then he will turn around--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No-  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply warning Lyle to be cautious of someone who may act in a deceptive or contradictory manner.


Passage number 459.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would anybody else like to contribute tothis. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks if anyone else would like to contribute.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 460.
MR. GUFFEY. I don't know whether it's a contribution or not:I have no quarrel with your prescription on the aggregates but I doshare the concern about the $250 million borrowing level. To acceptit, one must accept the premise of the staff that $250 million is ator above the frictional borrowing level. I'm not at all convinced, inview of the extent of the seasonal credit provisions, that thatnecessarily is above the frictional borrowing level. If it is not, wecertainly will be establishing a federal funds rate, it seems to me,and I would accept Lyle's prescription that 8 to 8-1/4 percent isabout the correct range. I would like to have some assurance thatthat's what we're looking at if we're going to adopt the $250 millionborrowing level because I have a concern that if that level is belowthe frictional level, we'll essentially turn loose any control otherthan establishing the federal funds rate. In that connection, I'vejust observed that everybody is talking about a fourth-quarter growthrate in M1 that's very low. But if you are willing to believe that aseasonal adjustment factor might put as much as an additional 2percent in the second half, that together with some benchmarkrevisions could bring growth up in the 4 to 5 percent range for thefourth quarter, which would be quite acceptable. We may be pushingthe ease button a little before we have all of that knowledge. As aresult, I would prefer to see a discount rate decrease by the Board ofGovernors and then to establish a borrowing level at least above the$300 million range with the target being a federal funds rate in therange of 8 to 8-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey disagrees with the premise that $250 million is at or above the frictional borrowing level and expresses concern about turning loose control if that level is below the frictional level. He also suggests a different approach, preferring a discount rate decrease by the Board of Governors and establish a borrowing level at least above the $300 million range.


Passage number 461.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there any reason to believe the changein seasonals would add as much as 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement asking whether there is any reason to believe that the change in seasonals would add as much as 2 percent.


Passage number 462.
MR. AXILROD. Well, on the assumption that M1 in December wasgoing to be 7 percent, we re-ran [the seasonal adjustment program] andthe second half was raised by 1/2 percent at an annual rate and thefirst half was lowered by 1/2 percent at an annual rate. I think Iput in a footnote in that document for yesterday. But I shouldmention that this is well before we have any benchmarks and you can't12/17-18/84tell what the variable month-by-month benchmarks are going to do tothis. So, I don't have any evidence at this point that it would benearly as large as President Guffey mentioned. But the weaker it getsin the second half, the more [the seasonal] goes up a little. Butthat leads you down a very funny road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and discussing potential adjustments to a seasonal adjustment program.


Passage number 463.
MR. GRAMLEY. No matter what we do we're going to get thesame number for December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that regardless of the actions taken, the result in December will be the same.


Passage number 464.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 465.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I think this is an opportunity for givinginterest rates a push because none of the immediate penalties that weusually face in relation to money supply, and in fact on the exchangerate, seem to apply at this time. I think interest rates have beenstuck at levels that in a broad sense are not equilibrium rates buthave been carried over from the past. So a push may get them to afractionally lower level that might last, if this isn't immediatelyreversed by something that happens in the market. And I think itwould be worth trying. It would have to be accompanied, probably, bya discount rate cut. I just wouldn't want to prejudice what we shoulddo for the rest of the year in taking a year-out view. But in thisimmediate window, I think we have an opportunity for lower rates. Bythat I mean that if we do what you propose and [also] cut the discountrate, we might have a chance of lowering the level of interest ratesin a structural underlying sense. And then when they move again, asof course they will, they might not make up this particular dropaltogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion on the opportunity to lower interest rates.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 467.
MR. RICE. I support your proposal, Mr. Chairman. It'sessentially in a range that I'm pleased with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice explicitly states that he supports the proposal and is pleased with it.


Passage number 468.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I should have added in responseto President Guffey's question that of the 1/2 point increase 1percentage point was in the fourth quarter. So it's concentratedthere. But again, I don't know how it would work out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides additional information in response to a question and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 469.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn, we haven't heard from you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement informing Mrs. Horn that there has been no communication from her.


Passage number 470.
MS. HORN. I support your proposal, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Horn expresses her support for the proposal made by the chairman, indicating agreement.


Passage number 471.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's look at the language a bit--goingback from whether or not the borrowing proposal is supported. Whatabout the federal funds range. It seems to me that where the rate isnow makes it reasonable to say 6 to 10 percent, but I don't knowwhether everybody else agrees. Nobody else commented on it, I guess.SEVERAL. I would support it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 472.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's assume it's going to be 6 to10 percent. Now, let me start with some language Mr. Axilrod gave mehere. I suppose what we need is "In the implementation of policy inthe short run, the Committee seeks to reduce somewhat..." I thinkthat encompasses everybody. To say "maintain existing" may be alittle confusing, given the last statistics that came out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the language they received and suggesting a potential change to make it less confusing.


Passage number 473.
-71-12/17-18/84MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm going to respond to your questionearlier about what happened over the course of the morning. The fundsrate was 7 percent. We went in to drain some reserves. We got a lotof offers--$7 billion plus--and we did just $1 billion. Funds werelast trading at 6-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation of what happened in regards to the funds rate and reserve draining.


Passage number 474.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They have their bets; they are aheadof us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only states that "they" have their bets and are ahead of "us." There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 475.
MR. MARTIN. They are ahead of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact, that "they are ahead of us".


Passage number 476.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, maybe that indicates that the level offrictional borrowing is $300 million instead of $250 million. At $250million now the bottom is falling out of the funds rate. This is avery dangerous course of policy. Interest rates can drop with nobottom. There's just no way we're going to limit them, if it turnsout that the estimate of frictional borrowing is wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply expressing his concern about the potential consequences of an incorrect estimate of frictional borrowing and the impact it could have on interest rates. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented.


Passage number 477.
MR. MARTIN. But if we have 6 to 10 percent and it approaches6 percent, we limit it. That's not zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is stating a fact and making a statement about limiting something when it approaches a certain percentage.


Passage number 478.
MR. GRAMLEY. If you're prepared to live with a 6 percentfunds rate, why, that's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a willingness to accept a 6 percent funds rate, indicating agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 479.
MR. MARTIN. For how long--two days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states a question being asked by Mr. Martin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 480.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't want the fed funds rate to goanywhere near that level. I think we're going way too fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley expresses his opposition to the fed funds rate reaching a certain level and believes that the current pace is too fast.


Passage number 481.
MR. PARTEE. That's the whole problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement that acknowledges a problem without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 482.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's where the disagreement lies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there is a disagreement but does not provide further details or arguments related to the disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 483.
MR. PARTEE. That's the disagreement. It's really morefundamental, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, mentions that there is a fundamental disagreement on a certain topic, implying that there are differing opinions or viewpoints on the matter.


Passage number 484.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It would really make more sense forus all to go home and you [Board members] can do a discount rate cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 485.
MR. MORRIS. Here's another situation where there may be anincompatibility between the borrowing level and the path for totalreserves. I think there's incompatibility on the other side of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or observation without any conflicting views.


Passage number 486.
MR. GRAMLEY. And lowering the discount rate is only apartial solution to the problem--that is, if the lowering of thediscount rate does, to be sure, [leave unaffected] the frictionallevel of borrowing. But if what we do with monetary policy, both openmarket operations and discount rate changes, is send another strongsignal to the market that we think the economy must be turning downand, therefore, we're going to push the ease button, don't expectinterest rates to go back up again. It isn't going to happen thatway. It didn't happen this last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is stating a series of facts and observations without presenting any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 487.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, that's true. There's somesimilarity in our thinking, Lyle. But on the other hand, if we dowant some easing, the preferable way of getting it at this point is adiscount rate cut. I don't think you have to read quite as farreaching a message; the markets will do what you just said. Now, if-72-12/17-18/84you feel that there shouldn't be any easing at all in the rates, thenI think you have a consistent position in also worrying about themessage you're giving to the market. There's no way at this pointthat the market has really exaggerated expectations. I would haveguessed at this point that if we were to demonstrate pretty clearlythat the funds rate is not going to go below 8 percent, we probablywould be able to deflate those expectations significantly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 488.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's the wrong way to get some support.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of opinion regarding a certain approach to gaining support.


Passage number 489.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm worried about the frictionalborrowing level, also. And it seems to me that one way of doing it isto do a modest cut in the borrowing level and move the discount rateeither 1/4, or possibly 1/2 point--or else just do the discount ratecut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about being worried about a borrowing level and suggests a possible solution without any opposition or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 490.
MR. PARTEE. Maybe we ought to let you fellows handle thediscount rate and we'll do the open market policy here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is suggesting a division of tasks, with one group handling the discount rate and another group handling the open market policy.


Passage number 491.
MR. WALLICH. I think a discount rate cut, if it came, wouldlook now like a following action, not like a strong policy signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion that a discount rate cut, if it were to happen, would be seen as a subsequent action rather than a strong policy signal.


Passage number 492.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would note that all these concerns I'veheard about declining interest rates for the last three months and notgetting the borrowing level too low have been accompanied by a declinein reserves and M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that concerns about declining interest rates and borrowing levels have been accompanied by a decline in reserves and M1.


Passage number 493.
MS. SEGER. And the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement, not a discussion or debate, and does not involve conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 494.
MR. BOEHNE. As to your specific question, before thisgeneral discussion, on the first sentence: Could one say "seeks toreduce somewhat the pressures on reserve positions that have prevailedin recent weeks" to get it away from just the last several days. Ithink that is really what we're talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is suggesting a way to rephrase the statement to make it more inclusive of a longer time frame rather than just the last several days.


Passage number 495.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I'm not sure that's very clear. Iagree that technically meets the problem, but the markets are sittingthere looking at not much more than $250 million in borrowing in theprevious two-week period, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person expressing their uncertainty does not contradict or argue against any specific statement; they are simply stating that they are unsure about the clarity of the situation.


Passage number 496.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Sternlight responds with a simple acknowledgment by saying "Yes." There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this short response.


Passage number 497.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they may be looking at something likethat again when this comes out, but it doesn't come out for a while.They'd say "Reduce from $250 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement discusses a future possibility without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory information.


Passage number 498.
"MR. BLACK. Maybe the best thing to do is to say that $250million was the target and say "seeks to maintain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between individuals. It simply presents a suggestion or idea without any conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 499.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We still can say "maintain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "We still can say 'maintain..." without any conflicting or contradictory ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 500.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm wondering whether that kind oflanguage wouldn't be less misleading somehow. "The Committee seeks tomaintain the recently reduced pressures on...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Well, I'm wondering whether that kind of language wouldn't be less misleading somehow" suggests that the speaker is questioning or disagreeing with the use of certain language because they believe it could be less misleading.


Passage number 501.
"MR. BLACK. I think that's a better way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no sign of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker (Mr. Black) is expressing their opinion on a preferred way of doing something, but there is no opposing viewpoint or contradictory statement provided.


Passage number 502.
-73-12/17-18/84MR. AXILROD. On Thursday, presuming our numbers are half-waynear correct, the borrowing level we're going to publish will be morelike $500 or $600 million for that one-week period that ends on thatWednesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents information about a borrowing level that is expected to be published on Thursday. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 503.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically, tomorrow--but who knowsabout these theories--there's going to be a lot of borrowing and thefunds rate is going to be 9 percent or 10 percent maybe at 3:00 in theafternoon. In fact, the funds rate is going to be 18 percent and [amajor bank] is going to come in and borrow $2 billion because thefunds rate is 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents a hypothetical scenario about borrowing and the funds rate without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 504.
 Now, there may be a miss here in thefigures, so I think this is just a question that's--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not contentious or disagreeable. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or doubt about the figures, suggesting that there might be an error.


Passage number 505.
 Since it doesn't get published for 6weeks, it seems to me that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't make that much differenceprobably, but--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 506.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know; the general trend isdown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific contention or disagreement. It is a statement of uncertainty about a specific trend.


Passage number 507.
 We could probably leave it simply "reduce somewhat" and notworry about the fact that since Thursday and today there has been--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, [the problem] is the previous two-week period or one-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not include any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the option of reducing something without concern for a specific time period.


Passage number 508.
MR. PARTEE. Say "reduce somewhat existing pressures" or wecould take out the word "existing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting alternative phrasing by proposing to either reduce existing pressures or remove the word "existing."


Passage number 509.
"MR. BOEHNE. Yes, that would be a way to approach it.SPEAKER(.). I think that's probably the best solution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: 
The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Boehne and the speaker agree that the suggested solution is the best approach.


Passage number 510.
MR. PARTEE. That makes it pretty vague.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Instead, it shows a statement being made by Mr. Partee and acknowledges that it is vague.


Passage number 511.
MR. GRAMLEY. "Seeks to maintain reserve positions" orsomething like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Seeks to maintain reserve positions" is presented as an example or approximation of what Mr. Gramley is saying, indicating agreement with his perspective.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Seeks to maintain minimal pressures onreserve positions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Seeks to maintain minimal pressures on reserve positions" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a goal or objective without indicating any conflicting views.


Passage number 513.
"MR. BOEHNE. I don't think that sends out the right messageon what we've been talking about right around the table. I think themessage that comes out from around the table is that we want to ease,so I think the words that we use have to convey that view. And theterm "reduce" does that; the word "maintain" doesn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne is expressing his opinion and suggesting using the word "reduce" instead of "maintain" to better convey the desired message. However, there is no mention of anyone disagreeing with his suggestion or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 514.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll leave it "reduce somewhatpressures on reserve positions." Then, "This action is expected to beconsistent with growth of M1"--what are we going to put in here. Mr.Axilrod wrote in 7, 9, and 9 percent; we could use 7, 8-1/2, and 8-1/2percent or 6-1/2, 8-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent. What's your pleasure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing options and asking for preference or opinion.


Passage number 515.
MR. MARTIN. 7, 9, and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement or response, potentially part of a larger conversation where Mr. Martin is providing numbers (7, 9, and 9) in a straightforward manner.


Passage number 516.
MS. SEGER. 7, 9, and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just a list of numbers.


Passage number 517.
MR. PARTEE. I do like these whole numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his preference for whole numbers, indicating a personal preference rather than engaging in any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 518.
-74-12/17-18/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'll trade you. Why don't we do atrade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement suggesting a potential trade.


Passage number 519.
MR. BLACK. Do it on this one instead of whole numbers and afractional number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply discussing a specific request or suggestion.


Passage number 520.
MR. AXILROD. I was only technically concerned with thespecifications between "A" and "B" and I was trying to find the M2 andM3 between "A" and "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states Mr. Axilrod's technical concern with finding the M2 and M3 between "A" and "B". There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 521.
"MR. MARTIN. And a discount rate [cut] of 1/2 point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not include any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements. It simply mentions the proposal of a discount rate cut of 1/2 point.


Passage number 522.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's leave that open for themoment. Let us try this next sentence. I'm just going to read whatMr. Axilrod has written down: "Somewhat more rapid growth of M1 wouldbe acceptable..." Do you just want to say M1 and not the others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 523.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's the only one that's falling wellshort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no obvious contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is stating a fact about something falling short, without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 524.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's the only one we're paying any attention toalso. Now the truth comes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is paying attention to only one thing and expresses that the truth is finally being revealed.


Passage number 525.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm tempted to say "Somewhat more rapidgrowth of the monetary aggregates would be acceptable in light of thecurrently estimated shortfall in growth for the fourth quarter"--No, this is only M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is an individual's personal opinion about the acceptable rate of growth for monetary aggregates.


Passage number 526.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's why it was put that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply affirming that the information was presented in a certain way for a particular reason.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 527.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...relative to the Committee'sexpectations at the beginning of the period, particularly in theabsence of evidence of a strong rebound in the economy and in view ofthe strength of the dollar in exchange markets." It would be moreparallel if we said "particularly in the absence of evidence ofcontinued strength and--. It's the reverse; it's not the absence ofthe strength.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that it would be more appropriate to phrase the statement in the opposite way, implying that there is evidence of continued strength rather than the absence of it. This indicates a difference in opinion or perspective.


Passage number 528.
MR. PARTEE. "Particularly if business continues weak and thedollar strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating a conditional situation without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 529.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that would make it parallel allright. How can we make this more parallel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that making something parallel would be the desired outcome and asks for suggestions on how to achieve that.


Passage number 530.
MR. WALLICH. "And in view of the strength of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 531.
"MR. GRAMLEY. Well, "particularly if business news continuesweak and the dollar continues strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a statement made by Mr. Gramley without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 532.
"MR. PARTEE. I think that's exactly what we ought to have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee agrees with the statement.


Passage number 533.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Continues weak" isn't exactly right interms of the latest figures, which aren't all that weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is not expressing any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that the term "Continued weak" is not entirely accurate based on the latest figures, which are not strongly indicative of weakness.


Passage number 534.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 535.
 Change your mind--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Particularly with evidence of continuedsluggishness" or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Particularly with evidence of continued sluggishness" does not indicate contention or disagreement, but rather suggests a reason or justification for changing one's mind.


Passage number 536.
-75-12/17-18/84MR. PARTEE. That's okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's okay" implies agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 537.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Particularly should evidence continue ofsluggish economic growth and strength of the dollar in exchangemarkets." Now, that raises the Corrigan question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that if there is evidence of sluggish economic growth and strength of the dollar in exchange markets, it raises the Corrigan question.


Passage number 538.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, I'd take the Corriganposition a notch farther. It seems to me the way it comes out nowthat some people might read this as indicating that we actually wouldtighten monetary policy if the dollar began to decline. And that isnot the message we're trying to get across.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It primarily expresses the author's opinion about a specific topic without conflicting with any other ideas or perspectives.


Passage number 539.
MR. BOEHNE. Doesn't the next sentence take care of yourproblem, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is simply suggesting that the next sentence resolves the issue or concern.


Passage number 540.
MR. PARTEE. This suggests that the sentence relates togrowth over the target numbers in the Ms, particularly M1. I guess itis M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a suggestion or interpretation by Mr. Partee regarding the sentence's meaning. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention among individuals.


Passage number 541.
MR. GRAMLEY. But Tony's point is right. More growth isacceptable because the dollar is high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges the correctness of Tony's point and states a fact about the dollar's high value.


Passage number 542.
 If the dollar starts to fall,then the implication might be--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, we've got to be very carefulabout this now. There's a lot of attention being paid in the marketto what we might do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that if the dollar starts to fall, caution is necessary and acknowledges the attention being paid to their actions in the market.


Passage number 543.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree it sounds that way. I don't knowwhether that's so bad. It sounds like precisely the opposite concernof Mr. Corrigan. You can't have it both ways; you can't object onboth grounds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the initial statement and presenting an alternative perspective.


Passage number 544.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But the way it reads now,that's what it sounds like. People may read from that that we wouldtighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement or observation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 545.
MR. PARTEE. Down to 7 percent growth in M1--that's thecontext in which we're discussing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the context in which they are discussing something.


Passage number 546.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually having access to the passage in question. Please provide the passage so that an accurate assessment can be made.


Passage number 547.
MR. PARTEE. We had an overshoot in M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact - that there was an overshoot in M1.


Passage number 548.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you going to have the nextsentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 549.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the question remains whetherwe need either of the next sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage as the speaker is expressing doubt about the necessity of the next sentences.


Passage number 550.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I was going to say is this: Ifwe are going to have a succeeding sentence of some kind, maybe weought to put in a more carefully worded [reference to] the foreignexchange market consideration instead of trying to get the symmetry inthat one. It's a risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a suggestion or opinion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 551.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how you put it in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their lack of knowledge regarding a certain topic, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 552.
-76-12/17-18/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, basically what we have alwayssaid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement does not have any conflicting ideas or opposing views. It simply describes what the speaker has always said.


Passage number 553.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying this wording we have isgreat, but I don't know why we need either of the next two sentenceswhen I look at them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the current wording may not be great but expresses confusion about the inclusion of the next two sentences.


Passage number 554.
MR. CORRIGAN. What does the "somewhat more rapid" sentencesay now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral question asking for clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 555.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd say "Somewhat more rapid growth ofM1"--or the monetary aggregates, which in this case doesn't changeanything else--"would be acceptable in light of the currentlyestimated shortfall in growth for the fourth quarter relative to theCommittee's expectations at the beginning of the period, particularlyshould evidence continue of sluggish economic growth and strength ofthe dollar in exchange markets." It isn't the most felicitouswording, in terms of reading it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that slightly faster growth of M1 would be acceptable given the currently estimated shortfall in fourth-quarter growth. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 556.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's the word "evidence" that louses itup. It doesn't carry through to the dollar. I think if we didn'thave those qualifiers, which are only now a reference to acceptance ofa larger M1 growth, then there would be a basis for continuing the twoparallel sentences afterwards. Maybe something could be done, then,on the foreign exchange value of the dollar there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement where Mr. Partee expresses his opinion and suggests a change in wording to improve the clarity and cohesiveness of the sentences.


Passage number 557.
 Otherwise, if wehave those qualifiers, it makes the next two sentences seem redundant,CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's hard to get lesser restraint onreserve positions. The second sentence, the "greater restraint"sentence, doesn't bother me; it's the previous one that just seems alittle peculiar depending on how low we go [on borrowing]. We can'tdo much less restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 558.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I think we can do--and the Fedwatchers will spot the difference--is keep the succeeding sentence onlesser restraint and move up international financial market conditionsto be the first [item in that list]. That gives some consideration toit--"evaluated in relation to the strength of international financialmarket conditions," etc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is discussing a suggested action and acknowledging that the "Fedwatchers" will notice the difference.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 559.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you suggesting here. That'scorrect. You haven't solved the next one. Mr. Axilrod has suggestedthat we combine the first two sentences. Go back to "In theimplementation of policy in the short run, the Committee seeks toreduce pressures on reserve positions consistent with growth" etc.That says, whatever figure we stick in there, we can go further if thegrowth isn't up to it. We haven't got much further to go. And wedon't need either of the [next two sentences]. Well, we could leavein the greater restraint sentence. We certainly don't need thesentence on lesser restraint; we've already said that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Well, we could leave in the greater restraint sentence" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or debate on whether to include a certain sentence.


Passage number 560.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I was going to suggest theopposite: Drop the dangling phrase beginning "particularly" and leavein the sentence, which is more or less similar to what's in there now,as a separate sentence; and move international financial marketconditions up to the head of that list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a suggestion or alternative being presented.


Passage number 561.
-77-12/17-18/84MR. PARTEE. I'd hate to put that ahead of the strength ofthe business expansion and inflationary pressures, Tony. I think thatreally is still our first objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that their first objective is the strength of the business expansion and inflationary pressures.


Passage number 562.
MR. MARTIN. Our own economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. It provides no evidence of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 563.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can give you simpler wording for this:"Somewhat more rapid growth would be acceptable in the light of...,provided economic growth remains sluggish and the dollar remainsstrong in the exchange markets. We wouldn't tolerate the excessivemonetary expansion if the dollar were weak in the exchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a condition that is dependent on two factors: economic growth remaining sluggish and the dollar remaining strong in the exchange markets. If these conditions are not met, the excessive monetary expansion would not be tolerated. The disagreement arises in the differing outcomes based on the strength of the dollar in the exchange markets.


Passage number 564.
MR. PARTEE. I think "particularly" is better than"provided." Provided is absolute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their preference for the word "particularly" over the word "provided." There is no opposition or argument being presented.


Passage number 565.
MR. MARTIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage as indicated by Mr. Martin's response. The word "Yes" suggests that he is opposing or contradicting something previously mentioned or expressed.


Passage number 566.
MR. GRAMLEY. "Particularly provided".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It only presents the statement "Particularly provided" without any context or additional information that would suggest disagreement or debate.


Passage number 567.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you can use "particularly" in the samewording.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the word "particularly" can be used in the same way.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 568.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No you can't, I don't think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The phrase "No you can't" indicates a contrary opinion or refusal, while "I don't think" suggests a different belief or perspective. Both phrases imply disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 569.
MR. PARTEE. "Particularly if the economy remains sluggishand the dollar remains strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a condition or scenario that would likely occur if certain factors or conditions persist.


Passage number 570.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are you. "Particularly if" or"particularly in the context of continued sluggish growth in economicactivity and strength of the dollar in exchange markets." I'm notsure that this fourth-quarter preliminary flash on the GNP is going tolook all that sluggish. I don't know what you consider sluggish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a series of statements and questions without any contradictory or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 571.
MR. MARTIN. Less than 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about "Less than 3 percent."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 572.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Under 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Under 3" is ambiguous and could refer to different things, therefore leading to contention or disagreement about the intended meaning.


Passage number 573.
MR. MARTIN. Yes, under 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin simply affirms or agrees with the statement made.


Passage number 574.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, suppose we said "particularly in thecontext of sluggish growth in economic activity and continued strengthof the dollar in exchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a scenario or hypothetical situation without presenting any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 575.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is "continued strength of thedollar". What do you think it means to most people--the dollarclimbing further or maintaining present levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply asking for clarification and interpretations of what "continued strength of the dollar" means to most people. It does not present conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 576.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maintaining present levels or higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the phrase "Maintaining present levels or higher." This phrase simply suggests the continuation of current levels or an increase from those levels, without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 577.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "MR. PARTEE" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 578.
 It could be interpreted, though--MS. SEGER. When the popular magazines call it the "superdollar," people are looking at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an interpretation of the term "superdollar" used by popular magazines.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 579.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But it would be 180 degrees oppositeof what the Committee wants if any significant number of people inEurope or in the United States were to read from this wording that wewould resist, through monetary policy, declines in the dollar. That's-78-12/17-18/84not what we're trying to say. That fact that there's nothing in thedollar situation that would prevent us from easing is one thing.Carrying an implication that we would tighten monetary policy if thedollar began to come off is another.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The passage argues against the interpretation that the Committee wants to resist declines in the dollar through monetary policy. It claims that there is nothing in the dollar situation that would prevent the Committee from easing monetary policy. The disagreement is between the interpretation that the Committee wants to resist declines in the dollar and the assertion that they have no intention to do so.


Passage number 580.
MR. MARTIN. But, Tony, that would be such a departure fromthe policy of the immediate past. Why would they draw that conclusionfrom that wording.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification regarding a potential departure from past policy.


Passage number 581.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they would draw thatconclusion in the sentence talking about more rapid growth of M1 thanwhat we've--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It is a statement expressing the speaker's belief or opinion.


Passage number 582.
MR. MARTIN. The basic sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only provides a statement made by Mr. Martin without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 583.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's just a risk. I'm notsaying it's a strong probability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply presents their opinion that something is a risk without implying it is highly likely.


Passage number 584.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, do we leave out the next sentence.What do we do with Mr. Axilrod's suggestion "seeks to reduce pressureson reserve positions consistent with..." That would become morerelevant maybe, depending upon the borrowing number we put in here. Imust say, as I said before, my range of tolerance between $250 and$300 million is immense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a suggestion and expressing a wide range of tolerance for a certain borrowing number.


Passage number 585.
MR. CORRIGAN. There's a historical and understandable biasagainst answering this question, but within the context of either ofthose levels of borrowing is it the general expectation of theCommittee that the steady state level of interest rates would fall outat below 8 percent. That's in some way the thing that I'm stuck on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 586.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what we do with thediscount rate. But I think that is a dangerous thing to get hung upon. This Committee has been hung up on that for three months and hasnot eased as fast as it should have in terms of reserve growth and Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion while acknowledging that the matter depends on what is done with the discount rate. They also express frustration with a committee's focus on the issue for an extended period of time. However, there is no evident disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 587.
MR. MARTIN. If that's a motion, I'll second it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is simply responding to a statement or suggestion made by someone else by offering to second it.


Passage number 588.
MR. BLACK. I'll third it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "I'll third it" suggests agreement or support for a previous statement or proposal.


Passage number 589.
MR. BALLES. Amen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "Amen" is typically used to express agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 590.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know who that reflects upon--this Committee or the Board of Governors for not having moved fasteron the discount rate cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses uncertainty about who should take responsibility for the delay in implementing a discount rate cut.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 591.
MR. PARTEE. Are you suggesting $300 million rather than $250million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "rather" indicates that the speaker is suggesting a different amount, which contradicts the initial suggestion of $250 million.


Passage number 592.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm suggesting that I could go anyplacebetween the two. I thought we attracted a great consensus on somenumber between those two, which would not bother me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is suggesting finding a middle ground between two options and mentions that a consensus was already reached on a number between those two options, indicating agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 593.
MR. PARTEE. Like $275 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement or simple information without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 594.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $275 million wouldn't bother me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply expresses a lack of concern or bother about a specific amount of money.


Passage number 595.
MR. PARTEE. How about the range of $250 to $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the range of $250 to $300 million without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 596.
-79-12/17-18/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's fine with me, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit statement or context that indicates disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement expressing agreement or approval.


Passage number 597.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I still would prefer $300 million.MESSRS. BOYKIN and GUFFEY. I would too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. Both individuals express agreement in their preference for $300 million.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 598.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think any of the people who haveindicated that position here are going to be persuaded by your givinga few paltry million on reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention between two parties. Mr. Partee disagrees with the idea that giving a few million on reserves will persuade the people who have indicated their position on the matter.


Passage number 599.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's important to us, even if you sayit's not important to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the importance of something and acknowledging that others may not share the same view.


Passage number 600.
MR. RICE. But it could make them feel better.SPEAKER(.). Make it $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The second speaker is simply suggesting an amount to make them feel better.


Passage number 601.
MR. RICE. Give it to them; make it $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or instruction given by Mr. Rice.


Passage number 602.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For a Christmas present.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This sentence states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 603.
MS. SEGER. $300 million with a 7-1/2 percent discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply mentions a specific amount of money and a specific discount rate without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 604.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this whole [paragraph] impliesthat if things remain sluggish, we will go down below that; I don'tthink there's anything that doesn't say that.SPEAKER(.). That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker agrees with the implication stated in the paragraph.


Passage number 605.
MR. MARTIN. That's what it says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states what is written and does not express any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 606.
MR. CORRIGAN. That kind of thing is fine with me too in mostcircumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan expressing his agreement with a certain kind of thing. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the statement.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think I'm indicating that we cancome within $50 million when we're aiming there anyway.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 608.
 Look, I'm not really from a world--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 609.
 That's going to be particularly hard if it's nottoo--MR. BLACK. It seems to use the expression of Minneapolis orNew York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "That's going to be particularly hard if it's not too" suggests that the task ahead might be challenging, but there is no indication of any disagreement or opposing views. The mention of Minneapolis or New York is unrelated to any contention as it appears to be an example or reference point.


Passage number 610.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we had in mind--on the order of asuggestion--$300 million or lower to start with and we make the errorson the lower side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply mentioning their initial intention to allocate a budget of $300 million or lower, and acknowledges that they made mistakes by underestimating on the lower side.


Passage number 611.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Whose errors are they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is a question asking about the ownership of the errors.


Passage number 612.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Collective error.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 613.
MR. BLACK. [Unintelligible] asymmetrical range of $250 to$300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement mentions an "asymmetrical range of $250 to $300 million," which does not indicate any disagreement or controversy between parties.


Passage number 614.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that satisfactory.-80-12/17-18/84MESSRS. MARTIN and BOEHNE. Yes.SPEAKER(.). To whom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange of confirmation and agreement.


Passage number 615.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Me, sitting here trying to figure out whatto do. We're going to take more chances that it will be below $300million than above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is simply reflecting on their options and predicting the likelihood of a certain outcome.


Passage number 616.
MR. PARTEE. Why don't you take a show of hands for.preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Partee proposing a course of action.


Passage number 617.
MS. SEGER. What is the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 618.
MR. PARTEE. We haven't done a show of hands for a long time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply stating that they have not done a show of hands for a long time.


Passage number 619.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be nice to get a consensus; I'mstriving for consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their desire to reach a consensus, indicating that they value agreement and cooperation.


Passage number 620.
MR. PARTEE. I know you are. That's why I think you mightneed a show of hands as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply suggests using a show of hands.


Passage number 621.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure. We're combining the firsttwo sentences. Do you understand that. We have the second sentence:"particularly in the context of sluggish growth in economic activityand continued strength of the dollar in exchange markets." And wetake out the next sentence; it's implied by the first sentence. Thatnext sentence could be left in or taken out; it doesn't bother me. Itsays that if we really get a significant strengthening in economicactivity and inflationary pressures and if money growth is rapid, we'dtighten up some. That seems to me to be inoffensive, and I'd leavethat in. Is that the consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 622.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an answer without the passage you are referring to. Please provide the passage or a specific question related to it.


Passage number 623.
 MARTIN and MS. SEGER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is contention or disagreement in the passage between Martin and Ms. Seger.


Passage number 624.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we put in 6 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 625.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or argument that would suggest contention or disagreement among different parties.


Passage number 626.
 MARTIN and MS. SEGER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage between Martin and Ms. Seger. The use of "and" between their names suggests that they are engaged in a discussion or argument.


Passage number 627.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the borrowing level, as I nowinterpret it, is up to $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 628.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Up to. What is the nuance between$300 million and below and up to $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 629.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I tell you the only difference between$250 and $300 million is a great big fat nuance to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 630.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I noticed. If it's such a minornuance to you, why not try the $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 631.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because a lot of people--the majority--want $250 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that a lot of people, who make up the majority, desire $250 million.


Passage number 632.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, do they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Oh, do they" is a simple exclamation that does not support any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 633.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.-81-12/17-18/84fits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 634.
MS. HORN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 635.
 [Unintelligible] the first two sentences, thatMS. SEGER. Maybe in the spirit of Christmas we can give him$50 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests giving someone $50 million in the spirit of Christmas.


Passage number 636.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we have. [Let's vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the action of voting.


Passage number 637.
]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I still don't know what we're votingon. What are we voting on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification about the topic or item that they need to vote on.


Passage number 638.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Up to $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a financial amount without any contradicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 639.
MR. BERNARD.Chairman VolckerVice Chairman SolomonPresident BoehnePresident BoykinPresident CorriganGovernor GramleyPresident HornGovernor MartinGovernor ParteeGovernor RiceGovernor SegerGovernor WallichYesUp to $300. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no content or disagreement in the passage. The listed individuals are simply being mentioned, and no conflicting statements are made. The "Yes" and "No" at the end of the passage appear to be unrelated to the individuals listed.


Passage number 640.
YesYesYesNoYesYesYesYesYesYesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, I guess we're finished.[Secretary's note: At this point the group ate lunch in theBoard room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 641.
 During lunch, the following exchange occurred:]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm afraid we left one thing open at theOpen Market Committee meeting. We'll have to regather. We talkedabout the precise numbers to put in but didn't pin them down. Theoptions were 7, 9, and 9 percent or 6-1/2, 8-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent.I guess I was assuming 7, 9, and 9 percent when we were voting but ifother people were not assuming that, we ought to reconsider it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses their concern that there was a lack of agreement or clarity during the Open Market Committee meeting regarding the specific numbers to be used. They suggest the need to regather and potentially reconsider the options presented.


Passage number 642.
MS. SEGER. That's what I put down. I voted for 7, 9, and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 643.
MR. WALLICH. I voted thinking 7, 9, and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. While it is not explicitly stated, the phrase "I voted thinking 7, 9, and 9" indicates that there is some disagreement or contention regarding the voting process or outcome. This suggests that Mr. Wallich's vote may not align with the prevailing opinions or decisions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 644.
MS. HORN. I could vote for either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage indicates that Ms. Horn is undecided and that she is open to voting for either option. This suggests that there is some level of contention or disagreement between two options that she is considering.


Passage number 645.
MR. CORRIGAN. I assumed we were voting for 7, 9, and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their assumption about the voting process.


Passage number 646.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if that was the general assumption,we'll leave it at 7, 9, and 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply provides information without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 647.
MR. PARTEE. That's what I assumed too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the assumption made by Mr. Partee.


