Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 21-22, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, May 21, 1984, at 3:30 p.m., and continuingon Tuesday, May 22, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Volcker,Solomon,BoehneBoykinCorriganGramleyHornMartinParteeRice 1/WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey, Prell,Siegman, Stern, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Attended Tuesday session only.5/21-22/84Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, Parthemos,Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City,Boston, San Francisco, Richmond, Chicago, and Atlanta,respectivelyMs. Lovett, Manager, Securities Department, Federal ReseveBank of New York-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 21-22, 1984May 21, 1984--Afternoon Session[Secretary's note: Messrs. Promisel, Henderson, Hooper, andIsard of the Board's Division of International Finance gave apresentation on the external position of the United States and theexchange value of the dollar. See Appendix. The discussion thatfollowed this presentation was not transcribed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing a record of who was present at the meeting.


Passage number 2.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we're finished with this, we can turnto the meeting [agenda] and maybe have the Managers' reports today.We need to approve the minutes of the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a suggestion or plan for what to do after finishing with a certain task.


Passage number 3.
MR. PARTEE. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Mr. Partee" simply states "So moved," which indicates agreement or support for something, without showing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 4.
MR. MARTIN. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Martin is speaking for the second time.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is no disagreement or contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen through phrases like "I must object," "That is not the correct interpretation," and "I strongly disagree." These statements indicate a clear disagreement or contention.


Passage number 7.
]MR. WALLICH. Sam, what I hear about negotiations withArgentina isn't very positive right now. Is there any time limit interms of the Treasury's arrangements on when they need to arrive at aletter of intent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 8.
MR. TRUMAN. They formally have only extended theirarrangements through the end of this month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the extension of arrangements until the end of the month.


Passage number 9.
MR. CROSS. Through the end of May.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a timeframe, "Through the end of May."


Passage number 10.
MR. TRUMAN. But the Latin people who currently have theirmoney involved indicated in public when they announced their own 30-day extension through the end of May that they would be inclined topermit a further extension. So, although the Treasury formally has adeadline and they might even want to keep to it, they are somewhatboxed in by the Latins.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is stating the position of the Latin people and acknowledging that the Treasury might be constrained by their stance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS. The original agreement said only 30 days. Thenit was extended by the Latins and by the Treasury for another 30 days.And it may be extended further for another 30 days, according to theLatins, but the Treasury hasn't said anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The Latin representatives believe that the agreement can be extended for another 30 days, while the Treasury representatives have not made any statement regarding a possible extension.


Passage number 12.
MR. PARTEE. The additional 30 days would put it right up toJune 30 and the question of the treatment of the income arises again.And I suppose there's more of it by now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact and discussing a potential outcome.


Passage number 13.
MR. TRUMAN. The Argentineans have put forward a proposal tothe banks to deal with June 30. It involves the activation of theresidual amount of their medium-term loan which was negotiated lastyear, use of a substantial amount of their own reserves, and repaymentof the bridge loan done last year and this little $100 million piecethat they have left over. Essentially, they would be using $350million of their own reserves and $150 million left over from thearrangements that were done last year. So, they have offered to thebanks already--I'm [oversimplifying] it now--arrangements which by5/21-22/84June 30, if they had a letter of intent with the Fund and all thepaperwork had been done, would bring things up to April again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about a proposal made by the Argentineans.


Passage number 14.
MR. CROSS. There are a few other things in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement or remark made by Mr. Cross without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 15.
MR. TRUMAN. There are a few things in there that make thatpackage unattractive to the banks and for the moment they have turnedit down. But I, at least, consider it a positive step that in termsof the general negotiations they are thinking ahead. They are 6 weeksahead of where they were last quarter, if I may put it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are a few things in the package that make it unattractive to the banks, but the speaker still considers it a positive step that they are thinking ahead in the negotiations.


Passage number 16.
MR. CROSS. The encouraging part is that they are talking tothe Fund and for the first time have begun to make proposals to thebanks about how to deal with it. They are not home free.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing hope and optimism about the situation, noting that the involved parties are engaged in dialogue and making progress, but also acknowledging that the situation is not completely resolved ("They are not home free").


Passage number 17.
MR. PARTEE. Sam, I'm surprised that the weakness of thedollar on the basis of the Continental Illinois situation wasn'tgreater than what we observed. I'd view that as saying that they wereprepared to shift funds among U.S. banks--that is, they didn't regardU.S. banks as a group as questionable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing surprise, but there is no direct disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 18.
MR. CROSS. We did not hear a great deal of concern expressedabout a spillover into the whole system. Now, the dollar did comedown a couple of percentage points during that period, mind you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that there was not a great deal of concern expressed about a potential spillover into the whole system when the dollar decreased a couple of percentage points. This does not indicate any contention or disagreement, but rather reports on a lack of concern.


Passage number 19.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But as you pointed out, that was to alarge degree in response to the belief that U.S. monetary policy wouldbe easier, whereas what you're talking about is a direct loss ofconfidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging a point made by someone else and agreeing with it.


Passage number 20.
MR. PARTEE. A movement back into some foreign banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. It simply mentions a potential movement back into foreign banks without any contrasting opinions or conflicting statements.


Passage number 21.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At Bretton Woods over the weekend acouple of people asked me whether there would be a spillover effect interms of foreign banks' reluctance to fund other U.S. banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that a couple of people asked a question about the potential spillover effect of foreign banks' reluctance to fund other U.S. banks.


Passage number 22.
MR. PARTEE. You said no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that someone said "no" without any indication of conflict or differing opinions.


Passage number 23.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Obviously, I said no. There is thatview floating around a bit; that question is being asked in bankingcircles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's response and mentions that there is a particular view or question being discussed in banking circles.


Passage number 24.
MR. MARTIN. But the focus of the questions is not on one ormore individual cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the focus of the questions is not on individual cases.


Passage number 25.
MR. TRUMAN. I don't know whether it's in fact happening but,of course, they can move out of U.S. banks and stay in dollars. Theycan go into Treasury securities as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that individuals or entities have the option to move their money out of US banks and instead keep it in dollars or invest in Treasury securities.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There has been some tendency for U.S. bankrates to go up in London as well as in the United States relative toother rates. It hasn't gone very far. There is a little selectivityin the bank stock market--at least about some banks--but there is talkabout it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply describes certain tendencies and talks about potential selectivity and discussions in the bank stock market.


Passage number 27.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My feeling--my hope, I guess--is thatthe prompt action by the U.S. authorities on Continental Illinoiswould tend to prevent that kind of spillover [effect]. It's probably5/21-22/84realistic to assume that there is a somewhat more alert, moreskeptical, attitude abroad and that if there were another situation,we probably would see some more of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and hope that the prompt action by U.S. authorities would prevent a spillover effect. They also acknowledge the possibility of a skeptical attitude abroad in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
MR. WALLICH. At the Basle meeting there was considerablequestioning, at least by some central bankers, as to the adequacy ofour arrangements. There was a considerable lack of understandingabout what the Federal Reserve does--providing liquidity on a securedbasis--and about what the FDIC does--providing solvency support. Andthe question really was whether these arrangements were adequate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Some central bankers are questioning the adequacy of the arrangements and showing a lack of understanding about the roles of the Federal Reserve and the FDIC.


Passage number 29.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I hope you assured them they were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing the hope that someone assured others about something.


Passage number 30.
MR. WALLICH. I surely did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "MR. WALLICH. I surely did" indicates agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 31.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they are not adequate, I don't knowwhat else we can do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing doubt about the adequacy of something.


Passage number 32.
MR. PARTEE. I don't either. It's a government guaranteedbank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There may be some questions about itnonetheless.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The use of the word "nonetheless" suggests that there are doubts or uncertainties regarding the topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 34.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is some questioning by foreignbanks--I've heard this in a couple of places--as to whether it is 100percent risk-free at [every] stage of the process because they are notfamiliar with the way the FDIC would step in and what would happen.They wonder whether there is some point in time where they would be atrisk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that there is questioning by foreign banks regarding the 100 percent risk-free nature of a certain process. This implies a disagreement or lack of agreement between these foreign banks and the concept of the process being completely risk-free.


Passage number 35.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" alone does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions someone without providing any context or information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 That is intended to be answered in thepress release by saying any arrangements--or whatever the exactwording was--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [The guarantee] was so sweeping thatthey had difficulty believing it. Also, some of them say: Well,isn't the unlimited liquidity commitment of the Federal Reservelimited to the amount of collateral that Continental Illinois can putup.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. One group finds it difficult to believe the guarantee mentioned in the press release, while another questions whether the unlimited liquidity commitment of the Federal Reserve is truly limited to the amount of collateral Continental Illinois can provide.


Passage number 37.
MR. PARTEE. It doesn't say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because MR. PARTEE's statement does not contradict or oppose any previous statement.


Passage number 38.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I know. It doesn't say so because wegot advice in the course of our discussion that that would becounterproductive. But on the other hand, there's a heck of a lot ofcollateral in Continental Illinois.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two different perspectives, but does not involve conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $40 billion, if you take it all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The statement implies that there is contention or disagreement about the amount of $40 billion, as it suggests there are different opinions or perspectives on whether or not to take the full amount.


Passage number 40.
MR. ROBERTS. It has to be good and sound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. The speaker is simply expressing a requirement for something to be of high quality.


Passage number 41.
MR. KEEHN. It's not worth quite that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Keen simply states that whatever is being discussed is not worth as much as someone might think.


Passage number 42.
MR. FORRESTAL. A broader question on the LDCs: Has therebeen any progress with respect to the interest cap situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. It is a simple question about progress made in the interest cap situation of the LDCs.


Passage number 43.
5/21-22/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. That has been greatly exaggerated inall the press reports. I don't think anybody is realistically talkingabout anything other than protecting against some further sizableincrease in interest rates. It's all talk and no action at thispoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker suggests that there is no exaggeration in the press reports and denies the existence of any realistic discussions or actions beyond protecting against an increase in interest rates.


Passage number 44.
MR. KEEHN. There was an article in the paper, maybe today,saying that based on the most recent increase in the prime the fourmajor countries are going to get together and try to form a user'sgroup, if you will. Is that a serious threat or just more talk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking about the seriousness of the threat mentioned in the article.


Passage number 45.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know anything about that, but Iknow they are very unhappy--understandably so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker does not have knowledge about a certain topic but acknowledges that the individuals in question are unhappy, which is understandably so.


Passage number 46.
MR. TRUMAN. I made one contact on that subject. Ourembassy--I'll leave you to judge the quality of the information--regards the statement put out by the Mexicans, Argentineans,Brazilians, and the Columbians saying that they plan to get together,initially on the level of finance ministers and foreign ministers andthen subsequently perhaps at the head of state level, as a relativelymoderate response under the circumstances. The text of some of thatas picked up in the newspapers suggested that there was talk aboutprotectionism and concerns like that rather than a confrontationalframework. One never can tell once it gets to the politicians--if itis raised to the level of high politics--what will transpire. Itreflects I think both the sense of frustration of these countriesabout recent events as well as a feeling--which we've been picking upsince the conference last spring when we hosted the Latin Americans upin Boston--that the countries are being picked off one by one by theindustrial countries and their banks. So they have a sense of wantingto exchange notes from time to time about what is being done to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is describing the views and concerns of the Latin American countries without expressing any opposing or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that the rise ininterest rates has depressed the whole atmosphere surrounding thesedebt negotiations, which were already difficult. Certainly inArgentina and in the others as well, though perhaps to a lesserdegree, they have a very great feeling of helplessness. The banks doas well. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The passage is expressing a general sentiment about the impact of rising interest rates on debt negotiations and the feelings of helplessness among various parties involved, such as Argentina and the banks.


Passage number 48.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine from the given information whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 49.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are questions.


Passage number 50.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, if I may, I would like to askPeter a question about this movement of interest rates. Peter, giventhe two factors that you cite for causing the rates to go up--that is,the collision course between private and public credit demands and thefading expectations of some closing of the deficit gap--do you see anyparticular reason why long rates should have gone up more than shortrates since our last meeting. My own hunch is that, based on pastperformance, it would have been the other way around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is simply posing a question to Peter and expressing his own opinion or hunch.


Passage number 51.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think some of that collision is seenas taking place in the longer area. The Treasury has continued itsprogram of issuing longer debt. So it was not only that current senseof what is pressing on the market but, with that sense of strongprivate credit demand, there was some uplifting of inflationexpectations there too that I think had an impact at the longer end.5/21-22/84I must say, though, that I share your view of surprise as to theextent to which the yield curve has steepened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is expressing agreement with the person he is addressing in terms of their shared surprise about the steepening of the yield curve.


Passage number 52.
MR. BOEHNE. But hasn't that happened throughout therecovery. Haven't long-term rates retraced maybe 70 or 75 percent ofthe decline, whereas short rates have moved substantially less thanthat. It is a little peculiar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
Explanation: The passage consists of a single speaker making a statement and asking a question, without any indication of disagreement or contention between different parties.


Passage number 53.
MR. WALLICH. Doesn't that seem to you an abnormality,contrary to the usual tendency of the rate structure to flatten outtoward the end of an expansion. Doesn't it seem, therefore, thatthere is some doubt about what is going to happen to inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Wallich, where he expresses his perspective about an abnormality in the rate structure. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 54.
MR. AXILROD. I happen to have, Governor Wallich, a roughmeasure of the yield curve 18 months into an expansion from thetrough. I'm not exactly sure but I think it's from the trough of therecession, not the trough of the yields. The spread was about 1-1/8percentage points and is now 3.2 points, so the yield curve has gotten[steeper]. Looked at on a ratio basis, which is relevant because aratio takes account of the higher level of rates, it's not so marked.It goes from 122 to 132. Now, that's not very different from whatoccurred after the 1970 recession going out 18 months. In terms ofthe absolute spreads it's much different; but in terms of the ratioit's hardly different from the preceding troughs in the '70s. It isdifferent from the experiences earlier; before the '70s the yieldcurve did flatten more noticeably after 18 months. But it was not somuch the case in the 1970 recession, except that in absolute termsthis is quite different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting data and comparing the current situation to past experiences.


Passage number 55.
MR. GRAMLEY. Peter, where do we stand on the process ofmopping up the additional reserves injected through Continental'sborrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 56.
MR. STERNLIGHT. When the borrowing first began we still hada fairly high funds rate. To have gone in then overtly to dosubstantial mopping up could have been seen as a very disruptivefactor, I think, and we just let a pile of excess reserves build up.Increasingly in the last few days we've worked down that pile ofexcess. With the amount we took out of reserves today through somematched sales we have pretty much wiped away the impact of the specialborrowing that has occurred thus far and we even made a smallallowance for some anticipated continuing borrowing. We have been alittle gingerly in anticipating how high this level of borrowing willbe in the remaining days. In a numerical sense I think we have justabout caught up with that mopping up process now. But in apsychological sense some of the ease that was created because of theearlier buildup in excess reserves is still in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining the actions taken regarding borrowing and reserves.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
MS. HORN. Have we labeled it extended credit yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. This is indicated by the use of the word "yet" at the end of the question, suggesting that there may be differing opinions or perspectives on whether or not the credit has been labeled as extended.


Passage number 58.
MR. STERNLIGHT. No. It has not been so labeled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions or opposing ideas.


Passage number 59.
MR. MARTIN. Peter, have you been able to execute theseoperations while observing the markets performing more or lessnormally. I realize that's a matter of definition right now--with the1-point changes over short periods of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for information.


Passage number 60.
5/21-22/84MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm not sure. Are you asking aboutthe whole range of operations or the particular mopping up of theexcess reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is unsure about the specifics of the question being asked, but there is no disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 61.
MR. MARTIN. The particular mopping up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement or observation made by Mr. Martin without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinion being expressed.


Passage number 62.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That part has gone very smoothly. Once thebanking system came to realize they had all this excess, they havebeen very eager to show us propositions and have us pay them somethingfor the excess reserves that they now see as unwanted. So, that hasgone quite smoothly. The market, in general, had developed somegreater volatility just because of that massive pessimistic feeling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the banking system and the market, without expressing any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 63.
I think it is calming down somewhat from that, but it's still fairly--MR. MARTIN. Looking into the immediate future then, is therean implication in that behavior that you just described. Let usassume, or let us hope, that the Continental matter works its waythrough, that there is a merger partner, and that it's resolved insome reasonable way. Would you anticipate that the 1-point changesand the volatility that we observed in the market, particularly in thelong end, will subside. Or is there a situation or an attitude thatmay resist improving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing potential future scenarios and asking for anticipations or predictions.


Passage number 64.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that would remove one importantcontributing factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 65.
MR. MARTIN. We still have the LDC problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is simply stating that the LDC problem still exists.


Passage number 66.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The budget deficit problem is there too, butI think there is hope that something will go through. And the marketis also waiting for clearer evidence of a more reasonable pace in theeconomic expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a problem (budget deficit) and expresses hope for a solution. It also states that the market is waiting for evidence of a more reasonable pace in the economic expansion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 67.
MR. ROBERTS. There are also a lot of shell-shocked investorssitting on big losses. They don't want to buy any more long bonds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there are shell-shocked investors who do not want to buy any more long bonds. This suggests a disagreement or contention between these investors and the possibility of investing in long bonds.


Passage number 68.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, it's taking increasingly high yields[to attract them]. Some have begun to come back in again, but stillin a fairly modest way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply stating a fact about the increasing yields being offered to attract investors, and mentioning that some investors have started to return, albeit in a modest manner.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much do the dealers have left of thatfinancing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about the "dealers" or their financing, so there is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 70.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I would say they do not have anything verysignificant left. It is very hard to measure their positions becauseso much is hedged against futures positions. Even though they in asense took down big chunks from the Treasury, they had already madearrangements to sell some of it. I would say their positions now areno more than a few hundred million that could be attributed directlyto the financing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is expressing his opinion and providing information about the current positions and arrangements made by an unidentified group. There is no explicit contradiction or opposing view present in the passage.


Passage number 71.
MR. PARTEE. Yet the futures market has functioned okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that the futures market has functioned okay, which suggests a positive assessment.


Passage number 72.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It has, yes. It has also had thevolatility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about something having volatility.


Passage number 73.
5/21-22/84MR. PARTEE. There must have been some realized losses takenthat haven't shown up, as yet anyhow. [Do you know of] any particularsituation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement and asking for information.


Passage number 74.
MR. STERNLIGHT. No. There was one day of extremely volatileprice movements when the price limit situation was reached and theyhad to discontinue functioning for a couple of hours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a day of volatile price movements and the temporary discontinuation of functioning.


Passage number 75.
 But even that--MR. MARTIN. That was the only time the limit was reached inthat period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage states a fact about a specific event without providing any room for disagreement or contention.


Passage number 76.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That's the only instance that I recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact or personal recollection without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 77.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The great majority of dealers havebeen losing a lot of money for quite a few months; they don't seem tobe able to hedge well enough. Most of them are in some kind of netlong position and I don't quite know why. I don't know enough aboutthe futures market to know why they can't seem to hedge better. Thisis what I've heard from half a dozen of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply stating their observation and lack of understanding regarding the dealers' inability to hedge effectively.


Passage number 78.
MR. PARTEE. I was thinking of the nondealers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their own thoughts and ideas.


Passage number 79.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm not sure that that was thereason. They argue that as underwriters they were not able to hedge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is unsure about the reason and mentions that others argue that they were not able to hedge as underwriters. There is no disagreement or conflict present in the passage.


Passage number 80.
MR. MARTIN. But many hedging programs are incomplete. Isn'tit unusual that a dealer would hedge completely. Usually hedgingmeans an 80 percent hedge or a 70 percent hedge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and question posed by Mr. Martin, seeking clarification or agreement on the topic of hedging programs.


Passage number 81.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, some of them try to get very fullyhedged. At some point they live with a certain element of uncertaintybecause they take down securities from the Treasury. They don't knowwhether their bid is going to win securities or not, so they probablyhedge some of it in expectation that they will win some securities butthey may be preparing to have some net long position in the hopes ofmoving some of it out profitably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the cautious approach taken by some individuals or entities when dealing with Treasury securities.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 82.
MR. PARTEE. My thought, Tony, has been that the dealers werelosing on spot transactions and gaining on the futures, which meansthat somebody other than the dealers was losing on the futures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is suggesting that someone other than the dealers was losing on the futures transactions. This implies disagreement or a difference of opinion about who the losers are in this context.


Passage number 83.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the overall profit situation ofthe dealers has been very bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement presents a straightforward assessment of the dealers' profit situation without indicating any contradictory opinions or differing viewpoints.


Passage number 84.
MR. ROBERTS. But the relationship they put on the short orthe future can determine whether it's profitable to them. They canhedge it but at a loss initially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the potential profitability of the short or futures position depends on the relationship they put on it. They can choose to hedge it, but this may result in an initial loss.


Passage number 85.
MR. MARTIN. Well, when the markets see these spot andfutures spreads are not necessarily holding--. You can be completelyhedged and if the spreads change, you may lose. There is no suchthing as a perfect hedge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement providing information about the concept of hedging and the potential risks associated with it.


Passage number 86.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Any other questions" simply suggests that the speaker is open to answering additional questions, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 87.
MR. GUFFEY. Where do we stand on the debt limit legislation.Is that posing great problems for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the speaker, Mr. Guffey, is simply asking about the status of the debt limit legislation and if it is causing difficulties. The passage does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 88.
5/21-22/84 -8-MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it poses great problems for theTreasury and the functioning of the government. I think they have tobegin something in the course of this week because the Congress is dueto recess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 89.
MR. GUFFEY. Are they out of money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a question.


Passage number 90.
MR. STERNLIGHT. They will be out. I think they probablyhave enough to last beyond when the Congress goes home but not untilthe Congress comes back. They have to get action by the 23rd or 24th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight is only expressing his personal opinion about the time frame for the Congress to take action.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions. We need to ratify thetransactions. I heard a motion and second. Without objection. Wewill continue at 9:15 a.m. tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a series of statements and commands related to a meeting or discussion.


Passage number 92.
[Meeting recessed]5/21-22/84May 22, 1984--Morning SessionMR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that Mr. Kichline made a statement, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 93.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the provided passage is missing, and I am unable to answer your question. Can you please provide the passage you would like me to analyze?


Passage number 94.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I'll lead off. I sense that the recoveryis maturing in my District. Several months ago there was unabashedoptimism and report after report of rapid increases in sales andorders. But what I sense in the last month or so is that the optimismis more tempered; the sales forecasts are more moderate. Some of thebig firms are thinking that there might be a recession toward the endof 1985 and they don't want to get caught again as they got caughtlast time. I don't mean to imply that people are pessimistic. I justsense some tempering in the optimism, which would suggest to me thatthe normal cyclical pattern of fast growth earlier in the recovery andslower growth later may be consistent with this kind of anecdotalevidence that I'm picking up. Also, just looking at the numbers, itseems to me that the recovery is not all that unusual, with fastgrowth in the earlier quarters and some slowing in later quarters.The inventory boost in the first quarter certainly shoved up thefigure, but I suspect that if there hadn't been so much leftovercaution from the previous recession, we might have gotten some of thatinventory buildup earlier in the recovery rather than later. So, justin a subjective sense, there is some anecdotal evidence, at least inmy part of the country, that we are seeing some slowing.The price side seems to be holding up really rather well.There are some cyclical upward pressures in some industries that onewould expect. From the reports I get, wages continue to be moderate,although a lot of business people I talk to think that the autonegotiations in the fall will be the key. If we get through that,they see moderation continuing; if that comes out badly, it will beharder for them to hold the line in their own areas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their observations and opinions about the state of the recovery and the potential for a recession without any opposing viewpoints or arguments presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 95.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I also would talk about attitudes,but attitudes mainly in financial markets. Attitudes are indicatingdifferent kinds of strains in financial markets than we talked aboutyesterday--the international situation, the Continental situation andso on--and are what I call attitudes of excesses in financial markets.They start with some of the kinds of financial contracts we see beinginvented and being written, such as leveraged buyouts and that wholelist of things. It continues in the talk about how banks are runningtheir businesses; I keep hearing more and more that banks around thecountry are shoving money out the door, if you will. We hear about itfrom real estate developers; and when you start hearing real estatedevelopers in the Fourth District talk about these things, you knowthat it's much broader based in the country. Real estate developersare telling us that they can't put any equity in a shopping centerthese days--that banks are giving 100 percent financing--and that evenif they wanted to put equity in, because that's the way they wouldlike to run their business, they can't do it because their competitionisn't doing it. And worse than just the leverage problem alone isthat the 100 percent financing is short term. They are getting 5- to7-year terms from a bank at variable interest rates and at the end ofthe development they are not going to the insurance companies and arenot getting the long-term money. So, the specter arises: If you havea lot of unoccupied office buildings that are on 5- to 7-year term5/21-22/84loans, what happens when those loans came due. We only have one suchbuilding in Cleveland because we haven't had the building boom thatother cities have had. But if this is the situation around thecountry, then this very short-term financing of long-term assets couldbuild to be a real problem.Another Fourth District story about banks but about banksaround the country that I found very interesting was in connectionwith this recent takeover bid bythe fellow who controls that, needed--I don't remember theexact number--in excess of a billion dollars to make the bid. And forreasons of confidentiality, he didn't want to have a bank form asyndicate to get the loan for him. So, he did what he was advisedcouldn't be done. He went to thirty-two banks and asked them forlines of credit for a takeover for an acquisition and he wouldn't tellthem the acquisition target, and out of the thirty-two very largebanks he approached only one refused to give him a line of creditbecause they wanted to know the name of who was being taken over.Then, on a Friday afternoon, within several hours he pulled down allthe lines and made the offer. It is, I think, an indication of howbusiness is being done these days.The thrift stories, of course, continue and we increasinglyhear concerns about the lack of matched maturities--that thriftsaren't being run in a conservative way. In the Fourth District we'rebeginning to get anecdotal evidence about some of our thrifts that arein very poor condition suggesting that things are so bad for them thatthere is nothing to keep them from trying to take a big bet and tryingto hit a home run in real estate development kinds of projects.Because if they fail to hit the home run, have they really worsenedtheir condition. I guess it has always been true that there is acertain number of portfolio managers who have a very short-term viewon investment and manage their portfolios by saying: Let's pick thenext takeover prospect. But it seems that one hears about thesepeople prospering now, and I suppose that would be another thing Iwould add to my list of concerns. Just to complete an incompletelist, one more subject would be the auto negotiations. We'rebeginning to hear a minority view, expressed by people in thetransportation equipment industry in the Fourth District who arereally in a position to have very good information, that GM will notbe willing to take a strike. They are talking about and hope thatthey will be able to get a settlement that will tie wage increases toprofitability. But the talk that they are hearing is that GM may beunwilling to take a strike.I guess one could build a very pessimistic case from thislist of attitude excesses, if you will, and we could say that thefinancial contracts of today might be the international debt problemof several years from now. That may be overstated, but I've just beengetting so much anecdotal evidence across the board that I do believewe are beginning to see in attitudes a situation that is notinconsistent with rising inflationary expectations. Those are mycomments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Horn discusses various attitudes and behaviors in financial markets that she sees as indicating excesses. However, the passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments that would constitute contention.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Welcome to the world of American banking.Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot generate response


Passage number 97.
-10-5/21-22/84MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to pick up on thecomments that have been made already by my two colleagues with regardto the labor situation. We had the benefit on May 11 of the economicconsultants being in our midst and of the work in that area by ArnieWeber of Colorado, Bob Gordon, and others, coupled with work that hasbeen forthcoming from Kendrick and Dennison and others in theproductivity field. That work points toward a rather different labor/management situation, or at least some degrees of difference. We areall focusing on the upcoming auto settlements. position onthat, as perhaps everybody in the room knows, is that the autosettlement will not be a leading indicator this time--that there is aspecial situation there that won't affect steel that much and won'taffect construction and won't affect the other major settlementscoming along. position stems in part, I think, from a rathermore optimistic look at the cost push from unit labor costs. He is abit more optimistic than our colleagues here at the Board, forexample. He cites the restructuring of bargaining--a company-by-company approach--and even the changes in the preparatory stages forthese settlements. So, his conclusion was that it is unlikely thatthe average settlements will exceed the 5 percent range in the nextthree years. There again he's talking about the inertia insettlements and the fact that these arrangements have a way of holdingfor quite some time as a precedent. On the productivity side, I wouldbe the first to concede that none of the people that I've cited,including my [unintelligible] has given any reason to be wildlyoptimistic. On the other hand, there are scattered indications thatproductivity may come back closer to the trend line of the '50s and'60s [than] the negative or flat trend of the '70s or the staffprojection, if I remember it correctly, of something like 1 to 1-1/4percent. You can find quite a bit of evidence that productivity isgoing to more in the area of 1-1/2 to 2 percent. If you recall thework that was presented at a previous FOMC meeting on the subject ofinflation, productivity, and labor costs, and the relationship in aleading sense between the changes in unit labor costs and inflation,if indeed the slightly more optimistic numbers are true and ifand his people are somewhat correct, then you have a different cost/push coming from labor this time and one that is more conducive todisinflation or less inflation.There is one other area I would like to mention since I don'tdare talk about the thrift institutions and how much they're losingtoday because all of you are quite sick of my attempt to measure thatindustry. Besides, I think everybody in the room is aware that thethree big savings banks in New York City are very much under water,that the thrift industry is now operating in the red, and that theyare beginning to run out of the funny accounting practices that theyhave been participating in. They are quite ingenious; they may inventwhole new areas in which they can distort their reporting of loss.But turning to agriculture, I simply want to mention--and Ido this with great humility considering that those of you who comefrom the regional Banks in agricultural areas undoubtedly are awarefrom your own Districts of the continued plight in agriculture--theproportion of farmers operating in the red. There was a bank surveyshowing something like 40 percent of the ag borrowers are operating atzero or in the red. The foreclosure or impending foreclosure numbersout of that ABA survey were 2-1/2 percent of the agriculturalborrowers; and 8 or 9 percent were in the so-called distressed-11-5/21-22/84category as far as their credit outlook is concerned. So, I wouldjoin my Cleveland colleague--I refuse to use these darn Districtnumbers--in talking about the vulnerabilities in the bond market, theLDCs, the thrifts, and agriculture. It's a different recovery in thatsense, in my not so humble opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting different perspectives and viewpoints on the labor situation, productivity, and the state of the thrift industry and agriculture.


Passage number 98.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You follow the thrifts closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply indicates that the subject follows the thrifts closely, without mentioning any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 99.
MR. MARTIN. Can't get away from them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Martin, cannot get away from something or someone. There is no indication of conflicting perspectives or disagreement.


Passage number 100.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you expect the Congress nextyear, if the thrifts are in the same difficulty, to extend the capitalfusion program or whatever that's called.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking a question about whether Congress would extend a program if certain conditions were met.


Passage number 101.
MR. MARTIN. Yes. I think it will be extended for both thesavings banks, which need it more, and the other thrift institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin expresses the opinion that the extension will benefit both the savings banks and other thrift institutions, stating that the savings banks need it more. However, this does not imply any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 102.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't know whether those NewYork savings banks can continue their present situation as late asthat. I would assume they'd need a resolution of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement of uncertainty about the future of New York savings banks and suggests the need for a resolution.


Passage number 103.
MR. PARTEE. For the most sensitive ones, the ones that aremost on the line, I think that is probably right. But after thatthere will be another batch behind them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply expresses agreement with a previous statement and offers an additional perspective.


Passage number 104.
MR. MARTIN. Well, the thrift holding company types, such asFinancial Corporation of America, are tremendously leveraged and arebetting on lower--much lower--interest rates. It's simply a rottenbarrel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a single perspective or opinion about thrift holding company types and their leverage. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided is not complete, so it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I share Mr. Boehne's qualitativeview that the economy is probably moving into a more mature phasewhere we will see some slowing. But if you search the evidence, it'spretty hard to find anything in the statistics other than an apparentplateauing of housing that really suggests that that's taking place.So it looks to me as if the Greenbook is probably about right in itsforecast for real economic growth in the last three quarters of 1984.I fear, however, that they may be underestimating inflation for thelast half of '84 and for '85. Pres just cited some interestingdevelopments in productivity that I think will ameliorate that to someextent, and I would add to that the increasing foreign competition anddomestic competition. I have now reached the point that I don't everpay list price on anything. I think almost everybody has that samementality and that's bound to have an effect that had not been therebefore. Nevertheless, with the tremendous--I would say tremendous,although one could argue--amount of monetary stimulus put out in late'82 and '83 and the pickup now taking place in velocity, it seems tome that we're probably going to have more inflation than in theGreenbook forecast. I think the market behavior, which Karen hasreinforced with some interesting anecdotes, suggests that theexpectations are just that. As I read the market, we have a littleway to go before we get rid of those inflationary expectations.I have one other point. It's the main one. I think it isimportant that we monitor current economic developments verycarefully. But at the same time, I think it is important that we-12-5/21-22/84avoid giving too much weight to the short-term economic data that wesee in trying to set short-term monetary policy. Undue emphasis, forexample, upon the strong first quarter of this year could lead to ouraborting the recovery if we were to take action related to that. Butperhaps more realistically, the economy is going to slow downsomewhere before very much longer, I think. And when the data beginto show this weakening, if there is a perception on the part of thepublic that we are trying to fine-tune the economy to any greatextent, that is going to intensify the pressure that we have to easesignificantly at a time when such a degree of easing may well not becompatible with our longer-term objective of working down the rate ofinflation and getting back to a completely healthy economy. So, mybottom line is that I would not let the latest bit of economicinformation influence what our policy decision should be today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Black, does not express any disagreement or contention in this passage. He shares Mr. Boehne's view on the economy moving into a more mature phase, but also acknowledges the lack of evidence suggesting a slowing down. He presents his own concerns about underestimating inflation and discusses factors that could mitigate it. He also mentions the need to monitor economic developments carefully and not give too much weight to short-term data in setting monetary policy. Overall, he provides his analysis and perspective without expressing any disagreement with others.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: You have not provided a passage for analysis. Please include the passage so I can determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 108.
MR. ROBERTS. Conditions in the Eighth District are reallyfavorable. I tried to find some weak spots recently and, with theexception of agriculture which I will comment on, there don't seem tobe any. There is a general optimism and the underlying momentum ofbusiness activity seems to be quite decidedly upward. We took asurvey recently of 257 businesses in the District and 73 percentanticipate that their volume of activity is going to be expanding inthe next three months. Department stores sales, including those ofsome national companies, are very strong; they are running about 13percent ahead. And most of that is real; they don't see a significantamount of price inflation in that. Automobile sales are very strong.We're seeing year-over-year increases as high as 40 percent and in oneof my branch cites they are breaking new records. Industrial activityis robust. Anecdotally, we're hearing that the mid-South furnitureindustry in northern Mississippi is headed for its strongest year in adecade after a long period of tough times. Housing and constructionremain strong. People mention their concern about the recent rise ininterest rates but [the effect] hasn't shown itself yet.In terms of prices, there is surprising stability. I had agroup of chief financial officers of major companies in recently.They all seem to be concerned about the possibility of price increasesbut they say in terms of what they buy and in terms of what they getthat the price front is very quiet and nothing is really bothersome atthe moment. So, there is no acceleration of prices. Demand for loansin the banks in the District is vigorous now after a slow start. Ithink there are two problem areas, potentially. One is the saving andloan business. Our largest savings and loans are very thin on capitalposition and are not making any money; and with rising interest ratesthose that are narrowly making money are going to start losing money.In agriculture we have another troublesome situation, with raindelaying planting. For example, 21 percent of the corn is planted nowversus the normal 54 percent, and that affects production. I was innorthern Mississippi recently and I would say that the agriculturalsituation down there could best be assessed as grim. The bankers tellme that farmers who inherited their land, who didn't have debt on theland and who have been good managers, are having a very, verydifficult time and can't handle their credits, and they are veryconcerned. I had occasion to talk to four major national retailersrecently and asked them what their sense of the consumer's attitudewas. Uniformly they said that business is still okay but that the-13-5/21-22/84froth is off. The March/April experience has shaken out and in thelatest two ten-day intervals they have had good but slowing business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 109.
MR. KEEHN. My comments would very largely parallel EdBoehne's. There is a growing feeling from the people I talked withthat we are in fact reaching a plateau and that from this pointfurther growth will be tougher and tougher to achieve. Nonetheless, Ithink virtually all the sectors that I am familiar with are doingbetter this year than was the case, say, last year. But a lot of themhave not yet had an opportunity to recover fully and those are thepeople who are very worried that the economy may be in an area whereperhaps the sustainability of the recovery is getting increasinglyfragile. On the price side, there are some price changes going onthat may not be reflected in the figures but that could be rathersignificant for those industries that are operating at pretty highlevels. I will cite two examples of this: Liner board for boxes wasselling at $300 per ton in 1979, went down to $240 last year, and isnow back to $320; oil well casing was $1400 per ton two years ago,$800 last year, and is now back to $1200 to $1300. And during thiswhole period the list prices were unchanged. It's a way of sayingthat price increases--in some cases significant increases--are beingaccomplished but without any changes in the list prices, so theseincreases may not be reflected in our standard indicators.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observations and opinions about the current state of the economy.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the list price of something thatgoes up and down that much but has been unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is stating a fact that the list price of something has not changed despite fluctuations in value.


Passage number 111.
MR. KEEHN. I don't know the list price of those particularproducts but it hasn't changed during this whole period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating that they do not know the list price of the products mentioned and that it has remained unchanged. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 112.
MR. PARTEE. They give a special discount. I guess that'swhat happens. They have a list price and say: If you buy, we'll giveyou a discount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that the company offers a special discount to customers who make a purchase.


Passage number 113.
MR. KEEHN. They have a list price. But in 1982 no one wasselling at list and in 1983 people were selling a little under list.In 1984 they are now selling at [unintelligible] list. Despite this,nobody that I talked to suggests that we have any risks of runawayinflation. Everybody expects that prices will be higher as the yearunfolds, but not by a very significant amount. On the wage side, Icontinue to be impressed by how well people are able to renegotiatetheir contracts. The industries that are soft are renegotiatingcontracts of 1 to 3 or 4 percent on a three-year basis. Theindustries that are a bit tighter are in the area of 3 to 5 percentannually, and again those are on a three-year basis. So, the wageside continues to be favorable and, with productivity increases, allof this I think looks pretty good.On the agricultural side, I don't know what I can add to thecomments I made at the last meeting. Iowa continues to go through avery rugged adjustment phase. Land values there are continuing to godown, interest rates are going up, and for those farmers who areindebted it is a very tough environment. Having said that, there hasbeen some legislation that may ease these problems to some extent.But, net, I would agree with the staff forecast in the Greenbook. Ithink the [prospect for] sustainability this year continues to bepretty good but I have this feeling that we have reached or are-14-5/21-22/84reaching a plateau from which it will be tougher to achieve gains fromthis point forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 115.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think that the staff forecastis right on target. We find nothing in the Greenbook that we wouldquarrel with. There is a general confirmation of that outlook in theforecast for the Sixth District. Everyone we talked to also agreesthat we are bound to see a slowing in the economy during the rest ofthis year, although the hard evidence really isn't there in ourDistrict except perhaps in housing-related industries where there aresome definite plans to cut back in investment in inventories and plantand equipment. Labor markets, on the other hand, continue tostrengthen, largely because of continuing expansion in the industrialsector. So, while conditions still are looking very, very good andpeople continue to be optimistic and bullish, I think there is agrowing recognition that things are going to slow down. I supposethat is based more on a sense of inevitability rather than on any firmevidence. The trouble spots in our District are pretty much the sameas those in the other parts of the country: The thrifts are in badshape and the agricultural situation I can only describe as disastrousin most parts of the District.Just as a sideline, I had the great fortune to meet withabout ten farmers who had just undergone foreclosure of theirproperties and I wasn't sure whether I was going to be lynched when Iwalked into the room or not. Interestingly, their complaint was notabout interest rates or about Federal Reserve policy. They were muchmore concerned about the treatment they were getting from theproduction credit agents. I understand there is a very definite moveon the part of the bank cooperatives and [others], because of fundingproblems, to be much more selective in the granting of financing,particularly refinancing. But that was the main part of theircomplaint: that they simply aren't getting the financing and the helpthey had gotten in the past.People we talked to, particularly our directors, are veryvery concerned about inflation. This is more of a gut feeling, Isuppose, that inflation is going to pop up again probably by the endof the year; they don't have any hard evidence except in some isolatedindustries where they are seeing some price increases. On the wageside, the automobile people I talked to--and I talked to them asrecently as last week--are indicating that they think the autosettlement could well be a leading indicator and they are concernedabout what might happen during those negotiations.Just one final point: I was a little surprised that themarketplace in Atlanta and elsewhere didn't seem to be very concernedabout the Continental situation. There was very little discussionabout that in the marketplace. In summary, Mr. Chairman, in terms ofpolicy decisions, I think the staff is right that we're going to seesome moderation in the economy and that inflation seems to be prettywell under control. All the indicators that we look at--commodityprices and the price of gold and the exchange value of the dollar andso on--seem to confirm that inflation is not at the moment a verylarge problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, agrees with the staff forecast and finds nothing to quarrel with in the Greenbook. He also mentions that everyone he talked to agrees that there will be a slowing in the economy and expresses concern about inflation. However, he does not present any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 116.
-15-5/21-22/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If those banks down in Atlanta aren'tworried about Continental, I assume they are fully funded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 117.
MR. FORRESTAL. Oh, I didn't say they weren't worried aboutit. I'm sure they are worried. I think they are more worried abouttheir own fate when regional banking comes along. But there was justvery little discussion. I had expected people to call and ask aboutit and there wasn't any of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the lack of discussion or concern from others about a certain topic.


Passage number 118.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 119.
MR. WALLICH. First, I would like to support what Bob Blacksaid about not worrying too much about small temporary changes. As Ilook at our directive and policy record, we've really been through amini-cycle since the last FOMC meeting. At that time we had not seenfully the weakening of March. It was March 27th or thereabouts whenwe met. Had we known the March data we might have said: "Aha, thingsare slowing down." However, in April they picked up again. Someeting now in May we've had the weak March and the strong April andwe can just take off from there. The same applies to the aggregates.Had we known the weakness of the aggregates for April, we might haveworried about that but now we see that for May there probably is anexpansion ahead. So, again, the interim fluctuations don't mean verymuch. As I listen to the discussion around the table of the taperingoff, I ask myself: What is it that businessmen really pay attentionto when they evaluate conditions. Is it the rate of expansion oftheir sales and activity or is it the level at which they proceed.Now, the rate of expansion may be tapering off somewhat but the levelthat they have reached must be taxing their capacity or be giving thema sense of very high activity at least generally. I think thisslowing that seems to be taking over ought to be regarded as a successof our policy--a success in avoiding overheating, to the extent thatwe've done that. It certainly is not a reason to resume some kind ofstimulative policy.In thinking about what we should do now, we are financiallyvery much constrained. If we wanted to restrain more, we have thesituation in developing countries. We have the situation ofContinental. I find these things very hard to weigh. The wise adviceis to say that financial fragility should be handled by structuraldevices. And perhaps that is not quite as foolish as it soundsbecause this is the time to fix the roof--it's not raining. That'sthe time when one should fix the roof and not wait until it rainsagain. So, that would mean strengthening the capital of banks, doingsomething about LDC loans along the lines of our conference forfinding ways of limiting the effect of interest rate increases,[imposing] penalties for poor banking. That again is more possible inthe domestic area than in the international area where we're dependenton the same banks that made mistakes to continue making loans. So,this disciplinary supervisory action is somewhat stymied. I thinkthis is the principal choice we have to make right now: In terms ofeconomic activity, it seems to me that further restraint is stilldesirable; in terms of the fragility of the environment, there areobvious fears and inhibitions. How to weigh this, I find verydifficult. But I continue to lean in the direction, if I have achoice, of a little more restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, expresses disagreement with the idea of resuming stimulative policy and instead advocates for further restraint. He also mentions the difficulty of weighing the concerns of economic activity and the fragility of the environment.


Passage number 120.
-16-5/21-22/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I agree that it's not raining;there may be a heavy mist, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the possibility of a heavy mist but agrees that it is not raining.


Passage number 121.
MR. PARTEE. Also, if you have to rebuild the whole roof youworry about how long it's going to be before it rains again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Partee is expressing concern or consideration about the timing of rain after rebuilding a roof.


Passage number 122.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide an answer without the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'm less certain now about where the economy isgoing in the near future than I have been at any time since very earlyin 1983. These recent numbers are to me very, very puzzling. If wereally had an almost 9 percent increase in real GNP in the firstquarter, the fifth quarter of recovery, there ought to be a sense ofeuphoria around the nation. Boy, we sure don't hear that here thismorning. I can't figure out why the increase in nonfarm inventoriesin real terms was so very, very large in the first quarter. Clearly,it wasn't undesired. It was not a case of an unexpected slowdown infinal sales, yet I have a hard time arguing that businesses are sodesperately concerned with shortages or so desperately worried aboutprice increases that they are scrambling to get inventories. I justcan't understand it. This number on new orders this morning is veryweak. It's a volatile series, as Mr. Kichline said, but there arenegatives all down the line. It is just very, very puzzling. Asecond uncertainty has been added by recent developments in financialmarkets. I don't have any doubt in my mind that these developments onbalance are a significant negative, but I don't know how much. Wehave had a big increase in interest rates since the last meeting--bigger than I think any of the more hawkish members of this Committeewould have wanted at that time. We also have had a drop in stockprices and we don't know precisely what effects those changes aregoing to have. It may well be that confidence, at least among banksif not nonbanking institutions, has been affected a bit by what hashappened with Continental. I think a slowdown is ahead and if I wereforced to write down numbers, I probably would write something downvery close to what the staff has. If it works out that way, I don'tthink we should be concerned. We need that kind of slowdown. But,frankly, it could be a little more or a little less, it seems to me.I would like to make a couple of comments on the price side.One of the things that has happened in the past several months that tome is very comforting is that the increase in the civilian laborforce, as a consequence of increases in the participation rate, isfinally developing along the lines the staff had forecast earlier. Itlooks much less likely now that we're going to get down below thenatural rate of unemployment in the very near future, as I was worriedabout earlier. Still in all, I do expect to see some larger priceincreases relative to wages because in the kind of markets that thestaff is forecasting, with the increase in the capacity utilizationrate, I think businesses are going to take the opportunity to try towiden profit margins. I would just like to say in closing thatdevelopments in credit markets are to me still very, very worrisome.We had an enormous increase in the debt of the nonfinancial sector inthe first quarter. The forecast now for the second quarter is evenworse. And when I listen to comments around the table, particularlyby Karen, about the lack of discipline, I have to conclude that upuntil very recently at least we have not had much financial restraint.Whether we'll see that as a consequence of developments in the pastfew weeks I think is still problematic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention and disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley expresses uncertainty and puzzlement about the recent economic numbers and their implications. He also acknowledges that there are differing views among the members of the Committee. Additionally, he mentions concerns about the financial markets and the lack of financial restraint.


Passage number 124.
-17-5/21-22/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Looking at prices, one of the irritatingthings is that we changed to this new consumer price index about 18months ago--the beginning of 1983, I guess. The old measure has beenrunning about 1 percent less at an annual rate than the one we nowuse. If we hadn't changed that index we'd be looking here and saying:My goodness, consumer prices were only up 3-1/2 percent recently.And, of course, that is what social security and wages are indexed to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply discussing the change in consumer price index and the resulting impact on the perception of consumer prices.


Passage number 125.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is that mostly the rentalequivalency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only presents a statement without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has to be. That's the only thing theychanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "That's the only thing they changed" suggests that there was a disagreement or discussion about what to change and what not to change.


Passage number 127.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. The CPIW went up 0.2 percent in Apriland, as I mentioned, the all urban went up 0.5 percent. Virtually allof that difference is indeed attributable to the different treatmentof housing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents information about the CPIW going up in April and attributes the difference in increase to the different treatment of housing.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's about a 1 percentage point differenceas I remember so far this year, or maybe over the past 12 months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about a 1 percentage point difference, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 129.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is no. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only states that "Mr. Kichline" responded affirmatively without providing any context or information to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 130.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the right context, that's worthmaking public because I haven't seen that anywhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion that something is valuable and should be shared because they have not come across it elsewhere.


Passage number 131.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's right there in the second paragraphof the release but nobody ever looks at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opinion or disagreement. It simply states that information is present in a specific location but is often overlooked by people.


Passage number 132.
MR. KICHLINE. Actually, in the last 3 months the compoundedannual rate on the old basis is 1.3 percent and on the new basis it's4.3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides a statement of fact without any contention or disagreement. It presents the compounded annual rate for the last 3 months on both the old and new basis.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] we publish those figures--they say a 1.3 percent rate of price increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 134.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On this question of prices, what Ifind strange is that people are expecting somewhat higher inflationlevels--you hear a lot of worries about it and explanations about whatis happening and why we don't see much investor demand--but at thesame time those same people would admit that they don't expectinflation to hit higher than half of what it was in the previous tworecoveries. I'm talking about the great majority of them; there are afew [exceptions]. We hit rates of 12 to 14 percent in the twoprevious recoveries and you don't hear people in the financial marketsor industrialists I speak with expecting it to go to more than roughlyhalf of that. But that seems to get lost. It's a perspective that Ithink is a terribly important development. It holds out some promisethat during the next recession it will dip and in the next recoverywe'll be able to hold inflation at lower levels than this. So, Idon't know why there is so much fear of inflation. I have the sensethat it is almost a rationalization of the reluctance on the part ofinvestors to buy. They are more agnostic. They don't have any senseof confidence but [say] that their reluctance to buy is sosignificantly motivated by fear of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and questioning why there is so much fear of inflation. There is no opposing viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 135.
-18-5/21-22/84MR. ROBERTS. Don't you think, Tony, it's that pervasive fearof the deficit, right or wrong, that makes people think that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement or question about people's perception of the deficit.


Passage number 136.
MR. RICE. Don't they relate the deficit to future inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 137.
MR. ROBERTS. Yes, that's my point. I don't necessarilyagree with that, but that's what everyone says to me--that the bigdeficits mean big inflation ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that some people believe that big deficits mean big inflation ahead, without expressing a personal opinion.


Passage number 138.
MR. RICE. It's hard to imagine what could be influencinglong-term investment now if it's not inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement made by Mr. Rice, expressing his opinion or belief about what could be influencing long-term investment. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
 Maybe they just--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Institutions don't hold securitiesthe way they used to; even longer-term investors don't think in thesame terms that they used to. Therefore, they just don't want to sitwith big paper losses because it looks very bad and it reflects onthem and hurts their position in these various institutions where theywork. So, even if they are fairly confident that inflation is notgoing to go up to anywhere near the previous levels, they don't wantto be seen sitting with substantial paper losses in their portfolio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author suggests that institutions and longer-term investors no longer hold securities in the same way they used to, and they don't want to have significant paper losses in their portfolios. However, they may still be fairly confident that inflation will not rise to previous levels. This suggests a contradiction between their actions and their beliefs.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to analyze whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 141.
MR. CORRIGAN. I have just a couple of comments, Mr.Chairman. I share the view--it's just a hunch--that the edge may becoming off the speed of the recovery at this point. I'm compelled tothat conclusion even though I'm not sure that it can be backed up bystatistics as yet. On the farm sector that has been mentioned,obviously, in a substantive way the situation is a mess. The onlypoint I would add is that I think it is at or near the point where thepolitical implications of it, broadly defined, could get very testy.For example, I hear, as I'm sure others do, stories of people saying:Well, if you're going to cap foreign loans, you better cap farm loans.Certainly, in my District we have had a couple of situations involvingthe closing of small banks because of bum agricultural loans in thecontext in which the treatment of depositors is different than in thecase of Continental. And I think that is just another manifestationof how this problem could really start to close in on us. I continueto get very frequent reports of sharply different--or what isperceived to be sharply different--treatment of farm credits byvarious regulators, which reinforces the view that the process is insome sense discriminatory toward that particular class of credits orthat particular class of banking organizations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage expresses disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, shares his view that the edge may be coming off the speed of the recovery, but he admits that he is not able to back it up with statistics yet. He also mentions that the situation in the farm sector is a mess and raises concerns about the political implications of it. He mentions stories of people saying that if foreign loans are capped, farm loans should be capped as well. He also highlights the different treatment of farm credits by various regulators, suggesting discrimination. Overall, Mr. Corrigan's statements indicate disagreement and contention regarding the recovery, the agricultural sector, and the treatment of farm credits.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What reports are you getting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking for information. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 143.
MR. CORRIGAN. I hear this directly. The feeling is thatright now the FDIC examiners in particular are really playing hardballon these [agricultural] credits, and in a way that comes back to youas being unreasonable. I'm not sure whether it's true or not, butcertainly that attitude is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is mention of a feeling among some individuals that FDIC examiners are playing hardball on agricultural credits, there is no direct contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that he is unsure whether this feeling is true or not.


Passage number 144.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But is it clearly designated by agency.Does anybody else sense that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is asking for clarification and seeking agreement or confirmation from others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 145.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes. The FDIC is the SOB on the block right nowin my District as far as a regulator--for these kinds of reasons andfor what the banks regard as nitty gritty kinds of stuff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker refers to the FDIC as the "SOB" (which stands for "son of a bitch" and is a derogatory term), indicating a negative view of the FDIC's role as a regulator. Additionally, the phrase "for what the banks regard as nitty gritty kinds of stuff" suggests a disagreement between the banks and the FDIC regarding regulatory details or requirements.


Passage number 146.
-19-5/21-22/84MR. BLACK. It always has been in our District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the District without any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 147.
MR. GUFFEY. In the Kansas City District I think it isprobably more the Comptroller, and that's perceived to be a fallout ofthe Penn Square situation, which the Comptroller's people are soskittish about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the belief that in the Kansas City District, the Comptroller is perceived to be more involved due to the fallout of the Penn Square situation.


Passage number 148.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On agricultural loans in particular.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or mention any contention or disagreement related to agricultural loans.


Passage number 149.
MR. GUFFEY. On agricultural loans as well as energy loans.But the perception, as I hear it, is that the Comptroller's staff isvery, very tough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that Mr. Guffey perceives the Comptroller's staff as very tough on agricultural and energy loans.


Passage number 150.
MR. PARTEE. Nobody is hearing that it's the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Partee is making a statement about nobody acknowledging or recognizing the role of the Federal Reserve. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 151.
MR. CORRIGAN. When they talk to somebody else, they probablysay the same about the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply speculating about what other people might say about the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 152.
MR. BLACK. Remember, we are reporting on our own Districts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 153.
MR. BOEHNE. We just don't have that many state member banksout there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply states a fact and there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're going to have to take somefurther initiative in this area. I'm sure the concern is real, and Idon't know what we can do other than forbearance. But I think we'regoing to have to make some more specific arrangements to make surethat we are forbearing appropriately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the concern and expresses the need for taking further initiative, but does not voice any disagreement with the idea of forbearance.


Passage number 155.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is the rate of foreclosure on farmland still the same as it was a few months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking a question about the current rate of foreclosure on farmland, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 156.
MR. GUFFEY. It's much higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker simply states that "It's much higher," without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 157.
MR. CORRIGAN. It really has picked up. Mr. Forrestal madethe point that the PCAs--the Production Credit Associations orwhatever they are called--for whatever reasons clearly have aliquidity problem in their own right. I don't fully understand it,Bob, and maybe you do. And because of the rate of foreclosuresgrowing out of that, one hears--and I've never heard this before--concerns that the PCAs and the banks will be forced to dump land onthe marketplace to such an extent that the price of land could reallybe driven down sharply. It's awfully hard, particularly with farmersand agricultural bankers, to read through all the static they throwout. But my sense of it is, Tony, that once you cut through all thestatic it's quite real in terms of the degree of concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own lack of understanding and uncertainty about the situation, but there is no opposing viewpoint being presented.


Passage number 158.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, from a regulatory policy standpoint, whatI'm hearing is that, as Jerry said, they have land on which they wouldtake a big hit if they were to put it on the market. They are sayingthat the sensible thing is to live with that for a while, and they areasking for forbearance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply presents the perspective of Mr. Roberts, who is explaining the reasoning behind a request for forbearance.


Passage number 159.
 Good bankers--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that would cure the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses doubt that good bankers would solve the problem at hand.


Passage number 160.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, the wheat picture looks a heckof a lot better. Contrary to expectations up until last week, it isnow viewed that the Soviet Union is going to have a big crop failure-20-5/21-22/84again due to the dry weather. Wheat prices have moved up 3 percent inthe last few days and they are going to go higher as that getsconfirmed more and more. I don't know to what extent improvement ofwheat [prospects] will make a significant change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the wheat picture looks better and that there is an expectation of a crop failure due to dry weather in the Soviet Union. The passage also mentions the increase in wheat prices as a result of this expectation. There is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 161.
MR. CORRIGAN. Wheat prices have a long, long way to gobefore it could make any real difference in terms of profitability.It certainly will help cash flow. But the price has a long way to gobefore even middle-of-the-road operators reach the point where theycan grow wheat profitability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating a fact about the current wheat prices and how they may affect profitability. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
MR. PARTEE. We can inquire, of course, about PCAs. But Imust say I've been hearing for years that the typical situation, say,out in Roger's area or in the middle West was that the banks kept thegood loans and the PCA made the bad loans. If the banks are nowcomplaining about their portfolios being poor, can you imagine whatthe PCA portfolios must be. They must be rotten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's belief based on information they have received over the years. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 163.
MR. ROBERTS. We've had some PCA failures--big ones--up inthe Northwest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about previous PCA failures without expressing any opposing viewpoint or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 164.
MR. FORRESTAL. That is one of the reasons why the PCAs aretaking the harder line. A lot of these agents in the past have beenvery close to the farmers and were really pushing the money out tothem. And now that is being changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the change in approach by PCAs (possibly agricultural agents) towards farmers, suggesting that they used to have a close relationship and provide financial support, but now they are taking a harder line.


Passage number 165.
MR. MARTIN. Well, let me clarify my figures of 8.7 percentin distress and 2.5 percent in imminent foreclosure. That's an ABAsurvey published in January of '84, so it's ex post and is prior tosome of the increases in rates. The lag effects of the most recentinterest rate increases are not in those data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing additional information and clarification of the figures mentioned earlier.


Passage number 166.
MR. CORRIGAN. I want to make two other quick comments. Onthe wage side, I don't disagree with anything that has been said. ButI would note that from an employer point of view in the Twin Cities inthe first quarter of this year we have seen a very perceptible biddingup of salaries in the technical area for the first time in I guessthree years. I don't know what to make of that at this point, but itcertainly is there as a new development, at least in that veryparticular marketplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with everything that has been said and only adds additional information regarding their own observations.


Passage number 167.
MR. MARTIN. I think that's going on, but also what is goingon are changes in work rules and the ability to assign workers byshifts and the ability to redefine the job so that the job is notstrictly defined by the unions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion about the changes happening in work rules and job definitions.


Passage number 168.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, I'm not talking about union stuff yet,Pres. I'm talking about white-collar technical people--computerpeople and so forth. The only other point I want to make goes back toKaren Horn's observation about financial practices because I thinkanecdotally she put her finger right on what is at least a very, verypressing problem quite apart from stability and quite apart from theContinental situation. Implicit in what Karen was talking about isthat these are practices that probably can only be validated byinflation. And in some ways that's the most troubling aspect of allabout those practices. I would simply observe that quite apart fromany particular situation, including Continental, what we are seeing interms of practices and instruments--interest rate swaps and other-21-5/21-22/84things--is a situation in which the kinds of exposure and the kinds ofcontingent liabilities that are sitting out there in size may not betotally understood even by those who are playing in the markets. Andworse than that, they may not even be fully understood by us.Needless to say, this is not a point in time when we can afford to beblindsided. I don't know what we do about it. But I certainly thinkthat we have to sharpen our focus on these developments and make surethat we at least understand what is going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Corrigan expressing his concern about financial practices and the potential lack of understanding of the risks involved in those practices. There is no mention of opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 169.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the given passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 170.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Over the last coupleof weeks I've had an opportunity to meet with individuals involved inthe energy sector--those in discovery and development as well assuppliers for that industry. The story, simply told, is that there issome modest activity in drilling beginning to come back. Just to citesome numbers: At the height two years ago, late '81 to '82, therewere around 46,000 rotor rigs working in the United States. Thatdropped to 18,000 and is back up to about 22,000. The important partof it is that these were very, very large statistics in that industry.It is clear that the price of putting a well down and bringingpetroleum products for sale is now low enough that the numbers arebeginning to work and it's beginning to be attractive again to go outinto the field to discover and bring in energy products. But thesuppliers of that industry are still flat on their back. Those whohave survived are barely surviving. They are concerned, of course,about higher interest rates because they have a very high carry ofinventory to supply the industry.I also met with our Thrift Advisory Council. They have aconcern about the increase in interest rates that they have seen.Most of them readily admit that they are on the margin of beingprofitable or nonprofitable, that the increase in interest rates quitelikely will put them back in a nonprofitable position, and that theycannot survive for a very long period of time without help, merger, orsomething else unless interest rates come down a bit.Lastly, in the agricultural area, I have a couple of numbersthat I'd like to cite because Pres has thrown a couple out. As of theend of April, for example, 4.2 percent of all farmers and ranchershave gone out of business in the last six months, and that's 2-1/2times what would be considered the normal rate. That number is thosewho have gone out of business as a result of financial stress; thetotal who have gone out of business as a result of financial stressplus death and other normal things is about 6 percent of all ranchersand farmers. This is as a result of the developments, essentially,within the first quarter of 1984. Another 5.4 percent of all ranchersand farmers have experienced partial liquidation because of financialstress, which has come about among other reasons because the landvalues dropped in the first quarter of 1984. The best information wehave is that land values have dropped an additional 6 percent. Theyare now on average about 22 percent below the peak of 1981. And that,of course, is the collateral by which much of the lending took placein the agricultural sector back in better times. The important point,it seems to me, is that the agricultural banks that we survey and workwith are liquid. They just can't find creditworthy borrowers to takedown that money. Although they have money, they are not prepared toextend more money to the agricultural sector. It seems clear to me in-22-5/21-22/84talking with people in that industry that lower interest rates are nota solution to the agricultural problem. That is, without an increasein commodity prices we're going to see the situation continue todeteriorate. The fact of the matter is that the average rate to theagricultural sector now is about 14 percent. That doesn't changegreatly when rates go up or down in the financial markets. So, wecould drop that rate 3 or 4 percentage points and on the margin itwould help certain farmers and ranchers. But by and large it has tobe an increase in commodity prices in the period ahead that willsalvage this situation; interest rates are not the key to it.Turning to a couple of other industries: In the aircraftindustry, we have a number of very large participants in the TenthDistrict and they have had an uptick in their business. As a matterof fact, Boeing and Buick both have announced plans to expand theirfacilities, largely in Wichita, Kansas. The auto industry, whichemploys a large percentage of workers in the Tenth District, is goingfull out with a second shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and statistics about various industries.


Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 172.
MR. BOYKIN. I have a slightly different view in the DallasDistrict than what I'm hearing this morning. Either I don'tunderstand the situation or I'm talking to the wrong people. We seemto be maintaining our economic recovery and are showing steadyimprovement overall. Roger mentioned the energy sector. It is notincreasing spectacularly, but nevertheless it has been increasingsteadily. Our Texas manufacturing output is growing steadily; it'snot as fast as the rest of the nation, but it is growing. Our housingpermits in the first quarter were below a year earlier and this isprimarily because of declines in multifamilies. I think that'shealthy because our area has been very overbuilt. And our retailsales have been growing from a year earlier in most of the District.On the agricultural side, our information says that Districtfarmers are better off this year than last year and that prices forboth crops and livestock are generally higher than a year ago. Now, Iwould condition that statement by saying it's a little better in avery bad situation overall. We have not seen the kind of liquidationsthat others talk about in the Midwest. In talking with some of ourpeople involved in that industry, they do fear that it is coming butit just hasn't come. In looking at agriculture, it's pretty hard totalk about it if you don't talk about the weather because that isawfully important. Our District is pretty well divided between placeswhere it has rained and where it hasn't rained. The southwestern partis reminiscent of the dust bowl of the '30s. Sustained winds aregreater than they have been in the last 37 years; whatever littlegrass there is coming up on the ranges is being blown away by the windwhen it comes up. There are liquidations going on. We did have somegood rain over the weekend; I don't know how widespread that was, butamong those who got rain I'm sure the sentiments are better today thanthey were last week.Subjectively, my sense of the state of the economy on abroader basis is that it's possibly a little stronger even than thestaff forecast. I know it's our job to worry and be concerned butthat we may be coming into a slowdown is what we've been looking for,it seems to me. I think we would acknowledge that the rate of growth5/21-22/84in GNP in the first quarter is not sustainable. I think what ishappening is what I, at least, would like to see happen overall. Thequestion, obviously, is whether the economy is really turning down orgradually tapering off. But I don't sense the same degree of concernin our area that I'm hearing [here]. Commercial real estate, whichhas been very strong, is down a bit but is still going along at apretty fast pace. Projections are that vacancies in office buildingsin Dallas that are either up or being constructed will be absorbed ina three-year period. In Houston it is much more difficult; they areprojecting about an 8-year period to absorb what they have. But onestill sees holes being dug and new announcements coming along.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their own perspective and observations, but they do not explicitly state or argue against any opposing views.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided is incomplete. Could you please provide the full passage so that I can determine if there is any contention or disagreement?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
MR. BALLES. Out in the West, the picture of strong spots andweak spots really hasn't changed at all since I reported on that atthe last meeting. I continue to be mystified, I guess, by the factthat business confidence for some months has not been as good as thebusiness statistics. The thing I wanted to call attention to thismorning is that even prior to the Continental Illinois crisis, I hadgotten some very strong protests and indications of concerns fromsmall and medium size banks--particularly those represented on ourfive boards of directors--about the policies of the FDIC. The concernis what those policies will do to the availability of bank creditamong the community banks or regional banks, given the modifiedpurchase and assumption cases, which have meant less than fullcoverage for uninsured deposits in a number of small banks that haveclosed down in our District. The fear of these bankers is that theywill begin to lose deposits to the large banks--that whatevercustomers they had with deposits of more than $100,000 will run tosafety now. I'm afraid that fear has been considerably exacerbated bywhat is going on, for obvious reasons. They understand why it had tobe done in the Continental Illinois case but they aren't much consoledby the thought of what it will do to them. As a result, theirconfidence in their ability to supply local credit needs in the futureis considerably shaken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses concern and disagreement with the policies of the FDIC and its potential impact on small and medium-sized banks. He mentions strong protests and indications of concerns from these banks, indicating disagreement or contention between them and the FDIC.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The term "Governor Partee" does not provide any context or information that would indicate contention or disagreement. Without any additional information, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement related to Governor Partee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 176.
MR. PARTEE. I think the staff projection is quiteappropriate to use for planning purposes by the FOMC. It does tend tomake the future look a lot more favorable than the recent past, butmaybe in fact that's how it will work out. I've been impressed in thelast six weeks by the growing number of uncertainties, however, aboutwhat is occurring on the inflationary side. I would say my gravestconcern, which, of course, we can't really evaluate, is the PersianGulf. If oil shipments from there are closed out, as they might wellbe, that is going to have major repercussions that are very hard tosee but that might well turn out to be of an inflationary character.Incidentally, Tony, I think the main reason that we're not gettingthese projections of double-digit inflation is that people aren'tfactoring in a big increase in oil prices such as occurred in 1979 andwhich had a major effect on the rate of inflation that most countriesexperienced in the 1980-81 period. If you were to add a 50 percentincrease in oil prices, say, I think you might get a much higherinflationary expectation from the surveys. In any event, there's justno way of evaluating that except to recognize it as a problem and aproblem on the inflationary side, if it occurs.-24-5/21-22/84I get a little worried when Bob starts to talk about dustbowls. Of course, the other thing that has given us some inflationarytrouble in the past was a major crop failure. On the other hand, ifit's only half of Texas, I think we're probably all right. It takes amuch wider dust bowl than that to give us major difficulty. On theother side, I think the major negative--and it's awfully hard for meto evaluate--is the uncertainty of financial markets. Karen talksabout the leveraged buyouts. Those leveraged buyouts, as I understandit, are usually leveraged 4 or 5 to 1. They depend on an interestrate assumption and are very sensitive to the interest rateassumption. If you put interest rates up 2 points on the 4 or 5 partsthat are financed, it raises great questions about those leveragedbuyouts. I noticed that Lyle mentioned the stock market has declined.I just looked it up in the Greenbook and the NASDAQ index is off 25percent. Did you realize that. Those are the kinds of stocks thatare in leveraged buyouts. And a major decline in that market hasoccurred since the late 1983 high. I'm inclined to agree with Jerrythat for these deals to work out there has to be more inflation. Andif there isn't more inflation, they're not going to work out. Thequestion is: Which is going to occur. Will there be more inflation orwill the deals begin to fail and the people begin to pull back. Onthat point I would make the observation that I don't know that we havehad much restraint on the part of lenders for a long time. I don'tknow if that was true during the last cycle either. There was verylittle restraint on the part of lenders.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee expresses concern about inflation and the potential impact of events such as the Persian Gulf situation and an increase in oil prices. He also mentions that he disagrees with Bob's concerns about dustbowls and highlights the uncertainty of financial markets and the potential risks of leveraged buyouts.


Passage number 177.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me make a comment on that. I gotworried about the amount of financing going into leveraged buyouts, soI sent a team of supervisors to all the leading New York banks to lookat that. We came to the conclusion that there were 8 banks, and 4particularly, that were being too aggressive and too optimistic intheir assumptions on the amount of credit they are extending onleveraged buyouts, which we went over loan by loan. And we counselledthem to be cautious. Whether it will do any good or not, I don'tknow, but we took that initiative. And we came to the conclusion thatthe biggest point of vulnerability was not so much on the interestrate assumptions but on the--in some cases--very optimisticassumptions on the cash value of those parts of the leveraged buyoutcompanies that they were going to try to unload immediately if thedeal went through. In some cases the banks were giving financingequivalent to 100 percent of relatively optimistic assumptions. Andin that connection, although only slightly related, I've had reportsthat some of the European banks that participate in the lines ofcredit for financing big takeovers are beginning to pull back alittle. Two of the European bankers told me that their medium sizedbanks that have been participating in these syndicates are beginningto get worried and are pulling back in the financing of some of thesebig American takeovers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 178.
MR. PARTEE. I think there's a good chance, Tony, that that'swhat is going to happen--that they are going to pull back. I thinkthey are counting on good value there; that's why I made the pointabout the 25 percent drop in NASDAQ prices on average. They aretalking about selling and the value is dropping in the market forthose [companies]. I think they may well pull back. In fact, I'minclined to think that we're now reading the views of the recent pastrather than the current period. I believe that the Columbus offer waswithdrawn yesterday. I read in the paper this morning that that was-25-5/21-22/84cancelled. A lot of those deals are capable of being cancelled andcertainly new ones may not be generated at the rate they were before,if people are quite uncertain about the future.That brings me to my second point about the financial marketsand that is that although lenders may not be so conservative andrestrictive, I think maybe borrowers could be more sensitive becauseeverybody is on floating rate loans, including the farmers. We've hadquite a rise in rates quickly and that reminds people that rates cango up pretty high. They have had experience with 20 percent rates inthe past. So, there isn't any kind of limit that one mentally puts onhow high rates could go. I think people are likely, in an effort ofself-preservation, to be more conservative about the credits that theydemand in the future. In summary, I would say that the negative hereis the possibility that the financial market will be much less buoyantthan it has been for credit and that that may give us less spendingthan we're anticipating. I'm not predicting a financial collapse oranything like that, but I just think that people will pull backbecause rates have gone up so much and so fast--not so much, really,as so fast. And we just haven't seen the effects of that on planningand on expectations where we have past data and past decisions. So, Ithink there's both an inflationary threat to the forecast mainly fromthe Persian Gulf and there is also a prospect that we could come inbelow the forecast mainly associated with the financial markets. Forour own purposes, I think we can use the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions on the current and future state of the financial markets.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided in the question. Please provide the passage for analysis.


Passage number 180.
MR. MORRIS. We don't sense in New England the kind of changein attitudes that I've heard from Philadelphia and Cleveland and otherplaces. I think the mood is still very buoyant and that may reflectthe fact that we're primarily capital goods producers and the capitalgoods sector is doing extremely well. I've compared the rate ofgrowth of capital goods orders in this expansion to the expansionsthat began in '71 and in '75 and it is very much stronger. We have areal capital goods boom underway, which ought to augur well forproductivity in the future. We think the staff forecast is a prettygood forecast but if it's wrong, that it probably is going to be wrongon the low side in terms of the growth rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and observations, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That big boom is all electronics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact that the big boom is related to electronics. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 182.
MR. MORRIS. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Morris without providing any information about his actions, opinions, or any context that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm skeptical of the productivityimprovement. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, identified as "I," expresses skepticism about the productivity improvement mentioned by Mr. Solomon. However, there is no indication of any conflicting views or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 184.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. All I will say is that in my area Ihave a sense that on the one hand things are very, very strong andthat at the same time there are enormous financial uncertainties andvery poor profits in the financial markets, particularly compared tothe last couple of years. It creates a very mixed feeling. I wouldassume that the staff forecast is most vulnerable to financial shocks--virtually the same thing you said, Chuck. The staff forecast seemsvery reasonable in the absence of financial shocks, but I think thereis an increased possibility compared to previous cycles that it couldbe upset by something happening. For planning purposes I think onehas to go with something that basically tracks the situation and-26-5/21-22/84previous experience in recoveries. And that seems to [be true of thestaff forecast].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are strong aspects in their area, but also recognizes the presence of financial uncertainties and poor profits in the financial markets. They mention that the staff forecast is vulnerable to financial shocks, while also acknowledging that it seems reasonable in the absence of such shocks. This indicates a conflicting perspective on the current situation and the potential risks involved.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we have no other comments, we'll turnto Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states that if there are no other comments, they will turn to Mr. Axilrod. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 186.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full statement in the Appendix to refer to, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 187.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say a few words before we have thecoffee break. I don't like quite a lot of things I see these days.whether in the real economy or more particularly in the financialeconomy. I certainly think attitudes are very volatile and I wouldn'tbet on the economy slowing down all that much. I have one hypothesisbut it could change very rapidly. If you forgot about the financialside--and I'm not sure I'd propose it anyway--it might take somewhatmore aggressive action than we've taken before to bring the economy toa suitable path. And I might argue that that's the best thing in theworld for the S&Ls, for the farmers, and for others--to take it in theshort run and have some hope that they are going to get out of thissituation over a period of time. But, unfortunately, I don't thinkthat course of action is open to us. I look at this financial marketas being on a knife's edge. I don't believe all this business aboutpolicy at this point working at the margin with a nice little rise ininterest rates slowing things down here and there. We have afinancial market that for better or worse works by bankruptcy. Andwhen the economy is getting strong, people are going to make leveragedbuyouts and they're going to make construction loans without anytakeouts and for full value and I don't see any sign of that stoppinggradually. In some ways it seems to increase as the economy getsbetter, whatever happens to interest rates, until all of a suddensomething happens and then it may go [whirling] in the otherdirection.The biggest sign we have of something not working at themargin right now, I think, is the LDC situation. They are all goingto survive together or they are all going to go down together. Ifthey go down together, we will have a reaction in our financial systemand in our economy that I think at the very least is going to be verydifficult to cope with. We have this strange situation. Karen startsoff today by saying bankers are shoving money out the door; you hearthat all over the place. I'm sure they are engaging in financialpractices of a type that probably would send the fathers of some ofthese bankers whirling in their graves. There are things you neverheard of in the banking system on the one side; and on the other sidewe have this other force coming on. If you want to see a group ofashen-faced bankers, sit down in a group and talk to them about theContinental situation and possible repercussions for the funding oftheir own banks against the background of this LDC situation and whatthat might mean in terms of their own behavior and policies. I don'tthink it is occurring at the moment, unfortunately--I don't know,maybe some of this is going on--but what it could mean is a suddenchange in attitudes. I hope it's working gradually at the margin, tosome extent, and maybe it is. I don't see any evidence yet but thisis very recent.My bottom line is that we've run out of room for the timebeing for any tightening, given this situation. I don't know for howlong. I don't know what is going to happen in the weeks or months-27-5/21-22/84down the road, either to the economy or to the aggregates or theseother things. I don't have any sense here that we should be easing.But I do think we have to be concerned about a very potentiallyvolatile and actually volatile set of attitudes here and elsewhere.This Continental situation is rather enlightening in the sense that wehave a government guaranteed institution at the moment which nobodymuch wants to fund anyway. There is no doubt that it has caused a lotof looking at other banks and we don't see that strongly evident inthe market now. When we see it strongly evident in the market it willbe too late, in my opinion, to keep it under reasonable control.We're pretty close to the edge of that now. So, I'll leave you withthose thoughts and go have some coffee and orange juice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement and uncertainty about various economic and financial issues throughout the passage. They mention not liking many aspects of the current economy, and express doubt about the effectiveness of certain actions and policies. They also express concern about the potential volatility and difficulties that may arise in the financial system.


Passage number 188.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can proceed. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging a break and stating that they can continue with the discussed topic.


Passage number 189.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, you said much of what I wasthinking and I agree with everything you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing agreement and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. End of the story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "End of the story." This phrase typically implies that the story has concluded and there are no further points of contention or disagreement to be discussed.


Passage number 191.
MR. RICE. Not quite. No [unintelligible], however, just"but in addition." I agree that the state of financial markets rightnow is such that it practically precludes any significant tightening.But apart from that I think the appropriate policy stance at thepresent time is especially sensitive to what the economy is doing andwhat it is likely to do in the short run. Now, I certainly agree withBob Black and Henry that we have to keep the long run constantly inmind. But I think Lyle is right: There is a good deal of uncertaintyas to what the economy is actually doing right now. If the staff isright that it is slowing down at a very significant rate--and I thinkthe probability is on their side--that, of course, would suggest notmoving in the direction of further restraint. But it could well bethat the economy will not decelerate as rapidly as we expect, in whichcase it may actually need some further encouragement in that directionby increased pressure on bank reserves. But I don't think so. Ithink that the recent run-up in interest rates has been sharp and isalmost certain to have a significant slowing effect on the economy andthat any further tightening at this time would run the risk ofoverkill. So, I would think that the prudent posture for policy rightnow is as you suggest, Mr. Chairman, to hold steady--to have nosignificant easing or tightening but to maintain the degree ofrestraint that the Committee called for at its last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is discussing different perspectives on the appropriate policy stance and acknowledges different viewpoints. However, they ultimately agree that the current state of financial markets calls for no significant tightening and that the prudent posture for policy is to hold steady.


Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Boehne, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
MR. BOEHNE. I can ditto that. I think we ought to staywhere we are. The financial side alone justifies that but even if thefinancial side were less fragile, I would still advocate no changebecause we've had a substantial run-up in rates and I would want forreal sector reasons to hold where we are and see if, indeed, theeconomy is slowing. I agree with what has been said by you andGovernor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. While Mr. Boehne and Governor Rice agree on the need to stay where they are and not make any changes, Mr. Boehne provides additional reasoning for this stance by mentioning the financial side and the need to observe if the economy is slowing.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no mention of Mr. Solomon in the passage, so it cannot be determined if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 195.
-28-5/21-22/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree. I think we ought to go foralternative B and $1 billion of borrowing and leave the fed fundsrange as it is. I think that is a prudent position to take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the idea of choosing alternative B and $1 billion of borrowing while keeping the fed funds range as it is. They consider this position to be prudent.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage because "Mr. Guffey" is not mentioned in the given sentence.


Passage number 197.
MR. GUFFEY. I would agree with what Tony has just stated; itis precisely what I had in mind. I do have one question, however. Iknow the federal funds rate isn't under our total control but I wouldhave expected after the discount rate increase, when the fed fundsrate was running about 10-1/4 percent, that the one half pointincrease [in the discount rate] would have put the funds rate at about10-3/4 percent. It has been running less, about 10-1/2 percent. Iwould not object to seeing that rate around 10-3/4 percent at thepresent time. I think that is consistent with what alternative B anda billion dollars of borrowing would imply. I would ask the questionof Peter or Steve if that is a correct perception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is agreeing with Tony's statement and expressing a question or clarification about the federal funds rate.


Passage number 198.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we've said time and time again thatthat's a rather loose relationship. I would think the funds ratewould run around 10-1/2 percent but I couldn't dispute strongly thatit could turn out often at 10-3/4 percent. As to why after thediscount rate the central tendency was an increase of only a quarterof a point, I think that could well be because the discount rate movewas fairly well anticipated about that time and in part already hadbeen built into expectations. [Unintelligible] what you are lookingfor as a response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Sternlight about his opinion on the funds rate and the reasoning behind the central tendency of an increase of only a quarter of a point.


Passage number 199.
MR. MARTIN. Peter, my question about the $1 billion inborrowing is: Now that contemporaneous reserve requirements have beenmore understood and more adjusted to, what implication for excessreserves does $1 billion in borrowing have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked by Mr. Martin.


Passage number 200.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure I'd place it any differently.Clearly at the beginning of CRR we were getting a particularly heavydemand for excess reserves. That seems to have settled down a bit.We seem to be getting excess reserves reasonably close to the $600million level that we're putting in the path now. As to thesignificance in the restraining impact of different levels ofborrowing, I'm not sure I'm able to discern enough yet to give abetter answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Sternlight discussing the level of excess reserves and the impact of borrowing. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 201.
MR. MARTIN. We talked about $1 billion and $600 million inborrowings and excess reserves, respectively, last time in the face ofthe adjustments. Do you feel there would be no difference in thefederal funds rate at around 10-3/4 percent. Is that fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on a previous discussion and seeking confirmation about the federal funds rate.


Passage number 202.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply stating a percentage without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 203.
MR. MARTIN. 10-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 204.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's a loose relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Sternlight's opinion about a relationship.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 205.
MR. AXILROD. There's another point to add. I don't think weknow what is going to happen in the banking system in the next severalweeks, in the wake of this Continental business. It may be quiet andit may not. If it isn't quiet, I think there is some possibility thatbanks will become more conservative in the management of their own5/21-22/84reserve positions, conserving access to the window and maybe holding afew more excess reserves. We could find holding [excess] at $600million and [borrowing at] $1 billion gets us even higher funds ratesbecause the banks' general attitudes have shifted, in which case Ithink some allowance ought to be in there for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, expresses uncertainty about the future of the banking system and raises the possibility that banks may become more conservative in managing their reserve positions. This viewpoint contrasts with the assumption that nothing will change in the banking system.


Passage number 206.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 207.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full passage or sentence, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 208.
 We have language that would handle that or wecould compose some language--MR. AXILROD. --that would handle that situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that they have language or the ability to compose language that could handle a certain situation.


Passage number 209.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm assuming what Peter has told me:that we have been catching up with the lag in the last week throughour matched sales operations for the borrowings at the Chicago Fed.So, once the psychological situation changes--barring that reactionfrom the banks that Steve is talking about--I'm assuming that within 4or 5 days more, maybe a week, we probably will be back up to the morenormal levels that our policy and our nonborrowed reserve pathindicate--namely the 10-1/2 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating assumptions and expectations regarding catching up with the lag and reaching normal levels.


Passage number 210.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think the catch-up occurred evenmore rapidly. I should fill the Committee in, Mr. Solomon. Lateyesterday afternoon the funds rate moved up to the 12 percent area oreven higher and it has been at 10-1/2 to 11 percent this morning. Infact, we're having to put back a small amount of reserves today; wehad some revisions in the path. I think we accomplished that catch-upand maybe slightly more than accomplished it in what we did yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the movement of the funds rate and the actions taken to address it.


Passage number 211.
So I think it is back to--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why did it catch up so quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement expressing an opinion or speculation about why something happened quickly. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 212.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we did get this change in the paththat reflected a number of revisions in required reserves for thiswhole period totalling some $260 million; I think that was figure.And in the matched sales we did yesterday we got a lot of offeringsand we did about $5 billion out of $8 billion offered thinking that wewould just be taking away some of the unwanted excess. But I thinkwhen all the shouting was over the banks suddenly realized that theywere not as flush as they had thought when they were making aggressiveofferings to us in the morning, and they saw themselves as stillhaving some need. Also, apart from Continental, one has to think ofthe borrowing during this period, which has been averaging about $750to $760 million. So I think it was to be expected, if we're going tobe on path as we go toward the end of the period, that some greaterfirmness would work itself into the market as this period winds up. Iwouldn't have guessed that that would happen late Monday afternoon; Iwould have thought it would occur maybe Tuesday afternoon orWednesday. But it seems to be happening a day earlier than I hadestimated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks like we'll get a decline inContinental's borrowing and it might actually disappear tomorrow, butit doesn't reflect any better position. They are getting prepaid forthis credit card [sale] and drawing more on this backup line. If wewant to get them out tomorrow, maybe we could. It doesn't reflect anybasic improvement in their position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about Continental's borrowing and questions if it reflects any improvement in their position.


Passage number 214.
-30-5/21-22/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It does reflect a slight improvementfrom 6 days ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply states that there has been a slight improvement from 6 days ago.


Passage number 215.
MR. RICE. It means they have stopped losing deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about banks no longer losing deposits.


Passage number 216.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not much. Compared to 6 days ago they got$2 billion from the FDIC; they are getting a large amount of federalfunds from one semi-governmental institution; they are getting paid$750 million today by Chemical for the credit card business. Add allthose up together and I don't think you get much [improvement]. Plusthey got more from the line banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states facts about the amount of money the subject has received from various sources without expressing any conflicting points of view.


Passage number 217.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But after that initial run-off of theovernight money, they were expecting to lose about $900 million to $1billion a week. And I don't see that deterioration. Do the numbersadd up to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 218.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't get the numbers thatclosely. I think there has been some further deterioration; it's notbasically better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents an opinion about the numbers not being closely accurate and suggests that there has been further deterioration instead of improvement. However, there is no explicit mention of disagreement or contention between multiple parties.


Passage number 219.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did the Federal Reserve Bank ofChicago end up funding the FDIC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply asks whether the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago ended up funding the FDIC.


Passage number 220.
MR. KEEHN. No. [The FDIC] put cash in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage, as Mr. Keehn simply states that the FDIC put cash in.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's holding. I don't know that one canbe very precise about it. There were no very marked reflows. I don'twant to interrupt the conversation but they were losing theircorrespondent funding among other things; they pretty much lost it.Any encouragement in that avenue might be helpful, but it comes from alot of small banks and they just lost it. They were very heavilydependent upon foreign funding and they still get a little, but theydon't get anything like they were getting before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating personal observations and facts about the situation, without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer without context.


Passage number 223.
MR. KEEHN. I would certainly agree that the circumstancesare such that it would be very appropriate to continue the presentcourse and I agree that alternative B is the appropriate alternative.If we were going to go to one side or the other, I would tend to leana little toward "C" but primarily on "B" with a borrowing level of $1billion. The question in my mind is whether we ought to attributethis to any extent to the financial situation. On the one hand Iwould say that might be a mistake because that calls undue attentionto the problem. But having said that, I think perhaps by doing thatwe preserve an alternative--that with the passage of time if thisthing unwinds, we can withdraw that caveat and keep an option open toourselves. I think for right now alternative B would be theappropriate alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the current course and with alternative B as the appropriate alternative. There is a mention of leaning a little toward alternative C, but it is not presented as a strong disagreement or contention. The speaker also raises the question of whether to attribute the circumstances to the financial situation, but this is more of a contemplation and does not indicate a disagreement with the overall direction.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any form of contention or disagreement involving Mr. Forrestal.


Passage number 225.
MR. FORRESTAL. I too, Mr. Chairman, think that theappropriate course for policy at the moment is steady as you go, thestatus quo. I would have reached that conclusion even in the absenceof the Continental situation or the other financial market conditions.I think we need a little time to digest both the actions in the-31-5/21-22/84marketplace and our own actions. It's probable, as the staff hasindicated, that we will get a slowing in the next quarter or two, andwith the aggregates behaving reasonably well I don't think we have anyparticular reason to tighten at this point. There certainly is nocase to be made, in my judgment, for any loosening. So, I would optfor alternative B with borrowing of a billion dollars. I think wemight have a little more flexibility if we were to opt for a federalfunds rate range more in line with alternative C, 8 to 12 percent.But basically alternative B is the one I would opt for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, therefore it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 227.
MR. CORRIGAN. I too am in favor of alternative B as is. Mypreference is not to have language in the directive that talks about"while taking account of [un]usual financial strains." We do thatanyway, and my personal feeling is that having that explicitly in thedirective would perhaps elevate even further the concerns that Tonyand someone else spoke of before--that the basic course of monetarypolicy is going to be undone by these developments. The only otherpoint I would make is that we have eight weeks until the nextCommittee meeting and we are at a point where it seems to me that overthat eight week period something of consequence [might occur].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is expressing his preference and personal feeling about the directive, but he does not disagree with the views expressed by Tony and someone else earlier.


Passage number 228.
MR. MARTIN. Excuse me, Jerry. Don't we meet on July 10-11.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply seeking clarification about the meeting dates.


Passage number 229.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes. I think it's eight weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the speaker's belief about the length of time.


Passage number 230.
MR. BERNARD. It's seven.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 231.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One thing we ought to be sure of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not stating anything that would create contention or disagreement. It is simply suggesting that there is something that we should be certain about. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 232.
MR. CORRIGAN. In any event, whether it's seven or eight, myhunch is that we're at a point where something of consequence islikely to happen in the intermeeting period. I don't know whether itwill be on the up side, down side, back side, or front side, but itseems to me that something is going to happen here and that withoutaltering the directive in any way we may have to be more sensitive tothe need for consultation between now and the 10th of July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion or intuition about a possible upcoming event, without contradicting or opposing any other person or idea.


Passage number 233.
MR. BLACK. We are not ever front-sided; it's always back-sided.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This statement is simply asserting a fact about a consistent behavior or pattern.


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage alone does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 235.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'm not far from where everybody else is. Butone of the things I would like to point out is that both the Bluebookand Steve's comments indicate that we might well find, if we vote for"B," that long-term interest rates have overreacted and in fact willcome back down again to where they were roughly speaking, say, threeor four weeks ago. That, I think, would be unfortunate. I'm not atall sure that the current level of interest rates in long-term marketsis not the right level for where we want the economy to go in thefuture. If I'm wrong and the economy starts to slow, that drop ininterest rates will be welcomed and everybody will love us. If on theother hand, a higher level of rates--the present level or somewhathigher--is needed and we let interest rates go back down to where theywere four weeks ago, we are going to get blamed the second time aroundfor pushing them back up and that would be unfortunate. So, what I-32-5/21-22/84would like is "B" with a tiny minus on it. I think we're going tohave to give the Chairman a lot of discretion as to how he runs policyin any event between now and the next meeting. But I would beinclined to talk about a borrowing range of $1 to $1.2 billion withthe idea in mind of using the upper end of that range as needed,probably in the latter part of the period if interest rates on long-term securities begin to come down significantly. I like Roger's ideaof thinking of a federal funds rate that might go up as high as 10-3/4percent to achieve that objective. I do think it is a good idea totake out that language about unusual strains. There is concerndeveloping that we are going to throw [away] everything that we'vegained so far. I don't think that's true and I don't think it has tobe true. And I think that language would give people ideas that theyshouldn't have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 236.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage you are referencing, I cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide the specific passage?


Passage number 237.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would be more inclined to gocloser to "C" myself in trying to look through the immediate problemto the longer term, which I recognize is difficult to do. But I dothink there are even broader considerations than Continental, and myview of the strength of the economy and so forth would lead me toward"C." I would go ahead and take that step now and make whateveradjustment might be necessary as future events unfold. But I thinkthe risk to the economy is greater than the risk to one or twofinancial institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
The passage does not indicate any contentious or disagreement. It features Mr. Boykin expressing his personal view and preferences regarding the situation, without any opposition or disagreement from others.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those risks are not exactly separable inmy mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply expresses the idea that the risks mentioned are closely related and cannot be easily distinguished.


Passage number 239.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, I would say that what happened to theeconomy and what we went through in trying to bring down inflation wasconsiderably more difficult; it represented dislocations of a muchlarger segment of this economy than what we're looking at right now.Therefore, I would guard against what I perceive to be the [risks inthe] broader picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 241.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, in the absence of theContinental situation I would have supported alternative C because Ithink the economy is still very strong. Since it is a long time untilthe next meeting, I still don't have a high degree of confidence thatwe can get through with an 11-1/2 percent cap on the funds rate. ButI would assume that if the situation arose, we would have a telephoneconference call anyway, so I would support "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is stating his own opinion and acknowledging the possibility of a telephone conference call in the future.


Passage number 242.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 243.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we are all worried about a lot ofthings, and more people seem to be worried about the state of thefinancial markets than about anything else. I don't think we ought tooverlook that. A lot of this seems to stem from some doubts on thepart of the market that we're going to be able to deal successfullywith inflation over the months ahead, and we obviously have to paysome attention to these transient factors that are present right now.But my caveat would be that we not let this deter us unduly from ourbasic longer-term mission. I lean a little toward "C" but the-33-5/21-22/84difference between "C" and "B" is not as great as usual and I would beperfectly comfortable with "B." But the most important thing weshould do is to try to get some agreement if we can as to what kind ofaction the Desk will take or as to when you would call a conference bytelephone in the event that these aggregates behave in a way that isway outside what is now projected. That's a more important part to methan the "B" or "C" part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I apologize, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
MR. MARTIN. I think the indications of future inflation areweak. I think the relationships among and between many of theaggregates this time are somewhat different and alternative B has thelogic of giving us time to observe the lagged effects of the verysubstantial changes in interest rates we've already had. And, inorder to add an element to the discussion that we have all been alittle too polite to enunciate, I will say that we are in such anintense political environment at the moment, with so much scrutinyfrom the Hill and elsewhere about what we are alleged to be doing,that holding to the course--if that's what alternative B with $1billion in borrowing and $600 million in excess reserves means--iscalled for both for economic and political considerations. So, Iwould vote for "B." Obviously, the Chairman and our associates on theDesk need some flexibility. It seems to me that excess reservespossibly ought to be $500 to $700 million because of our uncertaintiesas to how the Continental situation and other developments will affectborrowing levels. I would not quite go along with Lyle on this, but Ithink the borrowing range ought to be $900 million to $1.1 billion forthe same reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, expresses his support for alternative B with $1 billion in borrowing and $600 million in excess reserves. He argues that this approach is both economically and politically necessary. However, he also suggests that the borrowing range should be adjusted to $900 million to $1.1 billion, which differs slightly from what another person, Lyle, has suggested.


Passage number 246.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The political environment is going toget even tenser later in the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply predicts that the political environment will become more tense later in the year. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, as the given passage does not contain any information or discussion about Governor Wallich.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 248.
MR. WALLICH. It seems that we're sliding somewhatinadvertently into net borrowed reserves [targeting] from what Iunderstood to be a gross borrowing posture. I think there is asubstantial difference. If at any given time the Desk sees borrowingmoving one way and excess not changing, they have to make up theirminds whether they are going with borrowing or are going with net[borrowed reserves]. So, I hope we're going to differentiate betweengross borrowings, which is what I think we've done so far, and netfree reserves as the conversation seems to be going. As far as thelevels are concerned, I think we ought to raise the gross borrowinglevel a little precisely to avoid a relapse in the markets, whichwould give a false signal. In a sense the markets have done our work.I don't think one could have anticipated these increases at the timeof the last FOMC meeting. So there is justification, I think, for await-and-see attitude but not for an attitude of appeasing, whichcould be misinterpreted in many ways today. Also, I think one oughtto hesitate a little before one takes for granted that financialfragility is necessarily a cause for relenting. The rule about thelender of last resort operation is to lend freely but at a high rate.In the case of the thrifts and the LDCs and the farmers, I see thatthe nature of the fragility is related to the level of the interestrates. In the case of Continental it isn't quite clear to me whether-34-5/21-22/84they would be in a more fragile state if interest rates were a littlehigher than now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich expresses his belief that there is a difference between gross borrowing and net borrowed reserves and argues for raising the gross borrowing level. He also disagrees with the idea of appeasing financial fragility and suggests that higher interest rates may not necessarily make the situation worse.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they would be. Let medispose of that. I think the Continental problem is independent ofthe level of interest rates. I do not think the LDC problem is and,therefore, I don't think the concern about the banks or the bankingsystem is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and stating that they do not believe the Continental problem is dependent on the level of interest rates, while also stating that they do not think the LDC problem is dependent on interest rates either. There is no conflicting view or argument presented.


Passage number 250.
MR. WALLICH. I would interpret you as saying that it'sworthwhile to make that differentiation as to where the fragilitylies. The Continental situation is not so sensitive to it, but otheraspects are. As far as the funds rate is concerned, it would seem tome that this is a good opportunity to make the range a little moresymmetrical around where we expect it to be, so I'd raise it to 8 to12 percent. Hopefully, it [would] move to 10-3/4 percent rather than10-1/2 percent or below. This puts me at "B minus," as it were, asfar as the alternatives are concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions "Mr. Balles" without providing any context or information that could indicate contention.


Passage number 252.
MR. BALLES. Since I come from earthquake country, I'm usedto aftershocks, and I think we may well see some aftershocks from thebig increase in interest rates we've had since the last meeting. Wemay see some aftershocks from widening concerns about LDCs and aboutthe posture of thrift institutions, not to mention Continental. So,while basically I would start with alternative B, I would be hopefulthat we could have the flexibility that Jerry Corrigan recommended andbe able to move. If we had to move away from "B," I would think itwould be in the direction of "B plus." I think this is a time when weshould err temporarily on the side of more liquidity than our long-term game plan would call for in view of all these financialfragilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their views on potential aftershocks in the economy and expressing their preference for a specific alternative, but there is no disagreement mentioned or implied.


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as there is no specific passage provided.


Passage number 254.
MS. HORN. I'm for alternative B in part because it isconsistent with a long-term strategy to bring the aggregates,particularly M1, to the midpoint of their ranges by the end of theyear. I would like to see us end up the year with M1 at the midpointof the long-run range given how strong the economy is and how velocityis going. I think it is important to end up there becauseinflationary expectations are heating up and are a very serious matterin future inflation as well. I'm for "B" now. I have a naggingfeeling that it may take more than that in the future to end up whereI would like to end up at year-end. But for the moment I view it asconsistent with where I'd like to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. HORN expresses her support for alternative B and explains her belief that it is consistent with a long-term strategy to bring the aggregates to the midpoint of their ranges by the end of the year. She also mentions her concern about inflationary expectations, but overall she is in favor of alternative B.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
MR. PARTEE. I think "B" is all right. I would point outthat "B" has specifications for a number of aggregates and that if theaggregates run stronger--which they might well do in the case of M1particularly and are already doing in the case of M3--then thequestion arises as to what to do if they are strong or well above thepath. There is language in the directive left over from last timethat deals with that and speaks of greater reserve restraint if thereis more substantial growth in the monetary aggregates.-35-5/21-22/84Now, I think we are all talking about financial marketconditions in one way or another as a paramount feature of ourdiscussion this time. I wouldn't support the prominent and extremebilling given to any unusual financial strains in the very first partof the operating paragraph in the directive. On the other hand, Ithink we could put in a more general phrase about financial marketconditions late in the paragraph. That is, it could go down where weare saying that in either case--if we decide to ease or to move higherin terms of rates because of the behavior of the aggregates--such achange would be considered in the context of appraisals of thecontinuing strength of the expansion, inflationary pressures,financial market conditions, and the rate of credit growth. That alsohas a desirable attribute in that it includes things other than theContinental problem. We have had a very bad couple of months infinancial markets and, indeed, a repetition of that could well give ustrouble in an unknown way. It could be a futures market that breaksor something like that. And financial market conditions is a termthat could encompass all of that.I don't think we ought to bias the borrowing number towardtightening, as Lyle suggests. I would buy Pres's $900 to $1100million. I guess I would have assumed that $1 billion means $900 to$1100 million and that there's not much difference from what we nowhave. I also wouldn't want to prejudge long rates. Lyle made thepoint that long rates shouldn't be permitted to come down. Well, Ithink they have gone up quite a bit more than one would have expectedas a result of a run toward short instruments in a time of greatuncertainty. Should the uncertainty unwind in the weeks to come--which is a possibility, I think, as Steve pointed out--that could meanthat people who ordinarily would be in the longer market would committhemselves and we could get a decline in long rates. And I wouldn'tresist that. I think it would be a natural market process that oughtto be accommodated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with the idea of giving prominent billing to any unusual financial strains in the operating paragraph of the directive. He suggests putting in a more general phrase about financial market conditions later in the paragraph.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "Mr. Roberts" without any additional context or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 258.
MR. ROBERTS. I prefer alternative B and I would hope that wecould widen the band on fed funds to 8 to 12 percent in order to beable to focus on the monetary aggregates if what Chuck is talkingabout should develop. I hope, even though we have flexibility to dealwith financial crises--which certainly ought to be the case--that ifwe use that, we continue to [neutralize] the excess reserves that arecreated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Roberts is expressing his preference for alternative B and suggesting widening the band on fed funds. He also mentions the need to neutralize excess reserves created during financial crises. There is no indication of disagreement or contention between Mr. Roberts and anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 259.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't speak on the topic of the funds rate.If we were in a normal situation, I think the top ought to go up too.But I think it would be taken as a bad signal. And, in fact, [therange] doesn't restrain us. If the aggregates run strong, all it doesis suggest that we have a telephone conference call. So, I don'tthink it's worth the risk to raise the funds rate range at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee agrees that in a normal situation, the top range of funds rate should go up. However, he believes that raising it now would be seen as a bad signal and not worth the risk.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there is a broad area of consensushere, and we can turn to the wording. But let me make one commentabout the financial uncertainties or whatever we want to call it. Ithink it's extremely unlikely that they are going to go away in thetime period we're talking about. Continental may or may not behandled; that's going to be difficult in itself. But what I don'tthink is going to go away is the background of concern about the other-36-5/21-22/84banks against the fact that we are entering a crucial period on thisdebt problem in Latin America. Argentina does not look good from anyexternal signs. We have a funding to do with Mexico which should gowell objectively, but in this atmosphere I'm not so sure. One of theproblems is the interest rate problem. Brazil--depending upon whomyou believe--doesn't look too bad. But the Argentine situation isvery much in jeopardy. Venezuela is fooling around. Maybe I'll bewrong, but I don't see that the undertone--it's more than anundertone--of concern is likely to evaporate in two or three weeks. Ithink the sense of knife's edge or fragility is going to be with usfor a while. We [are not likely to] get Continental settled and someof these other debt problems behind us, at least in people's opinion,for some months. Getting Mexico more or less semi-permanently takencare of would change the atmosphere. But I think that's some waysdown the road at this point.So far as the language is concerned, we have exactly the samenumbers that we had before if we take "B" for M1 and M2, which isnice; I guess we're forced to raise the M3 number to be reasonable andI suggest 10 percent. I feel rather strongly that we should make somemention of reality out there--that we are affected by financial marketconditions and the conditions of the banking system are part of that.It's appropriate to say that we do [take that into account]. Havingno mention of it in the directive seems to me misleading, in fact.The minimum we can do is what Governor Partee suggested. I personallywould probably do more than that, but I think that's the absoluteminimum--the recognition of the problem. In a close reading of whatwe had last time, the directive is slightly biased in that we're moreapt to tighten than to ease. I would make that symmetrical and put"mights" in both parts of that sentence. I think "might" is probablymore appropriate than "would," given the other caveats.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of one person expressing their opinions and concerns.


Passage number 261.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context or information. The provided excerpt alone does not provide enough information to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 262.
 The asymmetry derives just as muchfrom having "somewhat" lesser restraint, whereas we don't have"somewhat" in the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I didn't even notice that. Should weput "somewhat" in both places.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The second statement is in agreement with the first statement and suggests including the word "somewhat" in both places.


Passage number 263.
MR. PARTEE. That's probably the practical thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion on what they perceive to be the practical thing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our Secretary is a little bothered by theEnglish in the first sentence. What we can do is make two sentences.Before we just said "seeks to maintain pressures on bank reservepositions judged to be consistent...." When we say "maintain existingpressures," which is I assume what we're talking about here--I'll getback to that precise numerology in a minute--it might just be a littlebetter to make two sentences: "The Committee seeks to maintainexisting pressures on bank reserve positions. This is expected to beconsistent with...." Let's put a "somewhat" in front of "greaterreserve restraint might" and in front of "lesser restraint might." Iwould just emphasize the qualifying clause a little more; [instead ofa semicolon] I would put a period there. "In either case such achange would be considered only in the context of appraisals of thestrength of the business expansion, inflationary pressures...." If weadopt the Partee suggestion we would put in there "financial marketconditions, and the rate of credit growth." I would be perfectlyhappy to write a separate sentence about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker proposes making two sentences instead of one, suggesting a change in the structure. They also suggest adding a qualifier and changing punctuation. These proposed changes indicate a disagreement with the current wording and style of the passage.


Passage number 265.
-37-5/21-22/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would go for Chuck's versionbecause there is already a widespread feeling in the markets that weare giving enormous attention to the situation in financial markets.I don't think that we're misleading the markets if we do it in a morelow-key way. Therefore, Chuck's approach strikes me as better. Weare very vulnerable to the charge--and I don't think the charge isjustified--that we're departing from anti-inflationary policy for atemporary reason like Continental. Maybe there are a couple of peoplewho feel that alternative B represents primarily that consideration.But I think many of us here feel that we'd be going for alternative Banyway, without the Continental situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of opinion where the speaker expresses their preference for Chuck's approach. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or any debate over the issue.


Passage number 266.
MR. BOEHNE. I agree with Chuck's suggestion as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage as Mr. Boehne expresses his agreement with Chuck's suggestion.


Passage number 267.
MR. PARTEE. If you wanted to sharpen it just a little, youcould say the sensitivity of financial market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 268.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't think so. I'd leave it the way youhave it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 269.
MR. ROBERTS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 270.
 It says appraisals of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that there are any morecomments. It's not the way I would do it, but I think it'sacceptable. I was playing around with a sentence such as "TheCommittee recognizes the operational implementation of policy mightneed to be modified in the light of unusual financial strains shouldthey develop." I think that is the fact of the matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their personal opinion about a sentence they were considering using. They acknowledge that it is not their preferred approach but still find it acceptable. They also state their belief that the mentioned sentence reflects the reality of the situation.


Passage number 271.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do you mean--should they developfurther. You're going to alarm the hell out of everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern or surprise rather than engaging in a disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 272.
MR. RICE. I'm not so sure. We put out this press releasewhich seems to me to indicate a very deep involvement in this wholething. Now we come along with a statement to the Desk and we try toignore it. I don't think that's really very prudent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Rice, expresses doubt and disagreement with the decision to ignore a statement made to the Desk. He believes that it is not a prudent decision. This indicates a disagreement or contention between Mr. Rice and the decision being made.


Passage number 273.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're not ignoring it if we useChuck's language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply indicates that using Chuck's language does not imply ignoring something.


Passage number 274.
MR. GRAMLEY. Remember that the public is going to be seeingthis after the whole period is over. And they will know what we havedone. Hopefully we will be remembered by our deeds rather than ourwords. And they're perfectly aware of the fact that we have beeninvolved in a heavy way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the hope that the public will remember the speaker and their actions rather than their words, and acknowledges the fact that they have been heavily involved.


Passage number 275.
MR. RICE. But they realize that; they read our words verycarefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention indicated in the passage. The statement simply acknowledges that the audience reads their words carefully, without any further conflict expressed.


Passage number 276.
 And if they don't see any acknowledgment, they'll wonderwhat--MR. MARTIN. Of course, the real Fed watchers will comparethe two operational paragraphs and say: Aha. They added "financialmarkets".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario about what people might think if there is no acknowledgment and how some informed individuals might analyze the situation further.


Passage number 277.
MR. GRAMLEY. Not only that, they will say: Aha. They have a"somewhat" before "greater restraint," and they used the word "might"instead of "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating what others might say without expressing their own opinion or disagreement.


Passage number 278.
"-38-5/21-22/84MR. PARTEE. And somehow or other they have broken it intothree sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about how a sentence has been broken into three separate sentences. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the excerpt.


Passage number 279.
MR. MARTIN. It's a living for those guys.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement made by Mr. Martin, expressing that the profession being discussed is a means of making a living for some individuals. There is no disagreement or contention expressed in this statement.


Passage number 280.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's a good living.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's a good living" implies that the speaker believes that the living is good, without any indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would not change the federal funds range--just on the grounds that other people are going to [read it as atightening]. I can never be sure whether these [directives] are goingto be released on the regular [schedule], given the Congressionalinterest in them. I don't see any operational significance in thatbut it will be read subsequently as a tightening. I don't thinkthat's what we mean to convey, so we shouldn't bother doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating their opinion about not changing the federal funds range and expressing their concerns about how it might be perceived by others. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict with another person or viewpoint.


Passage number 282.
MR. MARTIN. I agree. I think it's a hazard to signalanother 1/2 point after the outcry from [unintelligible] and otherpeople for the last 1/2 point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, forget about this financial marketconditions part for the moment. Is the rest of this all right. Webreak up the sentence and start a new one with "This is expected to beconsistent" and we put in 6-1/2, 8, and 10 percent [for M1, M2, andM3]. We use "somewhat greater reserve restraint might," which is ofabsolutely no policy significance. Make it a period after that. Thesentence looks a little long; I mean nothing by that. I would put inthe word "only," if that's all right. I can live with this othersuggestion. I think we have to make some acknowledgment of [financialmarket conditions] in there; it is unrealistically little to me, butso long as there's something--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making suggestions and expressing their preferences, but there is no disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 284.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, just for clarification, I assumethat still somehow implicit in all of this is a sense that there issome leeway for carrying out operations under "existing" if somethingdisorderly occurred or if financial strains developed. That's whatwas bothering us when we put this in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Axilrod is seeking clarification on a point. He is not expressing disagreement or contention with the statement made by the chairman.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I see your point. Those are caveats havingto do with a further tightening or an easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges and understands the point being made by the other person.


Passage number 286.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Axilrod without providing any information about him or any indication of disagreement or contention surrounding him.


Passage number 287.
 So, I think we need some sense here that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I would have done in my othersentence saying that the operational implementation might need to bemodified. This is precisely what I was after. If we do it the otherway, we're just leaving it understood, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and suggesting a specific course of action, but there is no contradictory statement or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 288.
MR. CORRIGAN. Which is fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that something is fine.


Passage number 289.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's clearly understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "It's clearly understood" implies that there is a shared understanding and lack of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 290.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, but that modifier says "considered in thecontext." I think it's better to drop that "only" and say "consideredin the context of appraisals of" these three things. The "financialmarket conditions" gives you the caveat to lean in an operationalsense in the direction of less restraint if that seems to be necessarybecause of unusual financial strains.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Gramley suggesting a modification to the wording for better clarity and context.


Passage number 291.
-39-5/21-22/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This sentence really refers to changing[the degree of restraint] in response to the movements in theaggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a mathematical expression rather than a statement or argument that can be contested or disagreed upon.


Passage number 292.
MR. PARTEE. I think that's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply agrees with the statement made by someone else.


Passage number 293.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it stands on its own feet andthat's fine so far as it goes, but it does not take care of Mr.Axilrod's problem. I guess we could leave it understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and stating that while they agree to some extent, the argument does not address Mr. Axilrod's problem.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
MR. PARTEE. We could also do something with that lastsentence, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests making a change to the last sentence, indicating a disagreement or difference of opinion about its content or wording.


Passage number 295.
 "The Chairman may call for Committee consultation ifunusual strains develop or--"MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we don't want to imply with the directivethat he has to call for a telephone conference to deal with adeveloping problem that may require instant action. I'd make thepoint that we didn't have special language in the previous directive,which did not prevent the Desk and the Chairman and Steve from workingon what was necessary. I don't think this language is going to hinderus in that respect either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley is simply expressing his opinion on the matter and explaining that he does not think the language will hinder their ability to take necessary action.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can also say if it reallybecomes necessary, we will have a consultation and we can have one.And we may well want one sometime during this interval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 297.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 298.
 Well, over the last eight weeks we seemed tohave had enough flexibility to deal with the problems and we didn'teven mention financial conditions [in the previous directive], so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think Steve is technically right but itshould be understood. It would be a better or [more] completedirective to put something in there, but if it's understood and we canall live with it--. I think it ought to be understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging Steve's point and agrees that it would be better to include something about financial conditions in the directive, but ultimately believes that it should be understood and can be accepted by all.


Passage number 299.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'd like to leave it understood. As far asthis consultation issue, under the circumstances it's not difficult tothink of a dozen circumstances in which we might want to consult thathave nothing to do with the federal funds rate band and that should beunderstood too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Corrigan is simply expressing his desire to make a point clear and emphasize that consultation may be necessary for various reasons unrelated to the federal funds rate band.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 300.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The question in my mind, which is notrelevant to our decision here, is that we look like knee-jerk reactorsin the sense that the first time we put in financial markets as athing we consider to modify our behavior is after the ContinentalIllinois situation. Many of us, including the Chairman, certainlywere worried about the financial market situation and vulnerability ofthe banking system before this month of May '84.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker describes a question in their mind that is not relevant to the decision being made. This suggests a disagreement or difference in opinion between the speaker and the decision-makers.


Passage number 301.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It became a little more operational.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that something became more operational.


Passage number 302.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. It does seem to me, though,that you and I are putting more emphasis even on the LDC debtsituation as being a constraint on our operations rather than theContinental situation. I'm wondering just in the longer term, more asa philosophical speculation, whether maybe we ought to consider havingthat in there even if Continental settles down. I'm saying we shouldnot take it out in the next directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing personal thoughts and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 303.
-40-5/21-22/84MR. ROBERTS. We always have it in when a $40 billioninstitution fails.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Roberts about the inclusion of $40 billion institutions failing.


Passage number 304.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's another way of making mypoint. We look like we're reacting to something that caught us bysurprise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining another way of expressing their point of view.


Passage number 305.
MR. PARTEE. Sometimes we've even said "international anddomestic credit market conditions." I think it can last for a while.If we put it in as we've been talking about, it's a soft reference andso it can remain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee discussing "international and domestic credit market conditions" and suggesting that it can last for a while. The language used suggests a consensus or agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 306.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just clarify the so-calledContinental problem, as it is in my mind. Continental is probablymanageable with difficulty; $40 billion institutions are difficult tomanage. Having two or three $40 billion institutions is a horse of adifferent color. If we have two or three, I don't think we're goingto stop at two or three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating the author's thoughts on the management of $40 billion institutions and the potential for having multiple institutions of that size.


Passage number 307.
MR. GUFFEY. But that event would not be determined byinterest rate levels necessarily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a objective fact that an event would not necessarily be determined by interest rate levels.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is in the sense that that's wherethe LDC problem comes in. I think that is the cloud overlying manyother banks--not Continental, which happened to be largely a domesticproblem. The underlying concern about the other banks wouldn't bethere if we didn't have this international debt problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any direct statements of disagreement or contention. It is more focused on stating the author's opinion about the LDC problem and its impact on other banks, specifically Continental. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or arguments between individuals.


Passage number 309.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, that's my point. The LDC problem is moredirectly affected by the interest rate movements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, is stating his point without opposing or contradicting anyone else.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply confirming the accuracy of something.


Passage number 311.
MR. GUFFEY. More so than is the Continental situation oranother $1 billion or $40 billion bank problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Guffey is simply describing the situation without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the other $40 billion bank problemis going to come because of the LDCs, if it comes. Again, 1 or 2percentage points on interest rates in and of itself doesn't make orbreak that problem. Psychologically it may, given where we are in thenegotiating scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating a potential problem regarding the LDCs and discussing the impact of interest rates on it.


Passage number 313.
MR. GUFFEY. The only point I wanted to make is that the LDCproblem has been with us and has been recognizable over the past twoor three meetings, so the language proposed to go in the directive onrecognizing the financial market stress has to be tied essentially tothe Continental situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Guffey about the LDC problem and the need to tie language in the directive to the Continental situation.


Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply refers to a person without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 315.
 I don't--MR. ROBERTS. I think it's a very modest mention of a majorproblem and people would be very surprised if we don't pay someattention to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the problem mentioned is significant and suggests that people would be surprised if it is not addressed.


Passage number 316.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, nobody's saying we shouldn't.All I'm saying is that I don't think we should take it out ifContinental settles down. And in a sense I'm sorry we didn't have itin earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is neither expressing disagreement nor contention. They are simply stating their own opinion.


Passage number 317.
-41-5/21-22/84MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a random combination of numbers and letters that does not convey any meaning or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 318.
 I would agree with that, Tony, but the questionof whether to put it in now just because of the events--MR. PARTEE. If we had several Continentals, the operationalreference here to maintaining existing pressures on bank reserveswould be modified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker begins by expressing agreement but then introduces an opposing viewpoint by raising a question about putting something in now just because of certain events. The mention of modifying the operational reference further suggests a disagreement.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod has found a bit of timehonored boilerplate. We can do what we feel like in the light offinancial distress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod has found a bit of time-honored boilerplate about doing what they feel like in the light of financial distress.


Passage number 320.
MR. AXILROD. The existing directive has had in it sinceFebruary at least: "The Committee understood that policyimplementation would require continuing appraisal of the relationshipsnot only among the various measures of money and credit but alsobetween those aggregates and nominal GNP, including evaluation ofconditions in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets." All thatmodifies policy implementation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the existing directive and its requirements for policy implementation.


Passage number 321.
MR. PARTEE. All that's in there now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided does not include any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It appears to be a statement with no explicit disagreement.


Passage number 322.
MR. AXILROD. Forever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Forever" without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 323.
 It's only--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have ample authority.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is ample authority.


Passage number 324.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what is in the policy record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact ("That's what is in the policy record") without presenting any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 325.
MR. AXILROD. That's in the existing directive, in the long-run part of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply referring to a specific part of an existing directive.


Passage number 326.
MR. BOEHNE. Right, we never look at that [except when weconsider the long-run ranges].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement expresses agreement that they do not consider something, except in certain circumstances. There is no contention or disagreement implied in this statement.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to put something in theboilerplate, which nobody reads anyway. I guess there's no mention ofthis whole range of problems. Steve is proposing a sentence. I don'tknow whether it has to be precisely this, but let me know if you agreein general. "Recently, day-to-day market conditions have reflectedconsiderable sensitivity to potential liquidity strains, ashighlighted by the problem of one large bank, and to uncertaintiesabout the financial and budgetary outlook generally." That's anaccurate statement. It is one of the versions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that something be included in the boilerplate, expressing uncertainty about the specific wording, and asking for agreement in general. They then comment that the proposed sentence is accurate.


Passage number 328.
MR. PARTEE. That sounds right to me. It goes in thefinancial paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee agrees with the statement being made.


Passage number 329.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's proposed to follow the last sentenceon the discount rate. We used the word "recently" to get away fromthe discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the reason for using the word "recently" in relation to the discount rate.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, where we are, just to repeat: ...seeks to maintain existing.... This is expected to be consistent withetc., "somewhat greater reserve restraint might....In either case sucha change would be considered only"--I would prefer to leave that in.Then it says "financial market conditions and the rate of creditgrowth." We leave in the 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent [range for the fundsrate]. All this is with an understanding that that bit of long-rangedirective language that has probably been with us forever covers the-42-5/21-22/84situation where if we need some flexibility in light of financialmarket conditions, [we have it] whether or not we are responding todifferent aggregates or growth or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the current situation and expressing their preference for leaving certain language in.


Passage number 331.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not sure I understand why youwant the word "only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a statement expressing confusion or uncertainty about the reason behind someone's desire for the word "only."


Passage number 332.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only provides information about Chairman Volcker without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions being presented.


Passage number 333.
 That depresses the--MR. PARTEE. Aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement about something depressing, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 334.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --the speed with which we react to theaggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information about contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "the speed with which we react to the aggregates" without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 335.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So you're going to have "a changewould be considered only in the context of appraisals," right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that the consideration of change is limited to the context of appraisals, which could be seen as a point of contention or disagreement if there are differing opinions on whether change should be considered in other contexts as well.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The word "right" is not enough to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to give a clear answer without further information.


Passage number 337.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That sounds to me that we're lessquick to let the influence of the continuing strength of the businessexpansion, inflationary pressures, etc., etc. come through in terms ofthe monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating an opinion or interpretation.


Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I understand what you'resaying. It says--let me take the optimistic side--if the aggregateslook a little weaker than this and if the economy seems to be movingahead and the inflationary pressures are strong, we wouldn't be veryquick to react. If the aggregates are going up and the financialmarkets are in turmoil, we wouldn't necessarily be all that quick totighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing different scenarios and explaining the potential reactions in each situation.


Passage number 339.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't read it like that, because ineither case it is referring to the change in the aggregates. Such achange--namely, a response to the aggregates--would be consideredonly--. So you're basically limiting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing their interpretation and explanation of a certain concept, without opposing or contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 340.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it supports what would be yourposition, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is giving agreement and support to Tony's position.


Passage number 341.
MR. WALLICH. It seems to say that we wouldn't respond to theaggregates at all unless there were these other features and I don'tthink we want to preclude that completely; we just don't want to rushafter them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing a different perspective or suggestion, but there is no clear indication of disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 342.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I find the word "only" confusing. Doyou see that differing interpretation. Is there any great advantagein putting in only, which the Fed watchers will look at and wonderwhat is happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author finds the word "only" confusing, implying that they do not see an advantage in using it. The phrase "which the Fed watchers will look at and wonder what is happening" further suggests a potential disagreement or differing interpretation among different individuals.


Passage number 343.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems pretty clear to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement implies that the speaker has a clear understanding or interpretation of the situation, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 344.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's implied. We have a list of thingswe're going to look at before we let the aggregates move us. Italready says that. To add the word "only" doesn't add much; on theother hand, it may not be necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing his opinion about the word "only" and its necessity in the given context.


Passage number 345.
-43-5/21-22/84MR. WALLICH. Do you mean if there were no change in theeconomic situation from now and the aggregates were going very fastsuddenly--which they might do--that we wouldn't respond at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking about a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 346.
MR. PARTEE. It doesn't quite say that. It says we wouldconsider all these other things before we responded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the mentioned considerations would be taken into account before a response is made.


Passage number 347.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their agreement with the statement without providing any conflicting viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 348.
MR. CORRIGAN. I certainly don't have any problem with thesubstance of what we're talking about because I think it's the onlything we can do. But again in the context of possible contingencies Icertainly don't want to rule out the possibility--which we're not--that we might have to firm a bit sometime between now and July 10th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Corrigan expresses agreement with the substance of what they are discussing and mentions the possibility of firming up sometime between now and July 10th, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not ruled out and it's not meant tobe ruled out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing that something is not being excluded or intended to be excluded.


Passage number 350.
MR. CORRIGAN. I understand that. But the point I wanted tomake was more that the basic purpose of this directive, as I see it,is that it's a framework for a continuity and a discipline in thepolicy process. I don't want to diminish all the current problems butI don't want to see that lost with an endless string of adjectives andqualifiers either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is expressing his understanding and viewpoint.


Passage number 351.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So what are you saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "So what are you saying" appears to be a question seeking clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 352.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'm saying [this is] fine, but let's not losesight of what this really is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 353.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But I thought the practicalimplication of what you were saying was that you don't want thequalifier "only" inserted, which we didn't have in the previousdirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "But I thought the practical implication of what you were saying was that you don't want the qualifier 'only' inserted, which we didn't have in the previous directive" suggests a disagreement or contention about the use of the qualifier "only" in the previous directive.


Passage number 354.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't have a problem with it because I thinkI know exactly what it means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Corrigan indicates his acceptance and understanding of the given matter.


Passage number 355.
MR. PARTEE. But I think one can read it to include thatalertness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a statement made by Mr. Partee, expressing his opinion or interpretation of the text.


Passage number 356.
MR. BOEHNE. I don't think it adds anything to communicationor flexibility. I happen to like the sound of it and I think we cankeep it in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 357.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't want to make a big deal outof it; it's not. But if a Fed watcher sees "only" this time and notbefore, does this imply that earlier we were more responsive to themonetary aggregates and now we're less responsive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The phrase "But if a Fed watcher sees 'only' this time and not before, does this imply that earlier we were more responsive to the monetary aggregates and now we're less responsive" suggests a potential disagreement or contention. It implies that there may be differing viewpoints on whether the Fed's responsiveness to monetary aggregates has changed over time.


Passage number 358.
MR. BLACK. I think that's the way they would interpret it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing the speaker's belief or opinion.


Passage number 359.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "MR. PARTEE" without providing any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 360.
 That's what I say: It's not inconsistent with--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My long-term policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements.


Passage number 361.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You ought to be delighted. Shall we vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "You ought to be delighted" implies that the speaker believes the listener should be happy, and the question "Shall we vote?" suggests a potential decision-making process or consensus, but it does not imply conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 362.
-44-5/21-22/84MR. GUFFEY. Is "only" in or out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any discussion or disagreement about the word "only." It simply provides a string of numbers and the name "Mr. Guffey."


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In the following passage, there is no contention or disagreement.

Explanation:
The passage does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It may present information or describe a situation without any disagreement expressed.


Passage number 364.
MR. GUFFEY. I don't have a vote, so it's all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey simply states that he does not have a vote, indicating that he is not involved in the decision-making process.


Passage number 365.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Are we ready" is a straightforward question and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 366.
MR. WALLICH. I'm startled by the implication of this "only"now. This is a declaration in principle that we are changing ourattitude toward the aggregates at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich expresses surprise but does not oppose or disagree with the implication mentioned.


Passage number 367.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention anything about Mr. Partee or any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 368.
 It would be considered in the context--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to be very careful in thecontext of all this stuff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It expresses a cautious approach without any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 369.
MR. WALLICH. I think that really means something more than Ihad understood. That's very difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply indicates that the speaker has gained a better understanding of something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 370.
MR. PARTEE. I have a marginal preference for leaving it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Partee expresses his preference for leaving something out, suggesting disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 371.
MS. HORN. I have a marginal preference for leaving it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is a personal preference expressed, which indicates a subjective opinion but not necessarily contention or disagreement.


Passage number 372.
MR. ROBERTS. So do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 373.
MR. BOEHNE. So do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 374.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Can we have a show of hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're cheating if we leave it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think we're cheating if we leave it out" expresses a personal opinion or perspective, but it does not suggest any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 376.
MR. MARTIN. Let's leave it in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement suggesting to leave something as it is.


Passage number 377.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we can have it understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. GRAMLEY is simply expressing a willingness to reach a mutual understanding.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have more things understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact - that "we have more things understood." There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 379.
MR. WALLICH. If we said "would continue to be considered" inthe context of all these things, then it would indicate that we're notchanging anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 380.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We weren't reacting thatmechanistically to the aggregates before this and no one seemed tofeel dishonest by not having the word "only" in at that point. Idon't know; I wonder if people are going to overread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author suggests that there wasn't a mechanistic reaction to the aggregates before, while acknowledging that someone may argue otherwise in the future. This expresses a difference in perspectives or viewpoints.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd be delighted to have them read that wetake a second look in terms of all these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker would be happy for someone to consider taking another look at certain unspecified things.


Passage number 382.
MR. MARTIN. So would I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "So would I" indicates agreement or agreement of a similar sentiment.


Passage number 383.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Instead of saying "only" could we say"such a change would naturally be considered".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Instead of using the word "only," the suggested phrase "such a change would naturally be considered" does not introduce any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory information. It simply proposes an alternative way of expressing the idea without changing the overall meaning or introducing disagreement.


Passage number 384.
MR. PARTEE. Or "such a change, of course, would beconsidered only in the context of".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Partee is expressing a condition that needs to be met for a particular change to be considered. There is no indication of disagreement or contention as Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact.


Passage number 385.
-45-5/21-22/84MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a mathematical expression or equation.


Passage number 386.
 "Would continue to be considered"--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's not going to influence my voteanyway, of course. It's a minor point. I don't want to make a bigissue out of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker clearly states that the point being discussed is of minor importance and expresses their lack of interest in making it a significant issue.


Passage number 387.
MR. MARTIN. Let's vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a voting process, but does not provide any context or information to suggest any disagreement.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's a relatively minor point.All it is meant to convey is that before we move we should stop, look,and listen a little more strongly than before. That's the way I feel.It's a question of whether you feel that way or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and acknowledges that it ultimately depends on how the listener feels.


Passage number 389.
MR. MARTIN. I certainly do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Martin simply expresses his agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the action of voting.


Passage number 391.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the only information provided is the name "MR. BERNARD."


