Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 11-12, 1986A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 11, 1986, at 3:10 p.m. andcontinuing on Wednesday, February 12, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan,l/ Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalJohnsonKeehnMartinParryRiceSegerWallichMr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele,l/ Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman,l/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Broaddus, Kohn,l/ Lindsey, Prell, Scheld,Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross,l/ Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting ofDecember 16-17, 1985, and acceptance of the report of Examinationof the System Open Market Account.2/11-12/86Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Danker 1/ and Mr. Stockton,l/ Economists, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek,2/ Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, Rolnick,Rosenblum, and Scadding, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland,Kansas City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas,and San Francisco, respectivelyMessrs. Higgins and McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Kansas City and Boston, respectivelyMr. Guentner, Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New York1/ Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussionand action on monetary growth ranges for 1986.2/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting ofDecember 16-17, 1985, and acceptance of the report of Examinationof the System Open Market Account.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 11-12, 1986February 11, 1986--Afternoon Session[Secretary's note: At the beginning of this meeting the Committee tookthe following actions: approval of the minutes of the previousmeeting; acceptance of the Report on the Examination of the SystemOpen Market Account; and, after hearing Mr. Sternlight's report,ratification of the transactions in domestic open market operationssince the previous meeting. For the text of Mr. Sternlight's report,see Appendix.]MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix. Secretary's note:There were no transactions to be ratified.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions?MR. RICE. Sam, are there any other explanations that youknow about, other than the [reaction to] statements of foreign centralbank and government officials, to explain the movement in the exchangerate after the lowering of the discount rate in Japan? As you said,after the Japanese lowered the discount rate and their interest ratesgenerally moved down, the dollar weakened further and the yen went up.I gather, as you said, that the explanation related to the statementsof government officials. But was there anything other than that?MR. CROSS. Many people saw this just as part of someunderlying weakness of the dollar. There was some view at thatjuncture that there might be a move by the United States and othersvery short after the Japanese action. Some people attributed someof the attitude to that expectation. But as I said, during thisperiod--and this is seen somewhat as a sign of the weakness in thecurrency--the fact has been that when events which in othercircumstances might have been expected to cause the dollar to showsome strengthening, it doesn't seem to have happened.MR. RICE. Very puzzling.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Steve, or Sam, or Ted--somebody:Where are the exchange rates today?MR. CROSS. The rates are down a little: 2.37-1/2 was thelast DM quote we saw and about 187 [yen].MR. AXILROD. They're roughly where they closed yesterday, sothey have been essentially flat this morning.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions?MR. PARRY. Do you think the long-term effect of lower oilprices will be negative for the dollar? Can a case be made thatlonger term it could have favorable effects, particularly in relationto sterling and the Canadian dollar?MR. CROSS. Well, this question of the effect of oil pricesis very, very complicated. I guess anybody can come to his or her ownview. Certainly, I would think that over a long period of time a2/11-12/86declining price of oil is going to be of great value and importance tothe United States and has to be helpful. But I don't know when or howthat comes about or in what kind of time period. But right now, as Isaid, the [market's] concentration seems to be on the fact that it isof greater help to those who suffered most when the oil price went upand to those who had a greater reliance on imports--in particular theJapanese. For the Japanese, it's an enormous part of their totalimports and it has an enormous benefit.MR. TRUMAN. One view used to be that higher [oil] priceshelped the dollar because the people who were accumulating assets hada stronger preference for dollar-denominated assets in terms ofaccumulating wealth. One argument would be that you could run thatview now in reverse and say that that would be one explanation for thedollar's weakness. Given the fact that most of those countries havebeen decumulating assets for a fairly substantial period of time--several years now--that argument probably has less weight than itwould otherwise. That asset preference argument probably has lessweight than if the oil price decline over the last several years hadhappened all at once.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other questions, we'llturn to Mr. Kichline and company.MESSRS. KICHLINE, PRELL and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was an exhaustive, comprehensive, andanalytically complete briefing. Now, what questions can anybody ask?MR. MELZER. Jim, on the current services budget, it dawnedon me that maybe the reason the market hasn't reacted so badly in thelong end to this unconstitutionality aspect of Gramm-Rudman has to dowith the thinking that is evolving with respect to the currentservices deficit. Looking out to 1991, as I understand it, withnothing further done than what is already on the table, and that wouldinclude the fiscal 1987 actions, I guess--no it doesn't; it's just thefiscal 1986, right? You probably wouldn't agree, but I would beinterested in your view: Is that a viable scenario? Seeing the CBOcome out with similar numbers is what caught my attention.MR. KICHLINE. Right, I think that's an important feature.And that's very different from the last four or five years, as youknow, with current services estimates shown to grow substantially intothe $300 billion plus range five years out. We do not have all of thedetails available on the CBO estimates. I must say that one mightassume that there is some agreement on what current services estimatesmean but that turns out to be very wrong. This year is a classiccase. For example, the Administration's current services numberassumes that the defense baseline is 3 percent real growth. Well,after the Gramm-Rudman March 1 cuts, they jump up spending but assumethat the spend out rate is very slow. CBO assumes that noCongressional action is zero real growth, but recent experience hasdefense spending much faster than the Administration [assumption].The net result is that in 1991 there is a mere $35 billion[difference] between the two on defense alone, but there areoffsetting changes. Interest rates are different; they are worth $20to $25 billion. Inflation rates are substantially different, with the2/11-12/86Administration having inflation drifting down to 2 percent in 1991 andhence indexed programs grow at the much slower rate; under the currentservices estimates, that's worth something on the order of $25 billionor so by 1991. So, if you want to mix and match all of these thingsin your own way, instead of 1991 numbers that drift down essentiallyto $100 to $110 billion without further action you probably could haveanything from $50 to $200 billion and be perfectly consistent with allof these numbers. The problem, I think, is that there is a great dealof emphasis on the notion that it's very different even withoutfurther action--that the budget will be improving--and I think that'sprobably faulty. Hidden behind this, there's a lot more going on.MR. MARTIN. I would like to ask Ted Truman about hisvertical bar chart, chart 16, on the changes in consumer prices inforeign industrial countries and in the United States. Could youdisaggregate that a little for us? What are you and your peopleprojecting for the Federal Republic [of Germany] and for Japan? I wasat a European conference recently and there was a lot of talk aboutzero inflation in the Federal Republic and I wonder what you are--MR. TRUMAN. We are projecting very low rates for both thosecountries: 1-1/2 percent for Japan; and 0.9 percent, if you want to beinappropriately precise, for Germany.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At [a per barrel price of] $10 for oil?MR. TRUMAN. With a $20 oil price. That doesn't take quiteas much off, as I explained, because there are high taxes. So,although the dollar component of it helps, the fact that they halvethe [rate] of consumer price--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Where oil was yesterday could easilyhave given you a negative--a small outright decline in consumer pricesin Germany and Japan.MR. MARTIN. I heard that too.MR. TRUMAN. Well, one percent for the year measured from thefourth quarter over the fourth quarter is the number I have.Obviously, within anybody's forecasting range, that could mean that ina given quarter there could well be a negative number. For otherEuropean countries like the Netherlands and Switzerland we also haveless than 2 percent.MR. MARTIN. What are you assuming about policy in theFederal Republic and Japan vis-a-vis their interest rates? When youget to the capital flow, what are you assuming--no change, whateverchange we do?MR. TRUMAN. Little change, I think is a fair [description],or maybe some slight drifting down of interest rates. We have notmade any abrupt assumption of change; for the average of thesecountries it's maybe something like 50 basis points over theforecasting period.MR. MARTIN. So the totality of that analysis wouldn't beparticular downward pressure on the dollar, just from matters such asthe interest rate spreads and inflation spreads.2/11-12/86MR. TRUMAN. Well, in some sense, the fact is that theirinflation rate is coming down more than ours and interest rates arenot coming down as much as ours. In fact, implicit in this forecastis that real interest rates will be going up slightly in thosecountries. Depending on what you think is going to happen to realinterest rates here, that could be viewed as somewhat negative to thedollar.MR. WALLICH. Why should that be negatively viewed, in thecase of negative interest rate [spreads]?MR. TRUMAN. I am just saying that if Germany cuts itsinflation rate from last year to this year in half--by 100 basispoints or more--and you don't think German interest rates are going to[decline] by 100 basis points, then that would tend to depreciate thedollar or appreciate the yen--I mean the deutschemark. I had thewrong currency there!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two strong currencies, anyway. They werereferring to chart 16; I had a small point on chart 15. ThatEconomist index looks like it went up all last year. You said, if Iunderstood you correctly, that in the last two months it has gottenhigher than a year ago. It sure doesn't look that way on the chart.MR. TRUMAN. This is zero. So those are year-over-yearchanges; anything above those--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are year-over-year changes?MR. MARTIN. I thought the index flattened in October, but ifyou are using year-over-year figures, I don't know how it works out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was decreasing at a slower rate ofspeed. Now it's right.MR. TRUMAN. In fact, on this index there's about a 6 percentincrease against the lows in the summer. Now, this is a broader indexbecause it includes food, particularly coffee, than just an industrialsupplies index. The industrial supplies index, instead of thispositive number here, shows something on the order of a 3 percentdecline.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Yes. Ted, I am asking a question around chart16, but I don't see what I am really looking for. It has to do withthe LDC countries; you slipped in a rather quick comment about theBaker plan and what it would do for those countries. But I wouldthink that since the announcement of the Baker plan last year thefunding needs of those LDC countries, particularly Mexico, would havebeen altered rather significantly. My question is: Does that haveimplications for real growth, for stability? How does that feed intoyour analysis?MR. TRUMAN. I think the answer is yes, in some. In fact,when we started to put this forecast together we were inclined to havea somewhat more [upbeat] outlook in the non-OPEC developing countriesthan is shown in this chart. By looking at such considerations as the2/11-12/86oil price and how that might affect them and some of the uncertaintiesthat might be associated with that, we were led to scale backsomewhat; it was sort of a netting factor that we wanted to put inthere. The Baker countries themselves, which include Mexico andseveral OPEC countries like Venezuela, Ecuador, and Nigeria, onbalance, are hurt by lower oil prices. We have maybe something like$7 billion, based on the price decline, built into this forecast. Itis also true, however, that the decline of the dollar does, onbalance, tend to help these countries. To the extent that they havefollowed flexible exchange rate policies, their exchange rates moreoften than not are biased toward the dollar, or [move] relative to thedollar. That's especially true in Latin America. A number of them--Brazil is a good example--are gaining in competitiveness vis-a-vis theother industrial countries, as we do. Korea is another example. Youmay have seen a lot of stories about that: how the rising yen has putJapan at a competitive disadvantage vis-a-vis Korea. Well, Korea isone of these non-OPEC developing countries; therefore, you mightexpect that, to some extent, to give them a somewhat better picture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I expect this is a non-collapse scenario?MR. TRUMAN. This is certainly a non-collapse scenario.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Jim, for the past couple of years, we have had alot of financial structure problems. Now today, if not before, we'llcertainly add to that list the potential problems that the oil pricecould cause. Looking back over the shape of the U.S. recovery, whereis it that we see these problems reflected in the recovery? Do we seethem in housing, business investment, balance sheets and so forth? Dothe sectoral problems just all wash out by the time it all gets to thenational average process? What has been the effect?MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's rather broad. We can start withTed's comments, because I think part of the problem that we are facing--and it certainly influences our thinking--is reflected in what hasbeen happening in the Third World countries and the debtor nations.And that, in part, is a reflection of what has happened to the dollar,which we think basically relates back to some structural developmentsover the course of the recovery with respect to the deficit and theway our economy has grown and our relatively high interest ratescompared to the rest of the world. Mike referred to some debtproblems in the consumer sector. We have taken what I think is amoderate picture there and have assumed that there are going to besome problems but that they will be manageable. At the same time, weknow we are generating a great deal in the way of additional financialassets and wealth; and we assume that consumers as a group will bewilling to run with relatively low interest rates. But I think hiddenthere in the consumer sector is a substantial problem that could bemagnified as this [expansion] goes on. For example, in the Southwestwe see the oil pressures evolving. We know that there already aresome debt problems in the Texas and Louisiana areas. Both consumerdebt and mortgage debt in the nonresidential structures area [couldpresent problems]. So I think that the problems are there. But, inour view, continued economic growth in the aggregate will help us gothrough that process without a great deal of strain. The corporatesector is a bit more difficult because there are tremendous problems2/11-12/86in that sector, if you look at individual balance sheets. Again, someof them on the energy side I think are quite risky. And some who afew years ago paid a heavy price and went into debt essentially todiversify their interests by moving into energy have a big problem.But again, we have assumed that those problems are essentiallymanageable. I think it is important to consider that we have a growthenvironment and relatively unchanged--certainly not substantialincreases in--interest rates. And in that context, we don't think themicro problems will escalate into big macro problems over time. Butthroughout all of the major sectors, it would be very hard to thinkthat there are not problems for certain groups and individuals orindividual firms or countries. I don't know if I have answered thequestion.MS. HORN. It's a good start.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Jim, on chart 21 where you talkedabout the impact of lower oil prices, it seems to me that the patternof effects is a little puzzling. Wouldn't one expect, for example,that the impact of lower oil prices on real GNP would be felt more in1987 than 1986--that it takes time for these oil prices to work theirway through in terms of increased income for people to spend and lowercosts for corporations to increase their spending? I would say thesame thing, but maybe with not quite the same lag, about the deflator.It isn't only the direct effect of lower oil prices on inflation;there are many indirect impacts that probably would show up more in1987 than in 1986.MR. KICHLINE. I think that's right. We have rounded thesenumbers and you caught the right direction in which things wererounded; actually, on the lower oil price side the effect is about .35or so and I rounded it up to a half and for 1987 I rounded it down.But the sense really is that the real impacts will take a while tofeed through. That's true on the prices too, except that there is abigger question on prices. The Board's quarterly model that we usedhere has a much larger impact on prices in 1987 and very little in1986; we judgmentally adjusted some of these because we think therewill be substantial pressure and the direct effects will come along ina major way. So, in effect, we fiddled with the numbers there. Ourbest sense is that we will get some of the direct effects [in 1986]but that the important feedback effects will filter through on into1987.MR. PARRY. I like your model forecast.MR. KEEHN. Ted, could you go over chart 17, the agriculturalexport chart, again? Apparently, you're forecasting an increase inexport volume in the first half of 1986, then a decline, and then backup in 1987.MR. TRUMAN. Again, that's partly because these charts aredone on a year-over-year basis; that reflects the fact that the firsthalf of 1985 was so weak. In fact, looking across the 1986 patterns,we do not see the kind of increase that is presently [unintelligible]while this decline in the first half of this year from the last halfof 1985 has assumed some fairly large shipments; and that's basically2/11-12/86the explanation for the dip shown in the second half of 1986. Iwanted to be consistent in the numbers used, but in this case I thinkit generated more in the way of wiggles for the agricultural picturethan our forecast suggests is likely to be going on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Jim, I have a similar question back on chart 21with regard to the response to further declines in the oil price. Myquestion is more a question of magnitude than of timing. When I lookat another $5 a barrel drop, which is I guess the alternativeassumption here, I'm surprised at the relatively small magnitudes onegets from that. Some work we have done suggests that the magnitudecould be a lot larger. The direction I would agree with; it's justthat our research suggests that the magnitude could be a lot larger,even allowing for some errors around the range. I am rather puzzledby this response.MR. KICHLINE. This is our general sense. Basically, itboils down to a rough rule of thumb that for a dollar change in theprice of oil the response is a tenth on real GNP and a tenth on thedeflator, in opposite directions. If one is talking about prices, itis very clear that the impact on the consumer price index is muchlarger--roughly double. Our thought is that a $5 change in the priceof oil would translate into a percentage point after four quarters inthe rate of change in the CPI. But I think this is fairly standard.I have seen a DRI forecast--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible]; maybe I don't understandit. You have one percentage point lower prices; it just takes twoyears to get it. You have 1/2 percentage point in each year.MR. KICHLINE. That's 1/2 percentage point off the rate ofchange in each year from what it otherwise would have been. If priceshad been running at 3 percent, when you change the oil price, pricesare then running at 2-1/2 percent in each year--minus 1/2 percentagepoint. So that is the marginal impact of that change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not an additional 1/2 percentagepoint the next year?MR. KICHLINE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So it's 1 percentage point over two years.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, that's right.MR. TRUMAN. But consumer prices will be--MR. KICHLINE. Prices would be down one percentage point inthe first year. Essentially, our view on the CPI is double thateffect in the first year. I don't know how to answer the question.Basically, there are lots of alternative views on this, but I thinkthis is one that is fairly standard.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.2/11-12/86MR. GUFFEY. Just an informational question with regard tothe debtor oil-producing nations such as Mexico: Is most of that debtdenominated in dollars so that they are getting a double whammy withrespect to the drop of the dollar as well as the oil crisis?MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the drop of the dollar helps them tothe extent that they export--well, Mexico is mostly a dollar exporter.If a country has some mix of non-dollar exports, that helps them.MR. PARRY. But the debt is denominated in dollars.MR. TRUMAN. Not entirely; that's the problem. A largefraction of it has been shifted--or will be shifted in the context ofthis arrangement--at the bank's option. Many of the European bankshave switched back into their own currencies.MR. GUFFEY. And will it carry a LIBOR? If it carries theirinterest rate, the repayment will be in their currency which couldhave a--MR. TRUMAN. It depends on whether you think the dollar isgoing to decline more or less rapidly than the interest ratedifferential.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Jim, I have a question about chart 21, too.This is an exciting chart.MR. KICHLINE. I had some questions about whether I shouldinclude it!MR. JOHNSON. You have a somewhat asymmetrical treatment ofreal output and inflation under the assumption of 1-1/2 percent highermoney growth. That 1-1/2 percent higher M1 growth feeds through as a2-1/2 percent change in the deflator by 1988 whereas the effect onreal output up front is only 1-1/4 percent. The net effect is reallya strong effect on prices. That 2-1/2 percent seems awfully highgiven the 1-1/2 percent--MR. KICHLINE. What happens in the model here--and I guess Iwouldn't blame this on the model because [our forecast reflects] amixture of some staff judgmental adjustments to a model result--butbasically in answer to your question, if I had extended this over alonger time period we would get back on track. It's simply that theprice impact would be smaller in later years so that you are going toretreat to path. You will note that the unemployment rate under thatpolicy is down about 1-1/4 percentage points from its starting level,so it would be in the mid five percent range. In the model and in ourthinking, the natural rate is believed to be around 6 percent or ashade under. So what is happening here is that in the second year theunemployment rate starts to plunge below the natural rate and staysthere; and that generates intense upward pressures on prices andwages. Now, if you continue this year after year, the model wouldturn right back to a nice sensible path and everything would work out.2/11-12/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But--if I understand the chart--you aresaying that in 1988 in this hypothetical example the money supplywould be 4-1/2 percent higher than otherwise, right? And only 2-1/2percent of that shows up in prices.MR. KICHLINE. No, you have to cumulate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, okay.MR. MORRIS. I would like to point out to Mr. Kichline thatin 1985 we had a 5 percent greater rate of growth in M1 than weexpected, which was associated with very slow growth and a declininginflation rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is, all other things equal[unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. I assume that has an assumption of no change invelocity.MR. KICHLINE. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we don't have any more specificquestions, we're at the point where people can express their opinionsabout the general economic situation. With the wide range of opinionsin what was distributed, I am sure we will have a lively discussion.MR. WALLICH. How long has the [economy been growing] at thissteady rate of 3-1/2 percent--maybe four years?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3-1/2 to 4 years. Are you suggesting thatis a long time?MR. WALLICH. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you care to speculate whether thissteadiness will likely be interrupted on the up side or the down side?MR. WALLICH. Well, if it stops on the way down, it stopsitself. If it becomes a continuous reduction, I think we could getexcessive movements from that. I think that that could be dangerous.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are hoping for steadiness. I guesswhat we are supposed to be debating now is the likelihood of that.Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I think the course of 1986 is not likely to beas steady as the quarterly projections [indicate]. Looking at thenumbers that we have gotten in the past months, it seems to me that weare likely to start out the year stronger in the first quarter--atleast stronger than the 3.3 percent [forecast]. The breadth of thestrength in the numbers suggests to me that the economy is startingout stronger.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These forecasts were made up before thelatest numbers?2/11-12/86MR. KICHLINE. Before the January unemployment numbers wereavailable.MR. MORRIS. Presumably, you would have revised the firsthalf.MR. KICHLINE. Well, the first quarter, anyhow. Our bestguess at the moment is that we would be more inclined to have a 4percent number for the first quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You wouldn't want to expound beyond thefirst quarter?MR. MORRIS. Well, as I said, 4 percent seems much morelikely for the first quarter. Beyond that, I don't have any strongconviction. I think 3 percent for the year is probably still aboutright. I think what we may be seeing is the end of the inventoryadjustment, as you mentioned; and that could lead to a stronger firsthalf unless there is more inventory rebuilding than we're expecting atthis time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as the forecast goes, my ownforecast is a shade stronger in real terms than the staff's forecast--3.4 percent versus their 3 percent. As best as I can recall, there isno one difference that accounts for that--just a bit here and thereacross the board. My inflation number is also a little stronger,although I might be inclined to shade that down at least a little,simply because the oil price has fallen further--and I think is likelyto [move down] further--than I would have guessed 10 days ago orwhenever that forecast was made.As I said a month or six weeks ago, we can play around withthese forecasts until the cows come home but I think there is avariety of factors that transcend the forecast, which Mike and Jim andTed referred to in various parts of their commentaries. On theexchange rate side, for example, we have seen something that smells tome like a basic change in market attitudes towards the dollar, partlybecause of some of the official announcements and all the rest. Ithink that has been reinforced by the combination of the oil pricesituation and perceptions as to how that will affect the LDCs, and inturn how that in combination with some of the other problems that areperceived at least to be there in the banking system will affect [thesituation]. I think those considerations, at least at the margin, dohave a decided influence on the attitudes toward the dollar right now.So, I view the dollar as not only lower by 5 to 7 percent from when welast met but I guess I consider it a good deal more vulnerable on thedown side than it was six weeks or so ago. What will happen to theoil price is anybody's guess. It could stabilize in the $18 to $20range; it could go down further; or, if the Saudis are able to reach ameeting of the minds with the British or somebody else, the problem isthat it could go up--particularly if it got down to, say, the $15 or$13 range. In some ways the worst of all worlds is to have the oilprice go down that low only to come back up, even if it only came backup to $22 or so. I don't think one can rule that possibility out.How that will play out is an enormous uncertainty; but almostregardless of how it will play out, I think it has caused the LDC-10-2/11-12/86situation to deteriorate significantly. Mexico's problems are clear;to me the great danger is if Mexico gets so out of control that itforces other things to become unglued a bit. So, I think thatsituation is also a good deal more tender, to put it mildly.I remain concerned about this whole debt issue, which again,Jim and Mike touched on. I don't see it getting much better. If Ilook at Mike's flow-of-funds forecast for 1986--and I know how hard itis to forecast the flow of funds--in an underlying sense I don't seeanything that constitutes a real improvement there, particularly whenyou take account of the special blip in state and local borrowing atthe end of this past year growing out of tax considerations.On the inflation side, I guess I am a little more concerned.I think the probabilities lie on the side of an inflation rate thatlooks like the ones that are more or less represented in the forecastin front of us. But it is not hard for me to see how the inflationpicture could be worse, notwithstanding the oil prices. Productivityis lousy. I don't see that getting any better. The exchange rate hasalready come down 20 to 25 percent. I don't see any hard evidence ofany feedthrough on prices coming from that, though I don't rule itout. I don't know what the natural unemployment rate is either. Somepeople say 6 percent; it might be higher than that. The fact of thematter is that, looked at it in that light, the unemployment rateisn't all that far from the point where it could put some pressure onthe price level. Beyond that, just in a behavioral sense, the kind ofunit labor cost/price behavior relationships that are in the staff'sforecast and my own basically have profit margins sitting still in acontext in which it is very clear to me that businesses are going tograsp at every straw they can find to try and raise prices. So whileI agree with the price forecasts that are on the table, especially inthe context of the oil price situation, I must say that I do have someconcern that by the latter part of the year we could get anunfortunate surprise on inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I always feel very nervous at timeslike this since I don't have much confidence in anybody's ability toforecast. And with the Gramm-Rudman effects upon us and a [potential]drop in the oil price of unknown magnitude, we have two additionalcomplications. Our reading of the tea leaves is very close to whatJerry Corrigan has just described. We're guessing that we'll be alittle higher on real growth and inflation than the staff hasprojected, and I guess we have more confidence in our projection ofreal GNP than we do in prices. We have a figure of 3.4 percent forreal GNP; essentially, we think that the rapid growth in M1 last year,the recent declines in interest rates and in the dollar, thesubstantial recent increase in employment in January, and now the dropin oil prices are all going to combine to give us greater realconsumer spending and greater business fixed investment than the staffhas projected. Indeed, I think the latest monthly data suggest thatthis could be upon us right now. On the price side, we put in afigure of 4 percent for 1986, 4th quarter to 4th quarter; we arebasing that upon this exceedingly large rise in Ml the accelerationin real activity that we seem to have had recently, and now thedeclining dollar, which is going to put increased pressure on prices.Of course the drop in oil prices would have a mitigating effect on2/11-12/86this but nobody knows how much. If it persists for a long time, itcould well be that the staff's projection is going to be closer thanours. From the standpoint of policy I think we have to realize thatthis oil price decline is a one-time effect in a sense and is likelyto be short-lived. And all the other factors that I see out theresuggest that the pace of inflation is apt to be up somewhat from whereit has been. So, we are getting a little more nervous about that thanwe have been.CHAIRMAN.VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. I appreciate the timing of my turn, getting todebate with my friend, Bob Black. It seems to me that the indicationsfor future prices are quite the other way. I see no turnaround in thecommodity price situation around the globe. It seems to me that therestill will be almost a dumping behavior and that in some cases theLDCs will be [induced] in various situations by oil price declines andnecessity to dump something else into the markets. In terms of theoil price change, I think it is more fundamental; I respectfullydiffer with you in that regard. I consider the faint possibility thatsome day the Iranians and the Iraqis will stop the killing of eachother and there will be an augmented supply from that part of theworld. It seems to me that gluts beget shortages down the road, butit takes many years. We have experience from the two oil shocks thatwe have been through and now we are in a glut situation. I believethe inflation outlook is positive from those points of view.I don't know, Jerry, about productivity; I am as puzzled asanybody else. I certainly missed forecasting that over a period oftime, but I don't share your negative approach to productivity. Itseems to me that we have yet to realize our trend rate of growth. Ithink 3 percent is too low a guess with regard to potential GNP; thegap could be a couple of hundred basis points that we are fallingshort by. And I am not comfortable with the staff's projections ofexport growth. There is a table in the Greenbook in current dollarsthat shows an increase--I don't remember the percentage anymore andI've scratched over it once--of about 25 or 30 percent in fivequarters. I don't think we are going to make that for the veryreasons that this special report detailed. I won't take the time ofthis rather large Committee but you may remember the 7 or 8 pointsmade in that report, which added up to a delay of the impact: thelong-term contracts, fixed investments, special factors and so forth,that we all read in that report. I don't think we are going to beable to take market share back; I try to [unintelligible] myexperience with Sears World Trade, which goes back a few years, but Ijust don't see our being able to compete in the manufacturing areawith the Koreans and others around the globe. I don't think we aregoing to get that share back, and I think we still are going to bestruggling with the difficulties of competing with imports.I think the fiscal drag situation is spelled out very nicelyin two of the line diagrams in the staff's presentations: we'reswinging from a growth in real federal purchases of about 12 percentin 1985 to a decline of almost 8 percent in 1986--and then you add onto that state and local government, as the chart graphicallydisplayed. Will that be offset by some of the more positive factorsthat have already been reviewed? I suppose it will, but I don't thinkwe are going to get rates of growth of 4 percent past the first2/11-12/86quarter. I go along with Frank Morris' estimate of something morelike 3 percent. When the Chairman polled us not too many months agoas to what we thought about 3 percent growth, I said it's inadequate.It is particularly inadequate when you think of the debt that we haveto service in this country; every sector is this country has a hugedebt. Add to that the less developed country situation and theGermans and Japanese headed for a 1 to 2 percent inflation posture.It seems to me that if we are erring in any direction interms of the economy, it is that we are understressing the risk ofeven more inadequate growth after the first quarter. The firstquarter is fine; but once again we are all so impressed with twomonths' data, not all of which were positive, yet we are talking aboutmonetary policy that is going to impact the third and fourth quartersof this year and the first quarter of next year. The first quarter ofnext year will be the fifth year of expansion, as Governor Wallich hasalready reminded us. It is a pretty old expansion. Whether or not itis obvious where the structural imbalances are, we know they are builtin there. Goodness knows we have had enough changes in the economysector by sector, as Karen pointed out, and in industry by industry--in manufacturing, the thrifts, nonresidential construction and soforth. I don't think we are going to achieve the numbers that are inthe Greenbook for business fixed investment. Looking at the fourthquarter and all the shipments and contracts on Sierra--well, IBM is afine institution and all that, but you can certainly get distorteddata from one quarter's move there. I don't think we are going tohave big upswings in business fixed investment and nondefense durablegoods orders. The Defense Department finally seems to be waking up alittle with regard to what they are about over there. It just seemsto me that the risks are on the down side and that we have anopportunity here because there is some disinflation in the totality.We have an opportunity to look at monetary policy with a little moreaction space than in a different economic situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I generally agree withthe broad outlines of what I thought was a first rate report [by thestaff]; I might lower my original unemployment figure a bit. But itdoes strike me that this is a rather paradoxical macro forecast thatwe have here. It is the fourth year of a recovery. We have a litanyof micro problems that we all have recited many times. Texas isbecoming a micro problem. And yet I think the macro outlook in thisforecast--and, as I say, I agree with it--is a good bit better than weprobably deserve, adding up the micro pieces. In my District, and itis one of the stronger Districts in the country, I find that whilepeople generally are optimistic about 1986 the expectations don't runvery deep. I don't think they run very deep around this table either,because in November and December a number of us were looking at thenumbers coming in and thought the risks were on the down side. TodayI gather that most of us feel that things are a good bit better; and Ithink the numbers have been better. My point is that as we formulatepolicy--I am getting a bit into tomorrow's agenda--there is thisparadox. These expectations are not very deep; our mood can change.I think we need to allow ourselves some room for maneuvering as we setthese long-term targets tomorrow. We have some room on the bottom butI think we also need some room on the top because we could very wellbe sitting here in March or May and our expectations could change2/11-12/86again in the other direction just as they changed from Thanksgiving tonow. So, I accept this forecast; I feel a little uneasy about itbecause somehow the parts don't add up to the whole, even though Iagree with the macro numbers that the staff put out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Our forecast of real GNP is really quite similarto that of the Board staff's; it's just a couple of tenths higher.There are significant differences in the composition, however. When Ilook at the differences that we have in residential investment, Iactually think that I would be more comfortable with the Board staff'sforecast; consequently, we might even conclude that our forecast wouldbe even stronger relative to the staff's than I first thought.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interject for a moment toremind people that you get a chance immediately after this meeting torevise the forecasts [you have submitted]. You all have made somecomment, but I don't know when you look at them whether you'll changethem or not. What unemployment rate are we talking about here? Arewe talking about the civilian or the total?MR. KICHLINE. The civilian rate is what I think we have beengetting in the numbers given to us. The difference is a tenth andwhen push comes to shove, to be consistent with the Administration, atthe end of the report we will just add a tenth to whatever anybodygives us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Administration projects the total?MR. KICHLINE. The total.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you subtract a tenth from theirs. Ijust wanted to remind you as you talk about the outlook that you maychange your forecast after this discussion if you want to. Excuse mefor interrupting you.MR. PARRY. One other point I would make is close to thatmade by Frank Morris. Given recent developments, I think there is anexcellent chance that growth in the first half will be stronger thanindicated by the Board staff's forecast--and for that matter, by ourown. But I have a feeling growth is going to be more in final salesthan in inventories because I don't think there is much indicationthat inventories are going to grow at a very rapid pace in the firsthalf of the year. There is a fairly significant difference between usand the Board staff on the rate of inflation; actually, we are almosta point higher in 1986 and somewhat lower as it turns out in 1987.That mainly reflects the differences in the way we see the interactionof the effects of a lower value of the dollar and oil prices. As Imentioned before, we see lower oil prices having their major impact oninflation in 1987 whereas the dollar's major impact on inflation iscentered more toward the end of 1986. In any case, if one looks outto the price level at the end of 1987, I don't really see much thatwould differ.If I may make a few comments about the Twelfth District: Itappears to us that the District's economy is expanding at a fasterpace than the national average. Geographically, it seems that the-14-2/11-12/86strength is centered in California, Arizona, and Hawaii. One of themore striking numbers that we received on Friday was that California'sunemployment rate fell to 5.8 percent; that's a huge drop in the lasttwo months. I wasn't able to get the numbers on where all of thegrowth in employment was but I would suspect that it was in services,where it always is strong, and in addition to that in constructionsince the weather has been quite good. By industry, the strength isin consumer spending, particularly for services and durables; we seegood growth in residential construction and in addition, defense-related aerospace and electronics. The weakness centers in nondefenseelectronics, where there is so much foreign competition; inagriculture, which continues to suffer from some of the same ills thatit has for the past two or three years; and in mining and oil drillingand forest products, although one can make a case that there is aslight light at the end of the tunnel with regard to forest products.Our expectation is that for 1986 the District will outpace the growthof the rest of the nation by probably 1 percentage point; if one wereto focus just on California, I think it could be even greater.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, our forecast is marginallydifferent from the Board staff's forecast both with respect to growthand inflation. We think that growth in 1986 is going to be somewhathigher, about 0.3 of a percentage point. It is not in any particulararea but pretty much across the board. On the inflation side, wethink inflation is going to be a little higher than the Board staff'sforecast. I am not really as convinced about that personally as mystaff is, but what is driving that forecast of higher inflationbasically is the unemployment numbers, which would seem to point topressure on wages and prices later in 1986. And that combined withlower productivity would certainly indicate a higher inflation rate.The effect of the lower dollar and the drop in the oil pricesobviously work in different directions in terms of the effect oninflation, if you leave out the timing question. I don't know howthat washes out; maybe those two factors tend to net out to not toomuch effect on inflation. But one thing that I am concerned aboutfrom time to time is the drop in the dollar in terms of our trade-weighted index, which is pretty well weighted toward the Europeancountries. Obviously, the drop of the dollar doesn't affect tradewith some of our other trading partners, particularly Canada, wherethe dollar actually has appreciated. So I think that does have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Canada does have a big weight in thatindex and that's why it doesn't go down very much.MR. TRUMAN. Its weight is multi-lateral, so it's less thanits weight in our trade. I think I'm supporting your point, Mr.Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I focused particularly on Canada becausepeople in my District--the lumber people, for example--took somecomfort originally from the decline in the value of the dollar untilthey realized that it doesn't have any effect on their trade withCanada.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, there is no effect on those lumberpeople.-15-2/11-12/86MR. FORRESTAL. That's right. In fact, it's the oppositeeffect. In any event, our forecast gives somewhat more weight to theunemployment number than the Board staff's forecast, so we are higheron growth and a little higher on inflation. If I were to take outthat unemployment situation, I personally would be less concernedabout inflation. One concern that I have, which others have alludedto previously, is the less developed country situation andparticularly the effect of the drop in oil prices on Mexico. I thinkthat is going to be a very, very serious problem for that country, notonly for its economy but socially as well. Already it is having thateffect, and it certainly is going to have an effect on banks aroundthe country, particularly the money center banks. Having said that, Iam not sure what monetary policy can do to help that situation; but itcertainly is a problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to remind you all that theseforecasts in the last analysis are yours; I'm reporting to theCongress that they are personal forecasts. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to the outlook, I too have a strongerforecast than that depicted in the Greenbook. Statistically, acrosscomponents, it's broadly based; it's simply shared among a wide rangeof sectors of the economy. A couple of interesting things are goingon, it seems to me. It's not just that the latest statistics lookedpretty positive, although they did. I have talked in the past about atwo-tiered economy and the distinction between what has been happeningin the metropolitan areas as opposed to the rural areas. At least inour District, I am afraid now that I have to talk about a three-tieredeconomy. The metropolitan areas continue to do pretty well. Theproblems in the agricultural part of the rural economy are stillthere, of course, but in the non-agricultural rural economy I thinkthere are some signs of improvement in our District. This is evidentmost vividly in terms of re-openings or expansions or building of newplants, particularly in the mining and the pulp and paper areas.There are new pulp and paper plants in Duluth and in the UpperPeninsula, and copper mines in the Upper Peninsula have reopened.Some may well reopen in Montana. Taconite plants are reopening inNorthern Minnesota and there are some new processes being developedthere that may lead to some expansion in taconite output. It's reallyrather remarkable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am nonplused by the copper mine opening.MR. STERN. The White Pine Mine, which is largely worker-owned, reopened several months ago in the Upper Peninsula. They seemto be doing all right, and they are going to add employment shortly--another 300 workers. I have forgotten what the original base was butit was probably at least that size. There are plans afoot to reopenthe big [unintelligible] at the former Anaconda operation.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You are kidding?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who is working on this?MR. STERN. The man behind that is a guy by the name ofwho has been a building contractor; he is looking to getsome breaks from the state in terms of tax legislation and so forth.I don't know what he is going to work out with the unions. I presume2/11-12/86he intends to work out something. That plan is not signed, sealed,and delivered; I don't want to suggest that. But they clearly areworking on it in a serious way. As I say, it's a rather remarkableturnaround and that's why I am talking about this three-tiered asopposed to two-tiered situation, at least in part of the District.But I guess the real reason I am more optimistic about real growth hasto do with things like the decline in energy prices and what thatmeans for production and productive capacity, wealth effects stemmingout of the rise in stock prices and bond prices, and the other side ofthat coin, of course, the somewhat lower interest rates we haverelative to a year ago.On the inflation side, I must admit to being quite uncertain,as I guess others are also. I am concerned that the favorable effectsof the decline of energy prices may be offset to some appreciabledegree by the weaker dollar. I have a sense that labor markets aretightening certainly and that labor attitudes are getting a littlemore aggressive as well. And that gives me some concern. But beyondthat, I would not be inclined at this juncture to change my inflationoutlook much one way or the other. I am just concerned that perhapssome of the good things that are falling in place are simultaneouslybeing offset.MR. BLACK. Minneapolis certainly did improve when Jerryleft, didn't it?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As soon as I left!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Our forecast for the year is in substantialagreement with the Board staff's forecast. We have a little less interms of real GNP; that may reflect a Midwestern prospective. We area touch higher on the deflator, primarily because we have not forecastsuch a significant decrease in the price of oil. Within that broadsense of agreement, though, we have some differences. Our housingstart numbers are a bit lower than the staff forecast, based primarilyon the input of 2 or 3 of our directors who have had a pretty goodtrack record on that in the past. For commercial structures we aresignificantly higher; we think that the level of starts will taper offvery considerably and significantly, but there are enough projects onthe drawing boards that are committed to at this point that that oughtto carry us through this year.Turning now to a couple of comments about the District: Sincethe last meeting I think there has been a perceptible improvement intone and attitudes, at least among the people I talk to. I talked toa large retailer who just had an excellent January--16 percent overJanuary of last year and the best month they had ever had. They willhave given a lot of it back in February, but they have a veryambitious objective for the year and they think they are going to makeit. On the auto side, people I talk to in Detroit are forecasting aslightly lower auto year than we are--10.3 to 10.4 million units. Butthe production schedules for the first quarter are a bit heavier thanwas the case last year and the production schedules for the secondquarter are about level, despite the fact that GM has this enormousinventory on its hands. In heavy manufacturing there is someimprovement, with backlogs up just a bit. They are nowhere near the-17-2/11-12/86peak levels reached before and they are never going to get back there;nonetheless, the attitude is somewhat better there.On the agricultural side, I can't suggest that we are goingto see any improvement necessarily in 1986, but I think at least therate of deterioration is moderating. Land values have got to begetting down to some point of stability; and certainly, we do see adecrease in the rate of decline in land sales. Farm [unintelligible]improved farm liquidity, and I think the work that has been done withthe Farm Credit System at least clarifies an area of significantuncertainty. A couple of negatively pervasive comments that I hearare Gramm-Rudman and tax reform. Tax reform was described by one man,a [corporate] chairman, as the worst piece of legislation he had seenin twenty years. On the positive side, [my contacts are] verypervasively positive on inflation. I am talking to people who stillare negotiating wage contracts three years long which tend to be inthe 3 percent range commonly, or even 2 percent on the low side. AndI do think that there is something of a sea change out there on thepart of organized labor; their attitudes as they go into thecontractual process are entirely different now than in the past.Pricing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a minute; let me understand thatcomment. It depends upon what "past" you are talking about. Are yousuggesting it is lower than it was in the past or higher?MR. KEEHN. I am saying it's lower than it has been in thepast. Whereas people in the past have had--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a sea change from the '70s and acontinuation of the recent '80s.MR. KEEHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I just wanted to make sure Iunderstood you.MR. KEEHN. Again, three-year contracts are being negotiatedat a 2 percent annual cost on the low side and 3 percent as a commontendency but importantly with good work rule changes also; therefore,productivity prospects are improved. I think pricing [unintelligible]continues to be very, very tight. The margins are holding and thereseems to be very little room for price increases, so that aspect ofthe inflationary equation ought to be pretty good. As we look at theyear, we think it will be a positive year, pretty much in line withthe Board staff's forecast.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Si, if I just could ask: What doesDetroit think their effective production capacity on automobiles isthese days?MR. KEEHN. Jerry, the number for the second quarter--sorry,I don't have the numbers here. It was about 2.2 or 2.3 million, Ithink, for the first quarter, and that was about flat out. Ford isrunning flat out; GM has pulled back a bit.MS. SEGER. It depends on the composition, though, doesn'tit? At any one time, they will be short of capacity for a certain2/11-12/86model or a mini-van or something and have space to accommodate otherkinds of cars.MR. KEEHN. Ford attempts to be pretty general throughouttheir line. They are running very rapidly. They are increasing theline speed and they are working Sundays.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin, we all remember those bumperstickers about freezing in the Northeast!MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I am wearing twohats. On the broader picture, I have just a couple of comments. Wesee the economy generally pretty much as the Board staff does. We seea little more strength than we first thought because of the oil pricedevelopments; my own guess is that if we are wrong, we probably arenot seeing it quite as strong as it's going to turn out to be. On theinflation situation, while that has been doing very well and lookslike it is going to do very well, I have a little problem aboutbecoming very complacent because that could change, and I think itcould change fairly rapidly.Reference already has been made to the fact that we have amicro problem, so I will take just a minute and talk about that. Inthe Dallas District, [business conditions] continue to deteriorate;while the steep decline in the price of oil is on balance beneficialfor the U.S. economy, it's depressing economic activity in parts ofthe Eleventh District. I should add, however, that while the pricedeclines are unprecedented in modern times, they are not as great yetas is usually alleged by the media, which typically focuses itsattention on spot and futures markets where only a small fraction ofoil is traded and where prices tend to be highly volatile. Most oilis traded at prices posted by refineries; and that market, while a lotmore stable than the spot market, is still disorderly. For example,posted prices on West Texas Intermediate last Friday ranged from $18to $23.85 a barrel. Posted or contract prices have fallen by 25percent from November levels, in contrast with more than a 50 percentdrop in spot prices over the same period. Adjusted for inflation, oilprices are probably about where they were in 1974.Adding to our District's economic difficulties is theoverhang of office and other commercial buildings. We had expectedconstruction activity to decline for some time. The volume of newconstruction contracts plunged by 25 percent in the fourth quarter;it's down by 40 percent from August 1985 and this downtrend isexpected to continue. The weakness in construction and energy, ofcourse, is causing financial strains on our District's financialinstitutions. Manufacturing activity, especially that related toenergy and construction, has been declining. Retail sales growth isweak. Furthermore, the agricultural outlook is dim in some areas andeven foreboding in others. In spite of all of the negatives I havejust outlined, we have experienced some employment growth in theDistrict, perhaps about one percent. That [could be maintained] ifoil prices remain at current levels. Any further drop in oil priceswould produce zero or negative employment growth in the District. Mr.Chairman, that concludes my rather gloomy report on what's going on inthe Eleventh District.-19-2/11-12/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had a one percent increase inemployment over what period of time? Over a year?MR. BOYKIN. Just in early 1986, looking year over year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, my forecast is for 3 percent realgrowth and 4 percent prices, so I wouldn't characterize myself asbeing unduly worried about the strength of the economy or futureinflation right now. Nonetheless, in terms of my feelings ofdiscomfort with the forecast, they tend to be on the side of lookingat that list of things that mean the economy is stronger than we haveseen it and might get even stronger than we are forecasting. The listhas been given by several people around the table and it includes thefact that whatever the margin of excess capacity in the U.S. was, it'slower today. The sharp decline in oil prices will mean strongereconomic activity in countries such as ours. The resource shiftimplied by the exchange rate decline also will strengthen businesseconomic activity. So, that list of changes that have brought about astronger economy is very much on my mind.Turning to the inflation outlook, again there has been a listgiven; I would add one more item to the list of areas of potentialconcern about the inflation outlook and that is the labor calendar forthis year. There is quite an active labor calendar this year and fromthe point of view of size, maybe it's a chance to make more gains. Ireally don't want to analyze it except to say that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forget: Is the auto industry up in thiscalendar year?MS. HORN. No, steel.In the Fourth District, there hasn't been much change inactivity, but I think there has been a perceptible change in mood.The mood is one of growing confidence and growing optimism though, asI say, without any changes in order books or production schedules toback it up. That may be what is characterized as a shallow attitudeof confidence, but we do have that in the Fourth District.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I am generally not that far off from the staffforecast either. I have about the same number for nominal GNP growth--about 7, 7-1/2 percent--although I too am a little more optimisticabout the real side. I see the economy moving closer to the 4 percentrange for real growth, since I had the advantage of factoring in someof the recent information from the last month of two. I do thinkthings are looking a little better. I don't expect any greatinventory buildup but that should play into the situation, certainlyfor the first half of the year. So, I see the mix more toward 4percent real and I am really optimistic on the inflation side. I seemost of the spillover from the lower dollar maybe filtering more into1987 than into 1986; so I see inflation closer to the 3 to 3-1/2percent range for 1986 partially because of the oil price decline,[the effects of] which I think will show up fairly strongly later inthe year.-20-2/11-12/86In addition to that, the budgetary situation looks verypromising. Although I am not betting a lot of money on Gramm-Rudmantargets being met perfectly, I think we are seeing a change in thebudgetary environment that we haven't experienced in the last fewyears. Everybody has been waiting for this turning point on thebudget situation, and I think we see it. We are seeing it now as aconsensus among budget estimators; CBO and Fed staff as well as theAdministration and many other private forecasters are now seeing thestructural budget deficit at a turning point. I am not expecting thisto do fantastic things but, given no further change in policy--lockingin the [unintelligible] in outlays for 1986 alone--the CBO estimatesshow the budget deficits getting down to the $100 billion range towardthe end of the planning period. Relative to the size of the economyin that period, it's quite a different debt/GNP ratio than we havebeen expecting in the past. I think that's going to have quite aneffect on inflationary expectations. Some of that already has beendiscounted; but even if this process doesn't work its way outcompletely, there is additional optimism being built into theinflationary expectations side. One of the major factors creatingconcern in the past was the potential for the budget and politicalenvironment to pressure this organization into partially monetizingthe deficit and then inflation might result from that. I think someof that pressure is starting to subside and I am fairly optimisticabout that. Now, that doesn't mean that issue is no longer with us;it's going to be with us for awhile. But I think the oil pricesituation along with reaching a turning point in the budget ispromising, and that's why I see a little brighter inflation picture.I do worry a bit about the progress on productivity growth;that has been fairly discouraging. I may be wrong but, if you look atthat closely, I think one of the major reasons behind that isobviously the employment growth. But you have to ask why we havegotten such a strong employment growth. A company doesn't just go outand hire because it's fun to hire. Obviously, the relative cost inthis component of production is relatively cheaper. If you look atthe growth of wages at this stage of the economic expansion andcompare it to all other postwar periods, you will find that unit wagecosts are relatively cheaper than they have ever been in the postwarperiod at this stage of the cycle. And I think that's one of thereasons why we are seeing a lot of substitution toward the employmentside, despite some of the advantages to capital purchases[unintelligible], especially in the equipment area. One of these dayswe are going to see all these computer purchases show up inproductivity, I hope.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm waiting--within the Federal Reserve.MR. JOHNSON. But still, I'm fairly optimistic. We are onlyat about 80 percent industrial capacity, and I think we still have aways to go before we see that full employment unemployment ratepressure set in. I don't know how far that is because I have no ideawhat the full employment unemployment rate really is. But it's hardto match up 80 percent industrial capacity with 6.7 percentunemployment and say that we are there. It just doesn't look like itto me, compared to anything I have seen in the past. So, I think wehave a fairly promising year ahead but I do worry about the dollarsituation. Most of the effects of that probably are going to show upin 1987 and I think we really have to watch that situation carefully2/11-12/86and [determine] what the lags look like in terms of commodity pricesand how that filters all the way into other production prices.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, very briefly I want to say that myforecast is very similar to the staff forecast, deviating marginallywith respect to the projection for prices; our projection is a bitlower than the staff's. Picking up on what Governor Johnson has justnoted, I think there will be a greater impact on prices coming fromthe decrease in the oil price than there will be from the effects ofthe dollar, and I think the dollar effects will [begin to] show uplater in 1986 and have a greater impact in 1987. Therefore, I wouldlook for inflation to be somewhat lower than the staff forecast.With respect to the Tenth District, I am delighted to hearthat there is some brightness being exhibited in the Ninth District.Maybe it will flow with the cold air down across our part of country!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you find a copper mine in Colorado?MR. GUFFEY. We have several copper mines; I am afraid theNinth District may have a jump on us. Talking to people in the urbanareas of the Tenth District after Christmas, I would characterize theoutlook as fairly optimistic because of a fairly good Christmasseason, though retail sales were up only modestly on a year-over-yearbasis. Secondly, throughout our District the month of January hasbeen very warm and as a result that increased the optimism, I guess,of virtually everybody. But outside of the urban areas the majoractivities are agriculture, mining, energy, and aviation industry andvery little has changed except for lower asset prices with respect tothe agricultural sector, for example. There have been some new ordersin aviation that should have some positive impact on the TenthDistrict, but not a great deal. So, I don't see any real change fromthat very low level. There is very little optimism outside the urbanareas, and I am not sure that the Tenth District is going to share inthis nice forecast of 3 to 4 percent growth that the nation may enjoyin 1986. I will just make one observation with respect to the energysituation and how it may impact my District. Energy is made up in theDistrict not only of petroleum crude but also natural gas and coal.Natural gas prices have not reacted to the [drop in] crude prices;coal is in less demand and perhaps over time will be fairly severelyimpacted. But overall, I think there will be less of an impact in theDistrict just from a reduction in crude prices simply because of thevarious kinds of energy resources that are found there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Were coal prices down earlier? Has therebeen any downward movement in coal prices?MR. GUFFEY. Yes. As a matter of fact, one or two of thoseopen pit mines up in Wyoming actually closed because of [falling]demand. There is one being opened momentarily, but they don't thinkthey can go on into production.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am out of [names on] my list here.There are a few people who haven't commented. We should finish upthis discussion this evening and then start afresh in the morning witheverybody having made some initial comments. If Governors Angell,2/11-12/86Rice, Seger, or Mr. Melzer want to say anything, this is your chanceor forever hold your peace until tomorrow.MR. RICE. I will just say that I go along with the staffforecast with all the caveats and uncertainties. Accordingly, I amraising my forecast for real GNP by 1/4 of one percent and I amlowering my price number by 0.1 of one percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My word, 3.9 percent! Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. One nice thing about being last is that so muchof what I was thinking has already been stated; but I will just make acouple of points. One is that my forecast for this year's real GNPgrowth is a touch below the staff's. The main reason is that,although I would like to see exports respond very rapidly to thedeteriorating dollar, I am not convinced that they will. Also, Iwould like to think that imports would respond negatively to thedeteriorating dollar but, unfortunately, I am not convinced that thatis going to happen either. So, I don't think that we are going tohave net exports contribute as much this year as our staff numberssuggest. Also, I am a little more negative about plant and equipmentspending. I am concerned that questions about tax reform and what theproposals will do to business tax bills will discourage a lot ofinvestment of that type; as long as those proposals are out there andas long as they look as negative as they do, that's going to happen.So, those are the two places where my numbers deviate from thestaff's. On the inflation side, I am a little more encouraged aboutthe impact of the deteriorating dollar on inflation. I just don't seethese higher prices being passed through quickly. I am very convincedthat the foreign competition, having gotten their toe or foot or wholebody in this market, rather love it here, and I think that they aregoing to want to maintain market share and are not going to dothemselves in through hasty price adjustments. That's what my sensetells me; I hope it's not just wishful thinking.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether you are going to be last, I guess,depends upon Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I hesitate to make Governor Seger incorrect onthat point. I feel as if I am the boy from the farm. After listeningto all of these big city reports, it makes me aware of the fact thatplaces like Boston, St. Louis, and even Minneapolis are big placeswhen you come from the farm. There is a different perspective in therural areas that [stems from] the immediate emotional impact of allthat has happened and continues to happen. Those forces tend toaffect people's willingness to take on debt because the entrepreneursall have run for cover and besides that the lenders don't want tolend. So a really different mix is occurring and I suppose that givesa different perspective. However, I must admit that I have been veryimpressed by Jim Kichline and Mike Prell and their staff and thereports they gave. Looking at my forecast and comparing it to theirs,I come back with a question that I want to be sure that I am right onbefore I proceed. Jim, I understand that your projection has builtinto it a decline in interest rates over the year of what--75 basispoints?MR. KICHLINE. That's about right. Our thought was that thebill rate will get into the area of 7 percent, with the funds rate2/11-12/86drifting down to about 7 percent. But heaven knows what will reallyhappen on the funds rate.MR. ANGELL. With that kind of projection on interest rates,then, I guess my forecast wouldn't be so different from yours. I mustadmit that I made my forecast based upon a continuation of the presentlevel of interest rates. If we get that kind of movement in interestrates, the timing of that certainly would have something to do withwhat the forecast might be. I admit to having probably the lowestinflation prediction of anyone here; I'll claim the 2-1/2 percentinflation number. I don't mind doing that because I've been aroundeconomists for some time and they all told me how inflation was goingto be higher than it turned out to be; so I don't mind having been onthe right side of this issue for the last five years and continuing tobe on that same side.I think Governor Seger is correct in analyzing the foreignsector in regard to the competitive level there. Their economies arevery price and wage flexible and, consequently, they are going to takethe steps necessary to continue, or maybe to add to, their position inour markets. But the impact of the deflationary environment iscertainly there, and I just don't see any signs of any change ininflation psychology. Now, I see the expectations there; but if theinflation expectation remains above the actual rate of inflation itseems to me that we are going to see that in such areas asinventories. The forecast of the inventory accumulation that mightoccur is not going to be very plausible if the actual rate ofinflation is lower than the anticipated rate. In the area of oils andchemicals and farm products, it seems to me that with the decliningprice scenario one would want to hold fewer inventories, not moreinventories. So I have some questions in that regard.I am also somewhat hesitant to believe that equipment isgoing to do as well in this kind of environment as some might expect,but that might be influenced in part by my own perspective in regardto equipment in the farm sector. I don't know when John Deere hastheir wage negotiations, but they probably coincide with the autoindustry and it seems to me that they are a long way from re-enteringthat market. My last comment is in regard to the natural rate ofunemployment. I don't know what it is, by the way; but whatever itis, it seems to me that it's falling faster than unemployment isfalling. In fact, it may be dragging the unemployment rate down sothat any margins that we had are still there. I do not see any wagenegotiations that indicate we are getting closer to the natural rateof unemployment than we were.MR. MELZER. First of all, I would say that on the real sideI tend to be among the more [unintelligible] camp. I think monetarypolicy was generally stimulative last year, so we are coming into thisyear with a good deal of momentum in terms of employment gains andhow that will spill through to income and retail sales and so forth.On the inflation front, I would be among those who are somewhat moreconcerned about it. I am concerned about the change in psychologytoward the dollar that was referred to earlier and what the impacts ofthat are going to be over the course of the year. I also react to thefact that we have record employment levels and we have this questionof what the natural rate of unemployment is. In some areas, financialservices in particular, we are going to see pretty hefty wage-24-2/11-12/86increases. For example, one executive of a large insurance companymentioned to me that they are looking at 6 to 7 percent wage increasesin the coming year. Basically, I guess I am at the extremes in bothcamps. I think we will have a pretty good year on the real side but Iam concerned about the rate of inflation we could be looking at.Apart from some of the effects of oil and so forth, I think thebehavior of some of these other indices is something that ought to bewatched. There are some special effects in terms of food prices inthere, but we see this Economist index has shifted as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we are at the end of today'sagenda. Let me give you some materials that will be presented to theBoard on Gramm-Rudman, if you would like them. It'll come up at lunchtomorrow. We will have some discussion there but it has to be adiscussion not leading to a decision. I don't know how we will managethat but we will not be in the sunshine and we will manage it somehow.This Open Market Committee meeting is over--not over, in suspense. Wehave the meeting scheduled to start at 9:30 a.m. tomorrow morning. Itmight be a little safer if we moved it up a bit, if that doesn'tbother anybody. Do you want to move it up at least to 9:15 a.m. or to9:00 a.m.? Does everybody want to move it up to 9:00 a.m.? Allright, we will move it up to 9:00 a.m.[Meeting recessed]2/11-12/86February 12, 1986--Morning SessionMR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One small point of clarification, Mr.Axilrod. You referred on a number of occasions to "further" declinesin the price of oil. I don't know what you are looking at in terms of"further" declines as opposed to declines that have already takenplace.MR. AXILROD. Well, as you know, we have a $20 per barrelimported oil price. The spot price varies but it has been around$16.75 or $16.60 recently. I was assuming a little further declinefrom that spot price and the spot price itself getting reflectedfinally into the imported price of oil. So, I was thinking [of adecline of] $4 or $5 more on the imported price of oil.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there were a further decline in theimported price of oil, that would be a reasonably safe bet I wouldsay.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, could I just ask Mr. Axilrod if hethinks that alternative I would be consistent with an expectation thatthere is no threat of slow [M1] growth in the first half of this yearbut there is some danger of slow growth in the second half of theyear?MR. AXILROD. I think so, depending on how slow a growth youanticipate in the second half. We might begin to get relatively rapidM1 growth if interest rates were to decline substantially in thesecond half and that would begin pressing the upper end of this rangemore, unless it was widened a little. Generally the answer would beyes, but it depends a little on the pattern of rates one expects to beconsistent with that kind of projection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make two small observations and seewhether they will command support. First of all, you have very smallchanges between all your alternatives here. It's hard for me to seethe significance of these changes other than pictorially andpsychologically. Therefore, I don't think any of these necessarilyimply one thing or another in terms of very current policy. The otherobservation is that your changes are almost minute on the M2 and M3categories and there is nothing that says the Committee has to bebound within the bands of your hypothetical examples here. But justin the interest of perhaps slightly simplifying our discussion I wantto ask a general question. Are there really significant questionsamong members of the Committee about the M2 and M3 tentative ranges?Obviously, I think, there will be questions on what weight to put onM1 and what the M1 range should be. Is that all we have toconcentrate on this morning at this stage? I don't want to forbidanybody from talking about M2 or M3 if any of you really want to, butI just thought in making comments, people don't have to make a pointabout M2 or M3 and don't have to keep repeating their ranges unlessthere is really a disagreement. It seems to me hardly worthwhile tohorse around with a half percentage point on those ranges, unlesssomebody has a bigger concern about that.2/11-12/86MS. SEGER. If we are off on velocity as we were last year,should we have [higher] ranges for all of them--Ml, M2 and M3--toallow for that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a question you can raise. Ofcourse, we were within the ranges, so velocity didn't look bad lastyear.MS. SEGER. Well, we were in for M3 and we just barely got infor M2, didn't we, by the end of the year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depended on whether you were using theparallel line or the cone. We were pretty much in the range all thetime using the parallel lines. Of course, it was toward the upperend; there's no question about that. Well, I couldn't if I wanted to,but I don't want to [unintelligible] not discuss the wider aggregates.But the principal concern, I suspect, is on the weight to be given toM1 and on the ranges for M1. Perhaps we could concentrate more onthat, anyway. Does anybody want to say anything?MR. MARTIN. I would support that view, Mr. Chairman. Itseems to me that our experience last year using the parallel linesthat you alluded to, as well as the various projections, are consonantwith M2 and M3 ranges of 6 to 9 percent, even. On a pragmatic basis,I don't think there's a big argument to go to 6 to 10 percent orsomething like that. Ml is different.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we proceed and talk aboutMl; but if anybody wants to make some [unintelligible] comments aboutM2 and M3, obviously, you are free to do so. What do we do with Mlnext year?MR. MORRIS. I have had a proposal for a number of yearsabout that: [I would get rid of the M1 range]. I think it has been abit embarrassing that in three of the past four years we have not beenable to set a range for M1 that is compatible with a reasonablenominal GNP outcome. That doesn't seem to have hurt our credibilityin the marketplace too much; but the fact is that we keep on settingtargets that we don't meet. And I think last year was particularlydifficult because we rebased in the middle of the year and then westill couldn't bring Ml within the range. Now, it may well be that M1is going to be well behaved in 1986 and that we can get through theyear and be within one of these ranges; but I don't have anyconfidence that we can be sure of that. The other thing I would getrid of is the debt measure, but for a different reason. I think it ispretty clear now that if we are going to use a debt measure, we betterhave some adjustments to eliminate debt that is clearly not related toeconomic activity--that is, the substitution of debt for equity whichhas been very big in the last couple of years. There is this practiceby state and local governments of putting out debt and investing theproceeds in government securities; we count both of those. It seemsto me that if we are going to use debt, it has to be an adjusted debtconcept to take account of these things. If we can't make thatadjustment, I think we ought to drop the debt aggregate. So I wouldpropose, Mr. Chairman, that we set a range of 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percentfor M2, M3 and total liquid assets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are going [unintelligible] the M2?-27-2/11-12/86MR. MORRIS. I am a little concerned about our practice ofcontinually picking upper limits with the expectation that that'swhere we are going to end up. It seems to me that it would be prudentto have a little margin, and if we say 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent forthese three measures I don't think we would get any negative feedbackfrom the marketplace.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is not where we would expect to endup this year, is it Mr. Axilrod? Your projection doesn't put us atthe top of the M2 and M3 ranges, does it?MR. AXILROD. Yes, for debt we would be projecting--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not talking about the debt--[just] M2and M3.MR. AXILROD. No. For M2 and M3 we are very close to themiddle of the ranges.MR. MARTIN. But it does for Ml, right? 7 percent?MR. AXILROD. Yes. Our forecast for M1 is between 6-1/2 and7 percent. Jim says near 7 percent. In the model we rely on most itis literally 6.8 percent. We have others that are a little lower andone that is higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But M2 and M3 are not expected to be sonear [the upper limits].MR. MORRIS. I don't think the half percentage point is[critical]; 6 to 9 percent would probably work out all right. I justlike the idea of having a little extra margin.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll get the rebuttal from Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. What led you to that conclusion? I do think it'sgood at the time we set these long-run targets to take a longer-runlook at this and the reasons we are setting these ranges. We havebeen at it now for 10 years and I don't think anyone would claim thatthey work perfectly. But I do think they have helped us focus ourattention on our long-run objective of trying to return to pricestability. The remark that Steve made a while ago about theimportance of avoiding signals to the market suggests that the prudentthing for us to do at this point probably is to reaffirm the rangesthat we had adopted tentatively at the middle of last year. Now, eventhough Steve made a very excellent case for using all of theaggregates, I still believe--rightly or wrongly, and maybe just on thebasis of blind faith--that, of the three that we look at, M1 is goingto end up over the long-run being the best one to use. A lot of theseinstitutional changes are behind us and I don't think we have the samesort of change in inflationary expectations that we had in the pastthat affected the behavior of the aggregates. I am well aware thatthe velocity of Ml may behave the same way it did last year, maybeeven worse; but I think it's also reasonable to think that at somepoint it's going to resume some part of its normal behavior and Ithink that we ought to bear that possibility in mind, at least, insetting our targets. And I think the 4 to 7 percent range doesencompass those possibilities. We have language in the Bluebook on2/11-12/86the long-run objectives that I think gives us enough flexibility totake care of that if we do have this aberrant behavior of Ml velocity.If we want to recognize it explicitly, then I think we could usesomething like the 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent range suggested in paragraph10 in the Bluebook. I would be opposed to using the 4 to 8 percentband because that would involve widening the range only at the top,which I think would be noted by the markets and probably interpretedby them as some weakening of our anti-inflationary resolve. So, Iwould stick with what we did at midyear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I decided not to go last today. One otheraspect of M1 that I would mention is that it bears the closestrelationship to what we do, and for that reason I think it's importantto maintain it as a target and not just as a monitoring range. Also,as I expressed yesterday, I tend to be among those who are moreconcerned about possible inflationary developments--what Steve citedin the first instance. And in that context it may be desirable tohave M1 as a target. If we find ourselves in a position where wemight have to exercise a greater degree of restraint during the courseof the year, an M1 target could add to that argument. At the sametime, I recognize the uncertainties about the behavior of velocity andfor that reason I could be persuaded to expand the band at the upperend somewhat. I don't think there would be adverse market reactionsto that. In fact, if we found ourselves in a position where wecontinued to have very aberrant behavior of velocity, we could dealwith that in the same fashion we did [last] year without losing atremendous amount of credibility. In any case, I do think it'sdesirable to have the M1 target. I could settle for a 4 to 7 percentrange, although I think the chances are that we would be running nearthe upper end of that. I wouldn't mind providing more room. In fact,it might be inappropriate to shoot for, say, the middle of the 4 to 7percent range, given the rate of money growth we had in 1985; but I dothink we ought to lean toward slowing that down and, under certaincircumstances, I wouldn't necessarily rule out aiming for the lowerpart of a 4 to 8 percent range--if other factors led us in thatdirection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I approached the question of theannual targets in terms of the likely contingencies that we might haveto face and what they mean. I don't think we can anticipateeverything but, for example, if the economy is weaker or if velocitycontinues to run badly astray, I agree with Mr. Melzer that policy canrespond to either of those two developments without a great deal ofdifficulty. I don't want to say regardless of the targets, but policycan respond within a fairly broad framework.On another front, if something goes wrong on the LDC side orin the financial sector, the response inevitably is going to bedictated by circumstances, and I don't think we could build that kindof thinking into the targets themselves even though situations couldarise that might require some response. So, I don't think we can dealwith that directly. On the other side of the ledger, if the dollarfalls further--and especially if it falls significantly further in theface of what surely will be the very sizable, persistent, savings gap2/11-12/86that we have--it seems to me that interest rates will tend to rise ontheir own. But in those circumstances, we might be faced with a needto tighten, even though it would be very, very difficult to explainthat when the dollar is seen by so many people from a tradeperspective as the boogie man. That would be a much more difficultsituation to deal with from [a policy] perspective than either of thefirst two examples.If the economy is stronger--or even worse, if inflationarypressures do begin to materialize--the policy response would be evenmore difficult, keeping in mind that over the long run I think thething that would be the most difficult, both for policy and theeconomy, and for the LDCs and the financial system, would be a build-up in inflation and the inevitable response that would have to come tothat no matter how delayed the response might be. So, I find thatfrom a policy perspective, either a fall in the dollar or a rise ininflation or a very strong economy are much more difficult to dealwith than the other sets of circumstances I mentioned.Now, as I said yesterday, I don't see that a rise ininflation especially is inevitable. But I think that we have to becareful, so I approached the question of long-run targets with theneed for an insurance policy, if I can put it that way, in mind. Tome that means keeping M1 as a target because I think it does serve auseful purpose. I think one can plausibly argue also that there is apossibility that velocity will be at least more normal, given the factthat the sizable declines in interest rates that have produced part ofthis aberrant behavior in velocity are probably behind us and that theinstitutional factors should not be as big. So, I would keep Ml. Iwould have a preference for 4 to 7 percent but I could live with 3 to8 percent. But if we're going to raise the upper end, I would alsofavor dropping the lower end and ending up with something like what wehad for the second half of last year. I think that sends two signals.It says that we know M1 is still a little funny looking, but thatthere might well be circumstances in which we would be comfortablewith Ml growing at quite a modest rate, even though we don't perceivethose circumstances right now. I am happy with M2, M3; I am not happywith debt at 8 to 11 percent, but I don't think that we can doanything about it. So, I would keep M1 as a target; I have a slightpreference for 4 to 7 percent but could live with, and in some ways Iguess favor, 3 to 8 percent.The only other point I would make, Mr. Chairman, is that Iwould at least raise the question of whether somewhere in the verbiagethat goes with the policy statement about the long-range targets, itmight not be a good idea to have a phrase in there saying that wewould indeed be prepared to resist any build-up in inflationarypressures, even though we don't see them on the horizon right now.It's not formally in the record; it's on page 16 or 17 in theBluebook. There is a long, long set of words that we have used in thepast in the operational part of establishing the '86 ranges, all ormost of which has been crossed out. Somewhere in that I wouldn't mindseeing a phrase that would indicate that in the unlikely event thatinflationary pressures do in fact begin to materialize we would beprepared to resist them.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me if there's one termthat applies to the difficult forecasts that were so well done by the-30-2/11-12/86Board's staff and so widely supported yesterday, it is "uncertainty."We do face a degree of uncertainty that even for a forward-lookinggroup of economists is notable. It seems to me that this isepitomized by a comment on page 6 below the alternatives for the longrun as we futilely define it here: the reference to the substantialportion of the rapid demand deposit growth of last year, which isunexplained by any concept of interest elasticity. Of course, wecould experience that again this year. I join President Corrigan inthe expectation of not putting a great deal of weight on it, butexpecting that we probably won't have that continued growth. But wedon't understand it. And if there are difficulties in the Southwestand in some of the oil-exporting developing countries, certainly thatphenomenon or something like it could return. But we don't understandthe very interest elasticity that now characterizes M1, or at leastcomponents thereof. Therefore, adding these two factors together, Iwould favor a 3 to 8 percent range around M1 to give the Committeeflexibility and to reflect the uncertainty generally--not just thedemand deposit uncertainty, but our lack of ability to forecast Mlright now in this context. I would not favor taking the 1984approach, though, of putting M1 too deeply out of the show because Ido feel that the money managers in banks will learn reasonablyshortly--the market is going to force them to learn--how to pricevarious instruments and what the interest elasticity in theirsubmarkets is. That aspect of the interest elasticity, in theinstitutional sense, will tend to be more understandable over time, Ithink.So, I would favor keeping M1 in the pantheon, widening therange because of the uncertainty with regard to velocity and otheraspects of it, and giving us the flexibility in implementing policy todeal with the unexpected. Think of the unexpecteds we have before usright now. In the last 10 hours the flow of news [has included] that:the Conference Board's consumer confidence index is down; MinisterTakeshita again is hinting about a further discount rate cut by theJapanese; and of all things, IBM is substantially cutting the price ofits brand new CPU mainframes just as their deliveries are takingplace. I think we really have to expect the unexpected. We need wideranges. With regard to President Corrigan's comment about thelanguage, Mr. Chairman, I would like to see symmetrical languageindicating that if economic growth falters very substantially--and Ithink there is a real risk of that occurring--we would be prepared toadjust even our targets but certainly the way in which we implementour monetary policy, regardless of what aggregate or aggregates wewere focusing on. I think Steve's comment about the triumvirate isimpressive. And I would join Frank Morris in wondering why we stillcite the debt [aggregate], which we can't control. We can affect thatonly marginally; there's no way to hit any kind of target or any kindof monitoring number on the debt range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the risksof slower growth or higher inflation that Steve alluded to are fairlywell balanced. That makes it particularly difficult to make a choiceon these longer-term targets. Because of that, and because of theuncertainties that several people have alluded to, I think what weought to strive for in 1986 is flexibility. Flexibility also isimportant, given the staff's projections for M1 growth in 1986,-31-2/11-12/86because of the experience that we had with M1 during 1985. It wouldbe very nice if we were able to come within the targets or reasonablyclose this year. I would keep M1 but, because of the need that Iperceive for flexibility, I would opt for the 4 to 8 percent rangespecified in alternative II--although I could support a 3 to 8 percentrange as well. I think it is important to move from the tentativetarget of 4 to 7 percent to provide some additional flexibility,particularly on the top side of the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I too would favor retaining a range for M1 andtreating it at least equally with the other aggregates. When I thinkabout what we did in 1985, it seems to me that Ml played a veryvaluable role--not in the operational sense, but in the sense that atleast on several occasions it caused us to stop and take a verycareful look at what was going on and to make a determination aboutwhat we wanted to do from there. Those exercises were quite valuableand we didn't get that [message] from the other aggregates. So, forthat reason, I'd be inclined to retain Ml. For many of the reasonsalready cited, I think that some widening of the range is a good idea.We just are more uncertain than we typically have been about therelation between M1 as a policy instrument and economic performance.I'm relatively indifferent between widening the range to 4 to 8percent as opposed to 3 to 8 percent; either one is acceptable to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I would emphasize the continuing uncertaintieswith regard to the demand for money and that leads me to argue for awider range; I would recommend 3 to 8 percent. I think we ought tokeep in mind that Ml, even with a 3 to 8 percent range, is likely togrow at the upper end of the range. Since the Board staff's forecastcalls for 6.8 percent growth, I think it's important to keep in mindthat nominal growth in our forecasts seems collectively to be a bitabove that and, therefore, growth in the upper end of even a 3 to 8percent range would be likely. Finally, I would favor retaining Ml asa target for 1986 for the reasons expressed by quite a few others andparticularly by Mr. Melzer.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I prefer to keep M1 as a target. I think therange should be maybe 3 to 9 percent. With velocity at a negative 3percent, the staff's dollar nominal GNP forecast gives a 9.7 percentrate of growth in Ml. I believe the marketplace would have a betterunderstanding if we really communicated the range that we think isplausible. That would give us the opportunity on the quarterly short-range targets to specify [our objective] more clearly as economicevents develop and as the velocity of M1 becomes better known. I keepbeing reminded of the events of 1917 to 1946 when Ml's velocity fellfrom approximately 4 percent to approximately 2 percent. So it seemsto me that it is entirely possible that velocity may not always have along-term rising trend and we should accommodate that [possibility].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.2/11-12/86MR. BOEHNE. I support a range of either 4 to 8 percent or 3to 8 percent for the reasons that have been given. I also support theretention of Ml, not because it has been a very good intermediatetarget in recent years--and I doubt very much that it will be usefulin 1986--but I think we ought to limp along with it because it may beuseful in the future. I think Governor Angell's point is well taken.In having a range of 4 to 8 percent or 3 to 8 percent, I would couchit with all kinds of caveats and would not hesitate very long to dumpit, in effect, as we go through 1986, because I don't think it's avery reliable guide. But I do think it could be useful for a varietyof reasons out in the future.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I think we agreed yesterday that the economicoutlook is certainly positive, but I also heard an unusually long listof uncertainties that seem particularly serious. So I would favoradopting a policy that gives us reasonable maneuvering room; I hopethat would convey that [uncertainty] to the market. We certainly wantto avoid any unintended signals and just possibly changing thetentative ranges might do that. I also think that continuing theranges that we have had in place this last year could, in fact, conveya continuation of our policy. So I would join those who suggest usinglast year's M1 range of 3 to 8 percent and continuing to view M1 as aguide in careful coordination with M2 and M3, as Steve has outlined.It seems to me that the broader range deals with some of theuncertainties and gives us some maneuvering room and that under thecircumstances that would be the appropriate choice.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, for all the reasons alreadystated, I would join those who would retain M1 as a target and treatit much as we did in 1985 because of the uncertainties. Secondly,it's attractive to me to adopt what Si Keehn has just proposed: toretain the ranges for all the aggregates, including debt, at the[unintelligible] positions we had in 1985. That incorporates the 3 to8 percent [for Ml] and retains the debt range of 9 to 12 percent.Although there is some real concern about what debt means, the factthat it is monitored and that we have to take a look at it and try todetermine why we missed the range is an important exercise. As aresult, I would keep debt and retain the 9 to 12 percent monitoringrange that we had in 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, like almost everybody else, I wouldfavor retaining M1, with its weight similar to that of the othermonetary aggregates, for the reasons that have already been mentionedby several people. I would favor that not so much because M1 shouldbe a rigid guide to policy but because, as Jerry and Ed pointed out,we may need it in the future to explain some policy moves that wemight want to take. I would favor a 3 to 8 percent range, but Isuspect that probably would be seen as too wide and might beinterpreted as a signal that we are moving away from targeting M1.So, perhaps a narrower range of 4 percentage points would be betterreceived. I would both lower and raise the range a bit to 3-1/2 to2/11-12/867-1/2 percent but I would be perfectly willing--in fact I would preferit if most people feel we could get away with it--to go with a 3 to 8percent range. On debt, I have a good deal of sympathy for the pointFrank made; I think we ought to look seriously at the feasibility ofan adjusted debt range. I would urge the staff to look into thefeasibility of moving in that direction. However, until they do, Iwould favor expanding the range a little to take into account what weexpect to happen. We expect that debt will grow a little faster than11 percent, so why not move the range out to 8-1/2 to11-1/2 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I would like to keep my [comments as brief] asI can. I hope you'll [understand] my difficulty in expressing myintentions, which I think will be resolved in a month or two. I wouldtake the M1 range lower limit to 4 percent [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. As I went over these various alternatives in thelast couple of days, it seemed to me that there were really verynarrow differences between them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had difficulty in discovering thedifference?MS. SEGER. That's right. I kept going over the alternativesand then I would reread the expected outcomes from the variousalternatives. They suggest to me a degree of precision in forecastingthat in my 20 months here I'm sorry to say I just haven't seen. So, Ithink the way we retain credibility with the financial markets is tolevel with them. I think the way we do that is to say that we don'thit both sides every time. We are not perfect forecasters, as no oneis even on Wall Street. So if we set wide bands, that really would bea positive factor for our credibility; it would not be viewed as ourturning into inflationary "wackos." It just would be a more honestindication that we're impressed with the uncertainties in the economy,with the changed relationships between the various monetary aggregatesand nominal or real GNP growth, and all the things that we discusshere regularly. Whatever we do, if it's explained in this way--and,of course, the Chairman has a good opportunity next week to go throughall the explanations--it can be handled. Therefore, I would like tosuggest that we use all the information we can and present everythingwe can so it will not look as if we're holding back any information,whether it's on Ml, debt, or whatever. I think we should present [theranges] but have very broad bands and not suggest that we can [beprecise by using] 1/2 percentage points. I think that's ludicrous.For Ml, I could live with either 3 to 8 percent or I could live with 2to 10 percent. Today I just don't want to suggest that any sort ofnice bull's eye targeting is possible. For M2, I could even go 6 to10 percent. Again, these are ranges; that's not saying that we'reshooting for 10 percent. For M3, I'd favor 6 to 9 percent orthereabouts. I would keep some sort of debt measure, but clean it upas Frank Morris suggested for these various events that are going onin corporate and state and local government finance that really arenot tied to economic activity. So, that would be my preference.2/11-12/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I think all of the important things have beensaid. I agree with what seems to be a consensus that there are a lotof uncertainties around M1 velocity, that we need to keep our optionsopen, and that the best way to do that is by a symmetrical widening ofthe bands. I support something generally in the range of 3 to 8percent for Ml; I think that's satisfactory. But I think it's veryimportant that we have language associated with this that makes itclear that the options available within the 3 to 8 percent range arenot options for more or less inflation but in fact a range ofpossibilities that we think [appropriate] and that the need to move tothe upper end of this range is still a non-inflationary alternative.In other words, it depends on what happens to monetary velocity if wecan detect it; and if we move to 8 percent M1 growth during some pointduring the year, or even well along the top of that range, that has noimplications for price stability. We simply would be moving the[unintelligible] associated with what we perceive to be continuedabnormal performance in M1 velocity. To me language like that isimportant because I think we experienced recently what a change inpolicy rhetoric can do with respect to the dollar. I don't think thefundamentals associated with the dollar have changed that much,although they have some. But there is a different attitude out thereabout the dollar simply because a lot of people who are in charge ofpolicy are saying things differently. We certainly don't want tocreate any impressions that we're leaning toward an easier policy andthat that means we're trading off inflation for real growth. It'svery important to point out that we would not be making those kinds oftrade-offs; we simply would be pursuing an easier policy toward 8percent money growth because of velocity conditions and demand formoney. The closer we can come to language like that, the better off Ithink we'll be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, because of the uncertainties I favorwide ranges, and for M1 a 3 to 8 percent range would be appropriate.I think the words that you use in your testimony perhaps will be moreimportant than the ranges we choose. And I think where we come inwith respect to Ml, and for that matter with regard to the otheraggregates, will have a lot to do with the conditions in the economyand perhaps some financial conditions as well. Some words on the typeof reaction we might have if the economy comes in stronger thanexpected I think would be very helpful.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I also would keep M1 and give itthe attention that we have been giving it. On the Ml range, I share alot of the uncertainties--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When things start happening, how do youinterpret that?MR. BOYKIN. I beg your pardon?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you interpret--2/11-12/86MR. BOYKIN. I don't know [unintelligible] different. But Istill think that M1 is important and that we ought to look at it. AsGary Stern said, when it's not behaving at least that causes us torethink periodically, so I would pay attention to it. As for therange, I share all of the uncertainties [alluded to by others], andmoving the upper end to 8 percent would be acceptable to me. [For thelower end] either 3 or 4 percent is okay.MR. BLACK. Just as long as it doesn't get to the point thateveryone tells you the same thing about Ml, you'd be pleased!MR. BOYKIN. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the band of disagreement isn'tparticularly wide; it's rather narrow. I'd just raise a couple ofpoints based on listening to this. I'm not sure we know what we'redoing. I guess the psychology of this is that most people talk aboutwidening the range for M1 for obvious reasons and then we end up withsomething like 3 to 8 percent or 4 to 8 percent. I'm not necessarilyopposed to that but I just raise the point that we will be asked thequestion: Why did you do that? It makes a 1 percentage pointdifference on the up side. Does that mean that we're really going toget the 8 percent this year and that we have reduced the option fordoing what we did last year, which is say it's not confirmed by otherfactors in the economy but it's running a little slow? I don't getthe sense that that is what you want to do but I'm asking: Is thatwhat people are going to read into it--that there's going to be moreimportance attached to Ml? [Will people think that] we went to thegreat trouble of changing the range to 8 percent and that's a moreliberal number, so we better stay within that 8 percent? In somesense and in some conceivable conditions that has the opposite intentof what I detect the sentiment is. That's one question I raise. Onthe debt issue, which is a lesser question, I do think there probablyis a difference given what is essentially double-counting in the stateand local area. I don't know what the magnitude of that is; I askedthe other day [unintelligible] the answer. I probably have one, butthey didn't see it. You go up against them--MR. PRELL. It depends on how you do the accounting. Ourrough estimate is that the impact of the accelerated financingactivity last year that was attributable to the concerns about taxreform would tack on roughly a percentage point. If you wanted toinclude all advance refunding activity, much of which was stimulatedsimply by the fact that interest rates were lower or by othertechnical considerations, that would move in the direction thatPresident Morris was talking about and you would get a slightly largerfigure; it might move toward 1-1/2 percentage point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't forget, it's not just the advancerefunding but all this mortgage financing is double-counted too, isn'tit?MR. PRELL. Well, yes; I think there's no end to this. Andthat's the problem, ultimately, in having an adjusted measure. Allsectors of the economy tend to borrow and build up assets at the sametime. Sometimes we can identify special financial strategies that arepeculiar, like advance refundings or seasonal debt by corporations,where if we had the data we could chop those amounts off. But the2/11-12/86fact is that homeowners may borrow more than they need to when buyinga home and use that extra cash to build up their liquid assets. So ifyou start taking all these things out, you get down to fundamentalsectoral balances which you really can't identify with growth of adebt aggregate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure; theoretically I thinkthat's right. In practice I'm not sure that there isn't a differencebetween an advance refunding by a state and local government and someconsumer--MR. PRELL. It's hard to choose where the lines should bedrawn.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's hard to know where the line is,that's for sure. But I think there is a difference. And it mightaffect our judgment at some particular time, whether we lean in onedirection or another. I think it is a question of whether it would beuseful--and a couple of people made this point--to have some kind of abenchmark out there [against which to judge whether] it is excessiveor not. In those terms I rather like it, but in fact the numbers thatwe have here seem rather excessive, even as a benchmark ofexcessivity. We start out with very high numbers, but that is arelatively minor point.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, since it is almost a duty of youroffice to express the policy and views of the central bank, how couldwe drop it? I am speaking now from a political point of view, notfrom an economic point of view. From an economic point of view Ithink we ought to drop it, but politically how could we when it isyour role, and properly so, to indicate that the leveraging of Americahas gone too far--that there are dangers and risks in it. How can wethen turn around and drop it out of the pantheon?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I could argue it the other way. I justargued against not keeping it. One could argue that these numbers areso high anyway that we can comment on the excessiveness of it withouthaving that benchmark. So, I guess you could argue it either way;it's not all that critical. On the M1 range, I'm not arguingsubstance here but I just want to make sure we really think aboutwhether we would be ahead of the game or behind the game by changingthe upper limit. We are going to have some language in here--languagethat we may want to take a little time to play with--indicating thatwe are not going to be locked into this Ml figure, depending upon alot of other developments. Given that kind of language which is notyet defined, unfortunately, if we change the range I think there is atleast a risk of it getting read as if 8-1/2 percent, let's say, reallyis bad. To make my case in extreme form--I'll make my case but Idon't feel all that strongly: Suppose M1 were running at 9 percent andall things considered we didn't want to do anything about it. That'sa modified example of what we had last year, which wasn't verytroublesome. Is that more troublesome if we have just raised theupper end of the range to 8 percent? Does that raise more questionsabout why it's running at 9 percent than if we haven't raised theupper limit of the range from 7 percent? That is my simple question.MR. GUFFEY. It seems to me that that may be the bestargument to readopt the range for Ml that we had for the last half of2/11-12/861985, that is the 3 to 8 percent, as no change. It is a wider range,and from the 4 to 7 percent that we gave tentatively for 1986 in Julywe've widened it on both ends.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can argue that we're doing the samething that we did for the second half of last year; but it meanschanging what we said for 1986, which is what most people will belooking at, I think. But you can argue that point.MR. GUFFEY. It doesn't seem to me that enough certainty hascome into the ability to forecast M1 growth that we should adopt whatwe thought might be appropriate in July of 1985 for 1986. Indeed, thetrack record suggests that we are still uncertain and that the widerrange is more appropriate.MR. MORRIS. I think we need to be able to finance 7 percentnominal GNP growth. An upper limit of 7 percent means that ifvelocity continues negative, we are going to miss the target again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My presumption is that the 7 percentwouldn't be a real upper limit any more than it was last year underthose circumstances.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. When I spoke about this earlier andsaid that I had a slight preference for keeping 4 to 7 percent, it waspartly for the reason that you mentioned. To me it's a question ofthese contingencies. If the economy is soft and so forth, I think wecan deal with that much more easily than the opposite. I don't thinkit is just a question of the signal of the upper limit of 8 percentversus the upper limit of 7 percent. That is why I think the languageis very important.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we ought to think a bit about thelanguage we should use. Unfortunately, I don't have a good suggestionto put before you. I wasn't crazy about what was in the [draft in theBluebook], although that is the minimum we would have to say--thatthere are great uncertainties about Ml. We can say more. Should wesay more than that?MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, my preference for the 9 percentwas strictly in response to your query. That is, it seems to me thatif we raise the limit and don't mean anything by the new limit, wehaven't accomplished much. We've increased market uncertainties. Iwould prefer to go to the 9 percent because I think that's enoughroom. I do not believe as much financial innovation change will occurin 1986 as we had in 1985. So, it seems to me that 9 percent willprovide us reasonable opportunities to stay within the range and thenwe could take the language out, which I believe is confusing and couldhave adverse effects upon [market] views of the dollar. I wouldprefer [providing] some more certainty to the market. If a realemergency occurs and is recognized, that would have to be dealt with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You put my point in extreme form; youraised it even higher. But then you really get tied to it.MR. ANGELL. You really get tied to it. But if we want toexpress to the markets what we mean, it seems to me that that is theleast risky path for us. But it would be a mistake--2/11-12/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless you get velocity like last year.MR. ANGELL. Well, I think velocity like last year is ratherunlikely. I don't see why money demand would be apt to increase at arate faster than last year, and it would seem to me that financialinnovation changes ought not to contribute as much as they did lastyear. Mr. Prell, do you have any idea what proportion of our growthrate last year was due to the deregulation?MR. PRELL. Mr. Axilrod may want to speak to this, but therewere no major deregulatory steps last year that had the immediateeffect of shifting funds from one category to another. The morecosmic issue in this context is what the cumulative effect ofderegulation has been on the character of the aggregates and theassociated interest elasticities. We think it has altered thecharacter and may explain why there was such an apparent sensitivityto the declining interest rates.MR. AXILROD. In a large sense, Governor Angell, the unknownportion last year was basically the demand deposit behavior. And Idon't think that had anything to do at all with deregulation. Thequestion in our minds was whether it had something to do in a broadway with the aftermath of E.F. Hutton, with banks and corporationsbeginning to look much more carefully at their cash managementpractices and banks their overdraft practices. A question also waswhether it had to do with some of the failures that occurred in termsof clearings and whether banks began looking at overdraft practicesand began to take the Board's policy seriously in terms of daylightoverdrafts. All those things together could have added a bit todemand deposit growth--that which we can't explain through normalinterest rate and income relationships. And that is the sort of thingwe were thinking might not be repeated this year. Of course it may,but we think it will not; therefore, we were thinking demand depositgrowth would be considerably less than the 8-1/2 percent [in 1985],absent a very sharp drop in interest rates. Those are our conjectureson that.MR. MORRIS. May I remind you that a year ago at this time wewere sitting around this table talking about the fact that there hadbeen a one-time adjustment in the demand for M1 which was behind us.When Steve talks about M1 in 1970, he's talking about a differentanimal. We [now] are talking about an M1 that bears a market rate ofinterest. It is an entirely different phenomenon and yet we keep ondeluding ourselves that what we call M1 today is the same thing it wasin the '70s. It isn't. And it seems to me that's the fundamentalsource of argument about how to forecast Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am reminded that there is a side issuethat we had a little discussion about. I don't even know what we callthese things. Do we call them weighted monetary indexes? I don'tthink they helped us very much, but I thought it might be acontribution if we had a short appendix to our report describing thiswork. We would intend to add it to the Humphrey-Hawkins Report, ifthat is agreeable, just as an explanation of the work in progress. Itwould not be long, but would describe the characteristics and tell theworld that we are looking at these indexes anyway. I take it there isno objection to that.-39-2/11-12/86MR. MARTIN. I think it would be very appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I scribbled down a couple of sentenceshere dealing with this M1 issue. I don't know whether I like themmyself, but let me try this out on you. Substitute for what's there:"With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that based on theexperience of recent years the behavior of that aggregate was subjectto substantial uncertainties in its relationships to economic activityand prices depending upon, among other things, its responsiveness tochanges in interest rates. It agreed that an appropriate target underexisting circumstances is--whatever we make it--but it intended toevaluate movements in M1 in the light of its consistency with othermonetary aggregates."MR. MARTIN. It would be appropriate to have language whichwould say "and therefore a wide range has been set"--if we set a widerange.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This would explain the wide range, Ithink--well, assuming whatever range we decide [is wide].MR. BLACK. It would rationalize a narrower range too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is independent of the range.Maybe I ought to get this typed and we can look at it. Nobody canread my writing, I suspect; I have it scribbled here. We clearly needsome language. A range of 6 to 9 percent seems to represent theconsensus on M2 and M3. I don't know what the consensus is on debt;most people thought we ought to keep something. We had scatteredviews as to what it should be if we kept it. If we want to avoid halfpercents, we could use 8 to 11 percent or 9 to 12 percent. Can wedispose of that one? Was it 9 to 12 percent last year?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. RICE. What is wrong with half percents?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, nothing.MR. RICE. If you think it is going to come within the half--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just ask for preferences. How manyprefer 8 to 11 percent? Seven; we have a majority already. How manyprefer 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent? We have one, anyway. Let me just getpreferences of Committee members at this point. Who prefers 9 to 12percent? Four. Well, there is a clear preference for 8 to 11percent. Can we live with that? The compromise is Mr. Rice's [8-1/2to 11-1/2 percent].MR. RICE. Well, we have reason to believe that we are goingto miss the 8 to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have reason to believe that we mightmiss it. But those estimates last year were off by 2 percentagepoints or so.MR. MARTIN. We haven't anything to do with whether or not wemiss it. What difference does it make?2/11-12/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the point is that if we put insomething like Frank Morris' caveats about mismeasurement, nobody willcare about 8 to 11 percent.MR. MARTIN. I am denying we missed it last year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nobody pays great attention to this as anoperational variable. I think "monitoring" is absolutely the preciseword to describe it. We look at it in a general way but it doesn'thave much policy significance. This is no federal issue to me. Wehave a majority for 8 to 11 percent; we have a substantial minorityfor 9 to 12 percent; the obvious middle course is 8-1/2 to 11-1/2percent, but that looks like fine tuning. What do you want to do?MR. FORRESTAL. As one who voted for 9 to 12 percent, I thinkthe half points do imply a precision that we are never going to get.And people really don't look at this very much anyway. So, I would bejust as happy to go with 8 to 11 percent.MR. PARRY. Why not widen the range on that one, if there areso many uncertainties?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8 to 12 percent?MR. PARRY. Sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's another way to compromise.MR. AXILROD. That's fine.MR. RICE. I could go with 8 to 12 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is really a small point, butthere is this tremendous concern about debt in the economy. I don'tcare what adjustments you make for advance refundings or anythingelse, it is a tremendous concern. The numbers don't mean a darnthing, but we have a published target on the record of a monitoringrange of 8 to 11 percent. Given all the concern in the marketplaceabout debt and given the concern abroad about debt accumulating in theUnited States, what signals does it send to raise it from thetentative target of 8 to 11 percent to 9 to 12 or something like that?I'm not going to go to war over it, but I think it is sending thewrong signals.MS. SEGER. But we don't control it. I think that is thepoint.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is beside the point. I'mthinking of it in this benchmark sense.MR. ANGELL. I agree with Mr. Corrigan.MR. BLACK. I do too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Tentatively, it looks like 8 to 11percent. On Ml, I expressed my only concern about Ml; I think wehave--2/11-12/86MR. JOHNSON. You made an important point, I think. If it'sjust slightly above target, we run the risk of having the markets takeit very seriously--much more seriously than if it were running wayabove and it was fairly clear that it would be impossible to try toget it back into the target range as well as that it obviously was nota major concern. I do worry about financial market uncertainties whenM1 is hovering a percentage point or so above target and there is alot of uncertainty about whether the Fed is going to try to takeaction to get back within the target or let it go. I think it isimportant; how important--? There is a July hearing, right? Is itoften changed then? I really can't remember.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three or four times.MR. AXILROD. The Committee has changed M1 quite a lot.MR. BOEHNE. We did it last year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is not typical, but it is notreally unusual either.MR. JOHNSON. My point is that most of this is a forecast,but at least the data for 1-1/2 months of the first quarter don't looktoo bad. Of course this could turn around quickly in one quarter, butif we are going to set a target, a wider path, we ought to take itseriously at least until midyear. And if we have reason to change itthen we can change it--unless we are going to put out some statementsalong the way that make it clear to financial markets that a slightamount of excess above target does not imply policy action. There areuncertainties around not meeting it during this intermediate period.I don't know what is going to happen either, but if we are going toset a target we ought to take it fairly seriously and then take someformal occasion to adjust it. If July is a formal occasion for doingso, that might be a good time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is nothing to say that we can'tchange these targets other than in July. I don't know that we everhave. But we have announced other than in July or February that wewere not observing--. There was some rigamarole that got someattention when it shouldn't have last October/November when we triedto say in an unobtrusive way, because people were conscience stricken,that we clearly weren't going to meet the targets. We thought weought to tell people that we weren't really trying to meet the targetsand we did tell them. It got a lot of attention at the time and had alittle market effect for a few days. We obviously weren't [going tomeet them] anyway. But we do that if we make a decision that we are,in effect, giving up on the target.MR. JOHNSON. Well, maybe that's the best way to do it: toprovide information carefully along the way about how seriously totake the level of M1 relative to the target. We don't have to sayanything if it is on target, but obviously we need a lot ofcommunication if it is not.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If in May or June or something likethat, M1 is growing at 9 percent and the economy is lousy and velocityis either empirically or otherwise declining, I don't think the marketis going to worry at all. As a matter of fact, I was amused reading a-42-2/11-12/86memorandum that one of Mr. Sternlight's people gave me yesterday, bysome fellow--I don't know who it was--who said that [at his firm] theydon't even stay around on Thursday afternoon until 4:30 any more toget the money numbers so that they can trade on them; they go home at4 o'clock. The problem is on the other side. If we get out there in1986 some time and, just to take an example, money has grown at 8percent and velocity is increasing and nominal GNP is rising by 10 or11 percent, you are darn right the market is going to worry aboutthat. The question is going to be how we respond to that. That isthe tough one.MR. JOHNSON. They ought to know how we'll respond: thatwe've got to do something about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After listening to all of this, theinitial preference of most people--but not everybody, for sure--was 3to 8 percent. We have one 3 to 9 percent and some at 4 to 7 percentor 4 to 8 percent. You heard my reservation, but I don't feel allthat strongly about it. Whatever range we have, we need some[explanatory] language. Does 3 to 8 represent the best consensus wehave? I don't hear any opposition to that. You want to change thetentative range, with caveats. Well, that sounds like where we aretentatively. I guess we can vote, but I don't know whether we shouldvote without seeing the language. Why don't we turn to the languagefor the ranges and see what other comments people might have? Thisdraft language takes out all the business saying that we might be inthe upper part of the ranges. I don't think we are saying that, if Iunderstand correctly, with respect to M2 and M3--or at least I needguidance on this. We have at times in the past, not infrequently,said that we expected to be in the upper part of the ranges. We arenot saying that this time; the estimate says that we ought to beroughly in the middle of the ranges, right?MR. AXILROD. Or thereabouts. We had put some language inthat said [the Committee would] continue to examine it in light ofvelocity, which by implication would take care of the need--MR. BLACK. I think Steve makes a good point, Mr. Chairman.The language says M1 is subject to substantial uncertainties. Iwonder if it wouldn't be better to say the velocity of M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm looking at the earlier version,the part that's crossed out. At midyear sometimes we have said thatwe expect to be in the upper part of the range. We're not saying thatthis time.MR. AXILROD. We substituted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] we take that out.MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying that's inappropriate; Ijust want to understand. We're not saying that.MR. AXILROD. We tried to cover it by implication on bothsides on the--2/11-12/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that covers it on both sides. Now,my language is a substitute for that capitalized language in the firstsentence, but not for the second sentence. It's pretty standardboilerplate or close to it: "The Committee understood that policyimplementation would require continuing appraisal of the relationshipsamong the various measures of money and credit, their velocity trends,and indicators of economic activity and prices"--this is apart fromsmaller grammatical errors--"depending among other things on itsresponsiveness to changes in interest rates. It agreed that anappropriate target would be," I suppose.MR. MARTIN. "Target" or "target range"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Target range" it should be. I'm not surethat last phrase quite captures what--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. How about if in that last part wesaid "in light of its consistency with the monetary aggregates,developments in the economy and financial markets, and the need toresist any buildup in inflationary pressures" or something like that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is all right with me. I guess if wedid something like that it almost replaces the next sentence too.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. MARTIN. It tilts it toward the inflationary pressures--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, the first thing is developmentsin the economy.MR. MARTIN. There's disinflation in the economy with the oilprice [decline]. Does that sound consistent with all we've justheard--that oil prices may go down another $5?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the point is it's contingent.It doesn't say that it is going to happen.MR. MARTIN. Yes, I appreciate the contingency so long as itis symmetrical.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I envision it as symmetrical.That's why I would put "the developments in the economy" first.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "It intended to evaluate the growthof M1 in light of its consistency with the other monetary aggregates,developments in the economy and financial markets, and the need to"--maybe "resist" is too strong a word--"be mindful of any buildup ininflationary pressures that might materialize over the course of theyear."MR. MARTIN. "Developments in the economy that might indicateweakness"?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is fine because, as I said, Ihad in mind to be symmetrical about it.2/11-12/86MR. MARTIN. That makes it symmetric. That was yourintention.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All things to all people. What I reallycontemplated in doing this--and maybe you don't want to do it--was notto cite M1 in the first sentence of the targets. We could start outby establishing ranges for monetary growth measured from the fourthquarter for M2 and M3. And then this would cover the M1 target.MR. MARTIN. If we don't make that amendment, then we reallyare featuring Ml; we are starting with M1 and finishing with Ml.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do you have in mind that they are ofroughly equal weight? You don't have in mind a monitoring range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't have in mind a monitoringrange, but in some sense I think this doesn't give it equal weight.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Good; it shouldn't have equalweight. That is all right with me if we can avoid specificallydenoting it as a monitoring range.MR. MARTIN. Yes, I wouldn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I wouldn't do that. But another wayof doing it is to put a sentence like this in first.MR. MARTIN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And then follow with the--MR. ANGELL. Yes, I would prefer that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me see how this flows here. How doesthe first paragraph start out? We need another transitional sentenceif we put it first, I guess. "In furtherance of these objectives, theCommittee agreed to establish ranges for monetary growth measured fromthe fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 1986. Withrespect to Ml--"MR. AXILROD. --"the Committee agreed on the followingranges" period. "With respect to--"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we take this other tack, I think Iwould say "The Committee agreed that an appropriate range in theexisting circumstances would be" whatever that is. "It intends toevaluate movements in M1 in light of its consistency with the othermonetary aggregates, developments in the economy and financial marketsand potential inflationary pressures." That is a simpler way ofsaying it and covers everything, it seems to me.MR. MARTIN. It is a little weighted toward fear of inflationwhereas if it said "[developments] in the economy that might indicateweakness"--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to be responsive ultimatelyto developments that indicate excessive strength.2/11-12/86MR. MARTIN. Sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this is kind of neutral. Whatabout the number? Is 3 to 8 percent what we want it to be, after dueconsideration?MR. ANGELL. There seems to be a consensus.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then I guess what we'd say is: "Infurtherance of these objectives, the Committee established thefollowing ranges. With respect to Ml, the Committee recognized thatbased on experience in recent years the behavior of that aggregate wassubject to substantial uncertainties depending on, among other things,its responsiveness to changes in interest rates. It agreed that anappropriate target range under existing circumstances would be 3 to 8percent. It intends to evaluate movements in M1 in light of itsconsistency with the other monetary aggregates, developments in theeconomy and financial markets, and potential inflationary pressures.It adopted a range of 6 to 9 percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent for M3.The associated range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial debtwas--" What did we say?SPEAKER(?). 8 to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --8 to 11 percent." Then I guess we don'tneed that other sentence at all and that's the end of the paragraph.What we don't say specifically is that we'll evaluate those othertarget ranges depending upon velocity. I'm not sure that's necessary.Do we know what we are voting on? Does anybody have anything else tosay? If not, [let's vote].MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can turn to the discussion on the shortterm or whatever else we are going to do.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, in light of the discussion on thelong run and the narrowness of the ranges I should mention, as theCommittee members surely know, that the width of the alternatives isnarrower than the likely range of error in the outcome.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's usually true.MR. AXILROD. The Committee at its last meeting hadestablished wider [short-run] ranges for Ml, M2 and M3 than had beenthe practice for some time. Because of the width of the ranges, and2/11-12/86given the fact that December turned out to be pretty close toprojections and January is coming in low--lower than we had projected--two of the alternatives, A and B, are consistent with those rangesthat had been established. As you can see, alternative B ispredicated on no further change in bank reserve pressures from whathad been adopted at the last meeting. Under Alternative B, we expectgrowth rates to be close to the lower end of the 6 to 8 and 7 to 9percent ranges adopted--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we have? We had 7 to 9 percentfor Ml and 6 to 8 percent for the two others?MR. AXILROD. Right. And that assumes that January growth infact will be about 1-1/2 percent by the time we put out the newnumbers, which are virtually completed. Alternative A assumes somefurther easing of bank reserve pressures and would have an acceleratedgrowth, we think, in Ml and M2 in February and March. But over afour-month period, the average would still be at growth rates withinthe ranges adopted by the Committee at the last meeting. I thinkalternative C is not particularly relevant, if the Committee acceptsthe staff view that that was predicated on adopting a tighteralternative long-run target than that adopted. Although, of course,in some sense, those ranges are not inconsistent with the long-runranges that the Committee has adopted--except possibly for M2; [theaggregates] just move down in those ranges faster.Mr. Chairman, I really don't have much more to add. I shouldmention that, in the past, the Committee has sometimes moved to aDecember base at this point in the first quarter. We have suggestedleaving the November base because the likely growth is not too far outof the ranges that the Committee already has adopted. So there is apossibility of simply leaving [unchanged] the directive and the rangescovering the period through March whether or not the Committee decidesto keep reserve pressures unchanged or to ease them. The alternativewould be to move to a December base; but in that case I think some ofthe numbers would have to be lowered from what had been adopted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just deal with that pictorialquestion. Ordinarily we would change to a December base at thispoint, but there is the peculiarity this year that we had a very highDecember, at least for Ml, and a low January. So, presumably, if wemoved to a December base, we'd have to lower all these figures quitesignificantly just to reflect the fact that when we leave out Decemberwe start off with an exceptionally low figure. Arithmetically, youarrive at the same result; it is just a question of whether we want tostay close to or the same as what we had [in the directive] last time.MR. AXILROD. I should say in that context, Mr. Chairman,that generally we attempt to review at the mid-quarter meeting whetherthe targets set at the beginning-of-the-quarter meeting are feasible.Our general feeling was that they seemed feasible; it is just thismatter of the November or December base. We didn't see a great needto change it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we accept that method of proceeding?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would.2/11-12/86SEVERAL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we take a break right now andcome back and resolve this issue?[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of comments withrespect to this decision; these all relate to the operationaldecision, which I presume will be on the level of borrowing. I thinkthat most people are [not] going to want to change our approachradically at this meeting. The setting that we are in--GovernorMartin used the word "uncertainty" and that is one way of putting it.The synonym is "confusing." That is what I got from listening to allof you yesterday. You have varying views about the outlook. Youemphasize quite different things, and that is quite understandable.All of the individual views are quite persuasive, but they are not allconsistent with each other, which I think is the confusing aspect.Obviously, we have had stronger data recently; the employment data inparticular have been very strong. One is left with this uneasyfeeling that that is not matched by equal strength currently orprospectively in a number of the key sectors of the economy. It is alittle hard to piece [together] just where the strength will come fromthrough the year. We have had a lot of monetary expansion and a lotof debt expansion, and from that standpoint there seems to be ampleliquidity. But I hesitate to believe this recent good data or tobelieve the part that states there are potentially weak sectors outthere, looking ahead a year or so. I am reminded of the old adage ofCharlie Kindleberger: In this kind of situation, just don't doanything; stand there. I suspect that may be good advice in thiscircumstance.I get more concerned as time passes about an underlyingfactor here. I had assumed that we were at least a year, or maybe 2years, off from any concern about general pressures on the economy orcapacity, looked at very broadly. These productivity figures surelook pretty sour. And that raises a question about what our growthpotential really is. We have had unemployment declining somethinglike a half percentage point over the last six months, if one believesthis last figure. Maybe we will get a reversal of that in February sothat will look different. But where we are now, getting a sizabledecline in unemployment with the economy growing--I don't know what ithas averaged over the last 6 months--less than 3 percent hasn't it?Well, that looks low; it makes you wonder. On the other hand, youwonder how much we can take without pushing the unemployment ratepretty fast. None of the projections suggests that, but theprojections are not consistent with what has happened over the lastfive or six months either in the relationship between economic growthand unemployment. Maybe it is a fluke; maybe it will all go away inthe figures over the next couple months. But it leaves me with morequestions in my mind than I had before about what our growth potentialis.And, of course, that bears on the inflation picture overtime. I don't know who Governor Angell was referring to [in hiscomment] that people are overestimating the inflation rate. I thinkthat has been generally the case among economists and others surveyedon inflationary expectations; people pretty consistently over the past-48-2/11-12/86few years have overestimated inflation. We have an unblemished recordas a Committee of overestimating inflation collectively for 5consecutive years. I don't know if that is going to change; theexpectations have been reduced somewhat in this latest set. I thinkwe are seeing some good things in reference to a change in the laborbargaining situation. I suspect a lot of credit for that has to go toderegulation. I think the air controllers' strike five years ago hadsomething to do with changing this trend. From my viewpoint, it is avery healthy development in the manufacturing sector and in some otherbig labor union sectors. The situation has never looked so great onthe financial side. Si or somebody referred to one insurance companyanyway, but that has been fairly typical of the service side of theeconomy. That is, I suspect, where we are getting on balanceparticularly poor productivity performance. My own bias is that oncewe lose that favorable inflationary [climate] it is the devil to getit back again. I don't think we have lost it yet, but theseunderlying factors raise some questions. The biggest threat isclearly from the dollar side. Can we absorb this kind of a reductionin the exchange rate and have just a temporary influence on inflationwithout affecting the whole climate, which has been improving? Fromthat standpoint, I suppose we should count ourselves very lucky thatwe may have this decline in oil prices coming. It may not be at thesuperbly right time, but it's about as good a time as one can everimagine in terms of offsetting the potential--and I think they will beactual--effects from the exchange rate side of the equation. Here weare getting a tremendously lucky break. Because of the oil situation,can we get through some of the exchange rate adjustment effectswithout the same degree of impact that otherwise would have occurred?The oil situation, on the other hand, obviously raises allthose questions of financial fragility--questions like Karen Hornraised yesterday. I guess the only answer is that while there is infact a lot of fragility, it has been contained and diffused; so wereally haven't had a test of what happens to the economy if somethingreally happened in a way that was not controlled. We have the clearand present danger in that respect internally, but I think in terms ofthe general risks--if one looks for the one place where things mightbreak down with unknown consequences--just because of the sheermagnitude, it is still in the area of the LDC problems. On top ofthat are a lot of continuing domestic struggles. We can't handle allthat with the monetary policy. I guess the challenge continues to beto keep monetary policy on track while those things get handledprimarily [in other] directions, although they obviously could affectthe tone of monetary policy at times. We have to continue to do so.But it all adds up to me that we are about as easy as we can bewithout actually forcing excess reserves on the market. There may bea bit of margin there, but we've been pretty accommodative. The mostrecent business news looks a lot stronger, but we get fooled lots oftimes. The most recent monetary news doesn't look disturbing, at theleast in a very short time perspective. So it doesn't seem to me asituation where we want to make any very violent changes. With thatmuch introduction, what have you got to say? Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you completely onthat. I would also like to agree with Pres on something. He talkedabout the need for symmetry a while ago, and in view of what you havesaid, I think we ought to put a "would" instead of a "might" in thatlast part of the clause. I know you don't think this makes any2/11-12/86difference. It does to me. We now have a "might" and a "would," andthe emphasis of your comments suggests to me that a "would" ought tobe where "might" was.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. We don't want to do all thedrafting [of the language] right now, but your point is noted. [What]way do you come out on these numbers that we have to put down becauseof this?MR. BLACK. I would go with "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make an immediate comment.Presumably, we don't want to go with short-term targets down to the1/4 of a percentage point. When I look at "B" I would assume that wedon't want to go with 5-3/4 or 6-3/4 percent.SPEAKER(?). As I understand Steve's earlier comments, "B" isroughly consistent with what we had initially specified.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we said 6 to 8 percent then, so itis fine for M3 and it is okay for Ml. It isn't okay for M2, justtalking--MR. AXILROD. That's what I was [thinking]--rounding in myhead a bit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would normally interpret these as saying7 percent, 6 percent, and 7 percent, [for Ml, M2, and M3,respectively]. Is that what you mean, Mr. Black?MR. BLACK. That would be fine, Mr. Chairman.MR. JOHNSON. On the borrowing range, what currently is ourobjective?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically, we are aiming at the lowerend of the range which, as we discussed last time, is $350 million orso. But we have been taking chances on coming in somewhat below that.You get to comment on that point for the sake of completeness.MR. BLACK. I would stick with that "Volcker $350 million,"although if we run into these problems with the federal funds rate notbeing what we expected, we get the borrowing that you are talkingabout. I think people very properly understood the context of theCommittee's remarks the last time, saying that the Desk should give alow preference to the federal funds rate and it did so. What is theborrowing related to that? What has it been coming to?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, for just these last two weeks--weare all finished but one day and--MR. STERNLIGHT. It is averaging just a little under $200million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The market is acting peculiarly today so Ihesitate to say what it will be. All the numbers say there are lotsof excess reserves out there, but the funds rate went up today. So, Idon't know whether that means we are going to get a lot of borrowing-50-2/11-12/86on the last day of the statement week even though statistically weshould get none. But, in fact, the [funds] market is on the firmerside today. Did we drain again today?MR. STERNLIGHT. No, we didn't. Statistically[unintelligible], but funds were high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you believe the projections, and thereis only one day left, [reserves] are $400 million above the targetwith an allowance of $800 million for excess reserves. Excessreserves should end up at $1.2 billion, so the market is firming. Itis probable that we will end up with borrowings below $350 million,but that assumes the market eases this afternoon again.MR. BLACK. That's with an expected federal funds rate ofaround 7-3/4 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can ask the staff but it used to be,historically, that when you had borrowings this low you would get thefederal funds rate at the discount rate or below. But it's nothappening now.MR. JOHNSON. That is what I am getting at. Projectedborrowings on alternative A are around $150 million. It sounds likewe are actually close to that at the moment in reality. I justwondered--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When [unintelligible] are low--assumingyou are aiming that low--unless you are very active, even then you runinto all sorts of quirks. Once in a while there is some miss onguesses by the banks on their reserves or something comes out that youdon't expect and you get high [borrowings] on one day. And becausethe target is so low, you can't go below zero but you can go high on aparticular day, and it is hard to get borrowings consistently toaverage that low.MR. ANGELL. There is no economic incentive.MR. AXILROD. In the two weeks ending January 29, Mr.Chairman, we had borrowings of $374 million and in the preceding two-week period they were $143 million. And, as you mentioned, for thisperiod they probably will be somewhere between $200 million and $300million or so by the time we are done. For the latest week that waspublished, the first half of this two-week period, borrowing was $240million in that one-week period.MR. JOHNSON. It sounds like what we really have is somethingbelow the $300-$400 million range you are suggesting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, on balance, I think it is. We havebeen a little below because the market has been a little tighter thanone might otherwise have expected. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would be in favor of alternative B. I mightjust say that down the road my tendencies possibly would be to leantoward a somewhat firmer policy. I am, as you expressed before,concerned about the behavior of the dollar and the change inpsychology there. One interesting manifestation of that recently was2/11-12/86on the unconstitutionality of Gramm-Rudman. The bond markets herevery quickly looked right through that; I am not sure the foreignexchange markets did. There are other factors there, such as how thelow oil prices have differential impacts and what the creditimplications are for the United States and so forth, but along thelines of the argument that bigger deficits are more stimulative.Maybe that would be positive for the dollar; maybe that subtle shiftindicates that the dollar is starting to get to the point where thereis concern about the inflationary implications of the deficits and thefinancial problems and what that might imply for monetary policy atthis time. So in any case, for the moment, I would be in favor of"B." I would lean possibly, depending on future developments, towarda somewhat greater degree of restraint down the road. Given that Ithink there are difficulties in projecting money looking forward, Idon't take a lot of comfort in the low projections looking out overthis period. That doesn't make me say that maybe we ought to betipping [policy] toward somewhat greater ease. I think we probablyhave been accommodative. In general I would tend to recognize thispenchant I have of leaning a little in one direction toward trying toget to $350 million as opposed to being overly sensitive to the fundsrate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think the advice not to rock the boat rightnow makes an awful lot of sense. The economic numbers have beenbetter; they may not last, but they have been better. The outlook forinflation seems a little better; it may last, but we are not sure. Ido think the international side is, if anything, more tender, so thatwhere we are seems to be about as well as we can do. There is a bitof trickiness with this borrowing, but I would think that $300 to $400million makes a lot of sense, perhaps altering that as we gather inthe information that the federal funds rate might tell us as to thepeculiarities of the borrowing range. Basically, I'd stay about wherewe are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you technically interpret that as"B" or what?MR. BOEHNE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I come out pretty much the same place, Mr.Chairman. I think you analyzed the situation quite cogently. Theeconomic numbers certainly look a lot better than they did the lasttime that we met and inflation looks pretty good. We have somecomplications on the international side, but I think we ought to heedthe adage that you quoted and keep running in place--maintain thestatus quo or an even keel or whatever it is. My tendency would be alittle different from Tom Melzer's in that the inflation picture to medoesn't look all that bad, and the question I keep asking myself is:What risk would we run by giving the economy a little boost? I don'tthink now is the time to do it, but I think that down the road perhapsI would tend to ease up just a little. At the moment, however, Iwould opt for alternative B with the specifications and the borrowingas indicated at $300 to $400 million.-52-2/11-12/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I note that the Greenbook'squarter-by-quarter projection has the second quarter of 1986 as aweaker quarter, at 2.3 percent. Whatever the error range is aroundthat, that is still a stepping down of growth from the first quarterwhich, as I read the consensus around the table here, is for a prettystrong rate of growth--stronger than the fourth quarter of 1985. Butwhat we do here today will have some effect on the second quarter of1986, although one can debate the time period needed to affectactivity. It seems to me that almost eliminates alternative C; thereis no compelling reason to raise interest rates at this time. Themarkets, of course, are going to start speculating or already arespeculating about what we are discussing here right now; certainly,they will speculate once the monetary data are released this Thursday.That will [result in] a little headline here or there when we starttalking about much lower rates of growth of Ml. We will release therecord of policy actions for December in a couple of days, so we aregoing to release some interesting numbers one day and some interestinghistory the next day. And the history is going to point toward thevery modest easing in that report for the December meeting.Moving to the alternatives, it seems to me that the markethas been telling us something. The market has been acting through thecommercial bank mechanism and has been keeping the borrowing numberslow relative to our target of $350 million. It seems to me that nowwould be the time to recognize the market signals and begin to movethe borrowing target first from $350 million to $300 million and thensee what the market response is to that. If the response isappropriate--if the federal funds rate begins to come down a little--then I'd very carefully reduce the borrowing level another $50million. I am not in favor of alternative A either for the samereason I reject alternative C. I think "A" probably takes us down tobelow the frictional level of borrowing. I don't know whether that is$150 million or $200 million or whatever. I think we ought to move inthat direction, though, in a couple of stages. That would permit theBoard of Governors to respond to the 5 or 6 remaining requests--I hopethey are remaining--to lower the discount rate. In other words, itwould give us some room to act in a way that would aim at that second-quarter figure and at the figures the staff has provided us for therest of the way. So, I am a "B+" person here with a [unintelligible].MR. PARRY. It seems to me that recent economic statisticssuggest that there will be surprises on the plus side in the firsthalf of the year. I don't know what that implies for the second halfbut in that kind of environment alternative B would seem to be theappropriate policy to follow. With the strength that may be presentin the first half of the year, I don't think alternative A would be anappropriate policy to follow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, looking at these alternatives, Isee very little difference between "A" and "B." I discount "C" tobegin with. There is virtually no difference between "A" and "B" withthe exception that "A" implies lower borrowing and a discount ratecut. I might have been in favor of that six weeks ago, but it seemsto me that a discount rate cut, in view of the good numbers that we2/11-12/86have had recently and the fragility in the dollar, might [not] beappropriate. Therefore, "B" at a stand pat level of $300-$400 millionwould be an appropriate prescription for the next six weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I also would favor alternative B and, with that,trying to get the borrowings back up to the $300-$400 million range,assuming that nothing too unusual is happening with the federal fundsrate. It doesn't seem to me that any of the incoming information oneither the economy or the monetary aggregates suggests that we shouldwant to make any changes at this juncture. That may be somewhat of anunusual position in recent history but maybe we should take advantageof that and, as the adage you cited suggested, just stand there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Angell.MR. ANGELL. I am afraid I am with the consensus in regard towanting us to stand still, provided that stand still means standingneutral. Unfortunately, we are in an environment in which we don'thave M1 targeting that can really be a policy guide as it was inperiods in the past. Since we don't have M1 targeting, we don't haveany way to let interest rates respond to economic forces. So it seemsto me that we have been pegging the federal funds rate. When I try tofactor in a change in the price of oil from $28 to $18 over a periodof time when the funds rate has been pegged at 8 percent, I do not getthe same responses in the real sector that I would get if we had someother way of running monetary policy. I'd note that the market'sjudgment during this period of time has been that interest rates oughtto come down. Market forces have brought rates down other than therates that the Federal Open Market Committee controls. It seems to methat unless Messrs. Axilrod or Kichline or Prell can tell meotherwise, I would tend to view actual policy as being pegginginterest rates. Now, I don't mind pegging interest rates temporarilyduring a period where the income velocity of money so misbehaves thatwe don't know what we are doing. But to run through a period, forinstance, of a $28 to $18 change in the price of oil, natural gas,coal--the entire [unintelligible] of the whole economy with peggedinterest rates seems to me just to be repeating exactly what happenedin the 1970s when we had oil price increases and largely had a peggedand somewhat discretional policy--an adjusted pegged policy. Itscares me, and I do not have enough foresight to be comfortable inthis environment. If Messrs. Axilrod, Kichline and Prell can tell methat my concerns are unfounded and that the model really works--thatthe real growth occurs with no interest rate responses--I will feelmuch more at ease because I have a great deal of respect for theirjudgment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You may have less so for the Chairman'sjudgment. Let me say that I find the analysis of this oil situation alittle ambiguous. Obviously, it is a plus on the price side but thefamous analogy is to a tax cut on the other side and an expansionaryinfluence on the economy. It seems to me to pull in the otherdirection from what you are citing. Be that as it may be, I thinkwhat you left out of your analysis is a big inflationary impact fromthe exchange rate which has gone down 25 percent or something likethat over the same period, roughly, that the oil prices came down; Idon't know how you factor that into your thinking. You are on the low-54-2/11-12/86side of the projections; I hope you are right. But the projectionscollectively, for what that's worth, don't show much change in theinflation rate.MR. ANGELL. I don't have more confidence in my ability toset the peg. I am expressing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't interpret our policy as a peg,be that as it may.MR. ANGELL. Well, would you explain to me what it is? Ijust don't understand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. An unchanged discount rate during thisperiod and we've been kind of sitting there with the economy movingwithout much change in either inflation or growth. I am not sureobjective circumstances in the market call for great changes ininterest rates. And that is what we have seen for the past year.MR. ANGELL. But it seems to me that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't see getting into a long argument,but some people might say 12 percent expansion in M1 was notartificially increasing liquidity and keeping short-term interestrates lower than they would have been in an unfettered market.MR. ANGELL. If oil prices were to move up from $18 to $28and interest rates stayed the same, I would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are taking one factor.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that it's a very big factor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is it bigger than the exchange ratefactor?MR. ANGELL. I would guess so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope so, but I don't know. I wouldguess they are roughly counterbalanced; I hope they are roughlycounterbalanced just on the pure inflation range. They are bothexpansionary in terms of the impact on activity.MR. ANGELL. The models that I have run and can think of--unless someone can point out another model to me--would suggest to methat the path toward expansion in the real sector is through areduction in interest rates. When you run a model of oil pricechanges and keep interest rates the same, then in that model I don'tsee how any real analysis is going to operate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon your model. If you use astrictly Keynesian model, you get a big increase in purchasing powerfrom the decline in oil prices.MR. ANGELL. Well, I never use such models.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's why it depends upon whatmodel you use. A popular thought when the oil prices were going up2/11-12/86was that policy ought to be more expansionary to offset thecontractionary effect of the rise in oil prices--equivalent to a taxincrease. Now we get the equivalent of a tax decrease.MR. ANGELL. But I don't subscribe to popular views that weshould have been accommodative during periods of price increases foroil. I would have thought we should not have been accommodative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what we are saying is that thereare different models of the world. I didn't want to divert you. Didyou express a judgment as to what--?MR. ANGELL. I cannot be satisfied with standing pat if itmeans that we peg interest rates at the current level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What alternative do you suggest?MR. ANGELL. I would hope that we might be able to have somereemphasis of Ml targeting and that we might be able to watchcommodity prices and see how they behave. If commodity prices behaveby moving upward due to the exchange value of the dollar, and with thecommodity price impact of the oil price change, I would want to takecognizance of that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really don't want to press you unduly,but do you have a position on these targets--borrowings or whatever atthe moment? It is not compelling that you express an opinion rightnow.MR. ANGELL. I think I've expressed my view.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Given all the circumstances and the crosscurrentsthat we've talked about, it seems to me that at this particular momentmaintaining the existing policy is appropriate. We are at a time whenthere is a reasonably short interval until the next meeting and,therefore, we have an opportunity fairly quickly to review what we aredoing. Therefore, I would be in favor of alternative B and theborrowing range of $300 to $400 million, but with a careful eye on thefederal funds rate. I certainly wouldn't want it to go over the 8percent level. It seems to me that many of the problems we havetalked about would be exacerbated by higher rates. On the other hand,we certainly want to watch the inflationary tendencies very carefully.Again, we have a fairly short period to deal with here and I thinkalternative B, the existing policy, is appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. [Unintelligible].MR. RICE. I think Governor Wallich supports alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just want to take one minute to bore you withsome ancient history. I was looking at some of the numbers that welooked at a year ago and, at that point, we had seen a surprisingly-56-2/11-12/86strong performance of real GNP in the fourth quarter. At the time ofthe December FOMC meeting we had been expecting real GNP growth of 1.3percent. Lo and behold, it came in at 3.9 percent--or the Greenbookwas showing 3.9 percent for the 4th quarter of 1984. As I recall, ourreaction to this was somewhat like I sense our reaction is today tothe strong employment numbers: Fasten your seat belts, we are about totake off. As I look back at 1985, other than that big expectation atthe beginning of the year, I didn't see much of a takeoff. I read thenumbers as a rather sluggish performance; I think real GNP growth forthe year was something like 2-1/2 percent. I just mention thatbecause I think it suggests that we can put too much emphasis on acurrent number and sort of extrapolate that, whether it is a strongnumber or a weak number. That is a risk. In terms of a specificvote, when I look at the actual numbers I have the same problem withthese alternatives as I did with our long-range ones. We really don'thave major differences between "A" and "B;" in fact, they are the samenumbers, rounded, for M2 and M3. As for Ml, I don't have greatconfidence in our ability to control that, period. So I am looking atthe borrowing target. I prefer something closer to alternative Awhere the borrowing target would be closer to what we actually havebeen achieving. If we accompany that with a discount rate cut, Ithink we would find that the fed funds rate would not be hangingaround 7-3/4 or 8 percent but would be down probably to 7-1/2 percentor below. So that is what I would like to vote for. In terms of aspecific number for the borrowing target, that would be something inthe neighborhood of, let's say, $250 to $300 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think the employment numbers arenot giving us a misleading signal on this occasion. If you look atthe leading indicators in December, there was very broad strength inthem. And, as I said yesterday, I think we are going to see a fastergrowth rate in the first half than we are now projecting. Sometime inthe first half I think we will have to move to a firmer policy, but Ithink it is a little early to do so now. I would like to see thedollar come down a little further in the foreign exchange marketsbefore we run the risk of halting that trend by moving interest ratesup. So, I think the stand pat policy is appropriate for this meeting;I would support alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. First of all, I don't see that much differencein the alternatives either; I also rule out alternative C. But I am alittle surprised that the difference between "A" and "B" is such alarge difference in borrowings. I think "A" goes a little too far, ifthat is really the kind of borrowing level that we have to go to. ButI don't want to close any options. I agree with Preston Martin tosome extent that we ought to edge toward the lower end of recentexperience in actual borrowings and leave the option open for apotential discount rate cut based on what we might see in the nearfuture. I would like to keep that option open. There's talk ofanother Japanese discount rate cut, which could make it possible to[cut our rate] without the exchange rate fallout that might result ifwe did it under the current Japanese interest rate structure. We havesome CPI data coming out, and it is going to be interesting to seewhat kind of CPI numbers or wholesale price numbers we get when we2/11-12/86start factoring in the oil price decline, which we haven't seen [inthose numbers] yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may be too early. Just as a technicalpoint, is that oil price decline likely to show up in either of those?MR. JOHNSON. It may be too early, yes. I don't know.MR. KICHLINE. We think there will be some effect in the CPIin January because spot gasoline prices have been dropping in retailmarkets. So we'll get a little, but very little.MR. JOHNSON. When is that report?MR. KICHLINE. February 25, which is Tuesday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we may have to wait a month or twobeyond this January number to see any real impact, but I may be wrong.MR. JOHNSON. There is some information there. Also, I thinkwe ought to look carefully at the yield curve and how the yield curveis responding to all this information. Holding the funds rate atcurrent levels and continuing to see the long-end rates decline and afurther flattening of the yield curve--that is certainly not a warningsign of inflationary expectations. If in fact we continue to see thatyield curve flatten out under these borrowing levels, then we ought totake the lead on that. And if the Japanese cut their discount ratefurther, I don't want to foreclose the option of another discount ratecut. So I would at least like to keep that option open and err towardthe lower borrowing range in alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Meaning $300 million?MR. JOHNSON. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think at least for now we prettymuch have to stay with "B" as is--$300 to $400 million borrowing. Idon't know what the future holds either, but trying to push it toohard now could back up on us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I also think we should hold steady at this pointwith alternative B and the borrowing range of $300 to $400 millionwith a little bias toward $300 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin or Mrs. Horn, do--MR. BOYKIN. Alternative B, $300 to $400 million, would be myposition.MS. HORN. I support alternative B with the funds rate in the7-3/4+ percent range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we had no trouble arriving at aconsensus for alternative B, whatever that means. What I think it2/11-12/86means in writing this directive is--. What did we say before? Did wesay [unintelligible] as compared to 7 to 9 percent, 6 to 8 percent,and 6 to 8 percent? Is that agreeable? A more subtle, and I supposeimportant operational question, is how we play this. I don't evenremember what the formal decision was last time on borrowing. Was it$350 to $450 million?MR. AXILROD. It was $300 to $400 million and there was anoutside range of $250 to $450 million, depending on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The outside range was $250 to $450 millionand the inside range was $300 to $400 million and then it depended onall these factors, including the discount rate. Just for those whoweren't there, the thought was that the higher borrowing would beappropriate with the lower discount rate rather than the reverse.MR. BLACK. Absolutely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there are two things that bearupon how we conduct this from day-to-day; they're fairly obvious. Oneis that people have not wanted to encourage higher interest rates. Onthe other hand, I think the consensus was--though it may not beunanimous--that people didn't want to encourage a lower exchangemarket feeding upon itself, anyway, on the down side. As those twofactors played out we ended up at least at the lower end of the rangethat we were discussing last time in terms of our intention. We're ina pretty narrow range here. I'm trying to sort out how to express it.I'm not sure we would capture all this if we said absolutely our lowerlimit on borrowing was $300 million. I'm conscious of the fact thatwe've been running below that. You can tell me, but I don't sensefrom the comments--basically the "stand-still" comments--that peoplewould want to go up necessarily on the borrowing, or let's say, gettoward $400 million right now, just for the sake of getting up toward$400 million if that meant the federal funds rate was moving up andthe dollar was fine and all the rest. We might move up in othercircumstances, but not in those circumstances. I wonder whether wecapture this best with something like $300 million with some margin offlexibility higher or lower depending upon those other two factorsparticularly. Otherwise, maybe it could be worded as $250 to $350million; it's the same thing, I guess.MR. PARRY. Is a range of $200 to $400 million inappropriate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MR. RICE. It's a wider range than we've been [using].MR. GUFFEY. That might be--MR. JOHNSON. It encompasses where we are now, though.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Keep in mind that the borrowing at anytime could be above even $400 million for some--MR. RICE. A day or two.-59-2/11-12/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --for maldistribution or expectationalreasons or whatever, but not as an intention. A $200 to $400 millionrange doesn't bother me, if it doesn't bother the Committee.MR. BLACK. Can we ask Steve what the expected federal fundsrate would be? Is it still 7-3/4 percent or--MR. AXILROD. I'd defer to Peter, to a degree. If youlowered it down to $300 million, I think the odds on it being at 7-3/4percent are increased and it might occasionally fall below that.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that's about right. In the contextof, say, 6 weeks ago, when we were saying $350 million we were tendingto associate that with 7-3/4 percent. But the intermeeting experienceand changing market expectations about the discount rate wouldprobably lead me to think that if you want even greater assurance ofbeing around 7-3/4 percent, something centering around $300 million ismore appropriate.MR. RICE. $300 million did you say, Peter, would beconsistent with 7-3/4 percent?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, something centering around that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a matter of taste whether you want tosay $200 to $400 million or $250 to $350 million, recognizing thateven if you said $350 million it might well be $400 million or $200million.MR. RICE. I'd like a little above or a little below $300million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MS. SEGER. You would use $300 million to calculate the patheither way, wouldn't you? If it went from $200 to $400 million or alittle on either side of $300--MR. AXILROD. We'd use whatever the Committee told us to use.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think what you'd do is probablystart off at $300 million, and that might vary, but be thinking thatyou might shade that as the week progressed depending upon what washappening. That's, in fact, what we do.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What did you say the two mainfactors were that you had in mind?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on the one hand, a feeling about[not] deliberately pushing up interest rates on the one side ordeliberately pushing down the exchange rate on the other side. Otherfactors obviously can enter in, but if important factors intervene wewould have a consultation.MR. MELZER. Is there any feeling that if we moved to $300million, that would show through and could possibly be construed as aneasing in the degree of reserve restraint coming out of this meeting?2/11-12/86As far as the foreign exchange market goes, I think that would not bea particularly timely conclusion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My assumption is no. But I would think wewould express this as unchanged, given what's been happening recentlywithin--MR. GUFFEY. But the market wouldn't see that for another sixweeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a relevant question. Maybe I'mwrong, but I was going on the presumption that they wouldn't see it atall, given that we've had a couple of periods when we've been belowit. That is my interpretation of an unchanged posture; or that wouldbe perfectly consistent, anyway, with an unchanged posture.MR. BLACK. That's an awfully good question. Could we askPeter and Steve what they think about it?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there has been enough variation fromperiod to period that there wouldn't be that much notice taken if wewere centering around the $300 million.MR. JOHNSON. That's my point. Given what we've been doing,some people could even interpret that as a tighter policy.MR. AXILROD. I don't think it would be interpreted that wayat all, Governor Johnson. Conditions may [unintelligible] the marketto react and they don't, as Peter said. But I would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I set it forward with a feeling thatit is unchanged. I don't think the market would interpret it[differently], but I'm not--MR. STERN. Assuming the funds rate stayed in the 7-3/4 to 8percent area and didn't do anything that would lead the market--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me that the funds rate, attimes at least, has been surprisingly high considering the borrowing.If we got a different relationship somehow and [market participants]got it in their heads that--. The funds rate in the very short run ishalf psychology anyway; it is where they think it should be. So Ican't rule out that if we did this, the funds rate might settle downin the lower range; but it hasn't so far.MR. AXILROD. It might be useful to note, Mr. Chairman, thatthe funds rate, which had averaged 8 percent in November and 8-1/4percent in December, since mid-January has averaged on the weeklynumbers 7.94, 7.87, and 7.83 percent. And up until very recently ithas been at 7-3/4 percent. So most of the time, in a sense, it hastracked down since the last meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, just in terms of Mr. Melzer'squestion, at the last meeting we said we were easing a tiny bit. Ithink what could be happening and has happened--if somebody wanted tolook at it through a magnifying glass--is consistent with that interms of the funds rate. But my interpretation of what we're sayingis that we would not be saying that this time.2/11-12/86MR. MELZER. If that's the judgment of the impact it wouldhave, it probably wouldn't be perceived that way. It's somethingyou're totally sensitive to, so that's satisfactory as far as I'mconcerned.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I hear objections?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would just make one point. Itgets me into the zone of nervousness, I'll tell you that! The point Iwould make is this: I think there is a danger that even if theJapanese, for example, were to lower their discount rate again andthrough a process of events we were to end up lowering ours, the netresult of that could very well be greater pressure on the dollar, eventhough the spread in some sense wouldn't be any different than it istoday. And that, in the short run, is the principal focus of my beingin the zone of nervousness. But I can--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I share that nervousness. Maybethere should be more comment in the short run. One comment on thatexternal point: Everybody loves to sit around waiting for us to changeour discount rate before they change theirs. If you look at Japan inparticular--there was some mention of this yesterday--they're going tohave an exceptionally favorable inflation rate this year and so arethe Germans. From an already good record, they have two biginfluences working in the same direction: the exchange rate and theoil price. I forget just what the short-term Japanese rates are;they're 5-1/2 percent aren't they, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. I think they're a little higher than that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if anything, a little higher thanthat. Their real rate--MR. TRUMAN. They're a touch above 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Their real interest rate--dependingon the importance you attach to that in the short run--is somethinglike 6 percent. It's much higher than ours; the German rates I guessare less striking, but nonetheless--MR. TRUMAN. They are 4-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is one country, Japan, with itsgrowth prospects really pretty dead, particularly against the Japanesepotential, and another country with an unemployment of 9 percent, bothof which have higher real interest rates than we do. You sit aroundand say: Why don't they move?MR. RICE. I don't quite understand what Jerry was saying.Are you saying we should be firming up a bit for you to staycomfortable?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, no. The discussion, as I heardit--I don't know what the numbers will end up being--was in thecontext that we were talking about a borrowing target of $200 to $400million or $250 to $350 million with an initial level of $300 million.MR. RICE. Presumably, that's no change.-62-2/11-12/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well,--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That depends.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I guess I will accept that. But I'mon the nervous side because my druthers would have been to tilt alittle the other way, but I can't make a federal case out of it. Inother words, I would try to aim more toward hitting the borrowingtarget that has been in the path all along.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And what I would say, just as anobservation, is that if we aim pretty religiously at $350 million,that would de facto be a little tightening from where we are. That'ssaying the same thing in the opposite way. It's in a pretty narrowrange.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me you've expressedwell two of the factors that we must consider in this short-run goalsetting and that is the rather overworked [unintelligible] projectionof the change in the price of oil and the known change in exchangerates. But I would hope that the impact of the change in the price ofoil would predate the impact of the exchange rate changes because ofthe contracts, the business relationships, the investment anddistribution systems and all the rest of it. And, therefore, I wouldhope that we would have a window here--to use another overworkedcliche; it's cliche day at the Board--for a brief time to move the fedfunds rate down by moving the borrowing rate. We should takeadvantage of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just look at the languagehere. What we'd be saying is "maintain." And we would use whateverthese numbers are for M2 and M3: "6 to 7 percent, respectively, whilethe growth of M1 is expected to be at an annual rate of"--what do wesay, about 7 percent?MR. FORRESTAL. About 7 percent, right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've come to Mr. Black's "would" and"might."MR. BLACK. I thought I deserved equal time since Pres hadmade that charge of asymmetry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had it asymmetrical toward the easingside last time. Do you want to make it symmetrical?MR. BOYKIN. I would.MR. MARTIN. No.MR. BLACK. I favor symmetry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we made it symmetrical by usingmight in both circumstances? Would that suggest that neither one isall that [likely]?MR. KEEHN. Yes.-63-2/11-12/86MR. JOHNSON. That's a posture of [unintelligible].SPEAKER(?). Take what you can get.MR. BLACK. It's better than what we had--let's put it thatway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The federal funds rate is still in themiddle of that range of 6 to 10 percent. What it would say is:maintain; 6 to 7 percent; might and might; and 6 to 10 percent.MR. GUFFEY. What's the understanding on borrowing?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, $300 million, however you want toexpress it: $300 million plus or minus; $250 to $350 million; I don'tcare. It all amounts to the same thing, I think.MR. GUFFEY. $250 to $350 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Express it any way you want.MS. SEGER. You predict that that would keep the fed fundsrate in the same neighborhood as it has been. Am I reading youcorrectly? Is that close--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in the recent period it has beenaveraging about 7-7/8 percent; I think something centering around the$300 million ought to give us something like 7-3/4 percent or maybe ahair over that.MS. SEGER. What has been the daily high on the funds rate inthe last couple of weeks?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, today it happens to be at 8 percentfor reasons that are a little obscure right now.MR. AXILROD. And when the Treasury balance was especiallyhigh, it was at 8 percent, too. There were a couple of 8 percents.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Sternlight, what would happen to the fedfunds rate if economic growth came in somewhat weaker?MR. STERNLIGHT. It would probably work on expectations; asthe Chairman said, that's a big part of the daily framework in whichthe market participants set the funds rate. If they see economicnumbers come out that lead them to think that we're going to be moreaccommodative, even before we do anything there could be a tendencytoward a lower funds rate. Beyond that, there is the opportunity inthe context of the directive you're writing to make adjustments in theborrowing level. That could have its impact on the funds rate aswell.MR. ANGELL. So, lowered economic conditions, loweredinflationary pressures, provide ample opportunity--MR. STERNLIGHT. It would work in the direction of a lowerfunds rate.2/11-12/86MR. ANGELL. And in view of this policy that we're lookingat, under those circumstances the members of the Committee wouldaccept the market's sense of adjustments in the fed funds rate and theother rates that might be relevant?MR. JOHNSON. If we talk only in terms of a borrowing level,those conditions would produce a lower funds rate. Would we saysomething about the funds rate or would we adjust the borrowing level?It depends on which we emphasize.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is some flexibility here inadjusting the borrowing level. But I think one would have to put afew other ingredients in here to have confidence in what we would door what the fed funds rate would do. What are those price figuresgoing to show? What's the exchange rate going to be doing in a coupleof months?MR. ANGELL. Well, I can accommodate to that kind of policyif it would appear that the fed funds rate would be sensitive tomarket forces, particularly if the oil price decline turns out to beas great or greater than we anticipate. I lack understanding as tohow the fed funds rate has remained as stable as it has over the pastseven months, given even some wording of a slight change in pressure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's anyone's perspective. Consideringhow little we [have done] in changing things, the federal funds rate--even on a week-to-week basis--just strikes me as being rathervolatile. That all [depends on] where one comes from, I guess. Wehaven't been doing much in changing this and the funds rate has beensurprisingly high, considering Ml and these statistical relationships.Sometimes it aggravates you, but basically it hurts you because we'renot sitting on it within a 1/4 of a percentage point or an 1/8 of apercentage point the way we used to.MR. ANGELL. But I haven't seen two-week averages in the 9percent range nor at 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.MS. SEGER. We won't see it at 7 percent with the discountrate at 7-1/2 percent.MR. STERNLIGHT. It did get up almost to 8-3/4 percent inthat period when there were a lot of year-end pressures. But themarket recognized that as something rather special and they weren'tgreatly concerned.MS. SEGER. If you used approximately a $300 millionborrowing target but accompanied it with a discount rate cut, whatkind of fed funds results would you expect?MR. STERNLIGHT. By roughly the amount [of the discount ratecut].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we're ready to vote. Idon't know if anybody wants to pin down whether we're saying $300million plus or minus or $250 to $350 million or $200 to $400 million.I interpret them as equivalent.2/11-12/86MR. JOHNSON. They're all the same.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't detect any policy differencebetween those ways of expressing it; I don't know if somebody elsedoes. We can discuss it, but on the understanding that those areroughly equivalent maybe we can proceed.MR. BERNARD.Chairman VolckerVice Chairman CorriganGovernor AngellPresident BlackPresident ForrestalGovernor JohnsonPresident KeehnGovernor MartinPresident ParryGovernor RiceGovernor SegerYesYesYesYesYesYesYesNoYesYesIf this precludes a discountrate cut, then I will vote NoCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it precludes anything.That's a separate decision.MS. SEGER. I think I'll still stick with "No."MR. BERNARD. [Continuing the roll call on the vote]:Governor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. I guess the meeting isconcluded.END OF MEETING