Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 19, 1986A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 19, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyHellerHornJohnsonMelzerMorrisRiceSegerWallichMessrs. Boehne, Keehn, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Bernard, Assistant SecretaryBradfield, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselKichline, EconomistTruman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, andPrell, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountPRESENT:8/19/86Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director forMonetary and Financial Policy, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Wallace, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof DallasMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Broaddus, Lang, Scadding, and Scheld, SeniorVice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Philadelphia, San Francisco, and Chicago,respectivelyMessrs. McNees, Pearce, and Sniderman, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Dallas, andCleveland, respectivelyMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMr. Weber, Senior Economist, and Ms. Rosenbaum, EconomistFederal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and Atlanta,respectivelyTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 19, 1986[Secretary's Note: The minutes of the July meeting wereapproved at this point.]MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any questions or comments?MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, do you think that the market is lookingfor further U.S. easing at this point?MR. CROSS. I think there is that expectation, but the timingis difficult to say; certainly, looking over a period of some weeks Ithink there is [that expectation].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other observations? We haven't got anytransactions to ratify do we?MR. CROSS. We have nothing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might take up at this point the Mexicansituation. We have [distributed to the Committee] a memorandum inwhich you'll see a proposal described as bridge financing. TheMexicans don't like to call it a bridge but a contingency support[facility]. It was agreed to in principle some time ago and waspretty much put together after a lot of discussion last week. We hadsome difficulty putting it together. We are sort of in the middle,satisfying the BIS people on the one side and the Mexicans on theother side. I'm just glancing through this memorandum to see what itsays and what it doesn't say--it does say $1.1 billion. We werethinking of $1 billion, but we added the kind of voluntarycontributions of the Europeans and the Latin Americans. We came upwith the idea that the United States would be 50/50 with the othersand they came up with a little more than $500 million to make it $1.1billion [in total]. The U.S. participation will be some combinationof Federal Reserve and Treasury participation, which hasn't beenfinally resolved yet; I think it will be resolved today.The banks were not very eager about this initially but agreedto go ahead on the basic conditions that were described in thismemorandum. They would go ahead with their bridge [financing] afterthey reach an agreement in principle on the basic bank loan--not onlyan agreement in principle on the terms of that loan but agreement onparticipation of the so-called critical mass, which is in theneighborhood of 90 percent participation. That is going to take, atthe very least, some weeks to achieve. There was an original targetset for the first week in September, but enough time has passedalready that I would be extremely surprised if it is reached in thefirst week in September. That negotiation on the basic bank loan isreally only going to begin tomorrow and if we get it done before theIMF meeting, I think we will be fortunate. One of the terms of thebanks' participation is that the officials come in first and go outlast in terms of the initiation [of the loan] and the conclusion.That doesn't mean that the amount of the official facility has to beas large as theirs for the whole time that it is outstanding. Thebanks originally wanted to come in on the same terms and conditions8/19/86that the officials did, but that violated another principle that wefollow: that the official bridge be paid off by official money--IMFpayments and World Bank payments to the Mexicans. There isn't goingto be enough of that money to also pay off the commercial banks. Thelogic is that the bridge part of the commercial bank participationgets paid off by the basic loan that the commercial banks presumablywill make. And that is why they have tied it down by saying they arenot going to participate in the bridge until they have agreement inprinciple on the basic loan. That makes the participants in thebridge pretty safe. Sometimes these things have been done just by theadvisory committee, which is about 13 banks, but this time they hopeto involve 40 to 50 banks. They will get all the major banks involvedin the Mexican credit to participate. There was quite a lot ofdifficulty getting full participation, even in the advisory committee,on the agreement in principle. The have been veryreluctant about this whole operation. The were reluctantat one point. The were bargaining with their owngovernment about some other supervisory matters. That has all beencleared up, in principle. Then we ran into delays on the officialbridge.The most important substantive question that arose from theMexicans is this: Mr. Mancera, the Governor of the Bank of Mexico,told me that if the bridge is going to be repaid out of IMF and WorldBank money on the time schedule anticipated for that money--and thebridge is going to be repaid pretty much by November and December--that's just when Mexico is going to need the money the most if thebank loan is not concluded by December. We have been assuming thatthe target date for the bank loan--the target date in the sense ofactual disbursement of the first tranche of the bank loan--isDecember. He is, with some justice, very suspicious of whether thatdate can be met. And he says: If that date cannot be met, what do Ido? By December or January the official part, at least, will bepretty much repaid. I am going to be losing money all during thisperiod from a balance of payments deficit. It doesn't look like [theplan] is adequately designed to meet my needs. He had some othercomplaints too, including the cost, but we got those resolved lastweek. We got them resolved with my intervention, frankly, whichraises a matter I directed just to the Committee. I think he has apoint, if the bank loan is delayed--which is not what we plan, but Ithink one has to assume that it might not come through in December andmight be delayed until January or even possibly early February. Ifit's delayed longer than that, I think we have a big failure on ourhands. I have a piece of paper, which you might want to glance at,that shows precisely what I told him because he wanted it in writing.[Turning to staff:] Why don't you give the members of the Committee mypaper? But I would like to have it back. You have it? Well, I wouldlike to have this back when you have read it because I don't thinkthis is something we want in the public domain at this point. You canjust take a minute to read it. I wanted to meet what seemed to me hislegitimate concerns about what happens if the bank loan doesn't comethrough by December. So I told him that I personally would be willingto recommend to the Open Market Committee--as you will see this ishedged--that if their program is on track and if the bank loan is infact negotiated and the only real problem is that the bank loan isgoing to be dispersed in January, let's say, instead of in December,that we would provide, on our own, permission for a drawing upon theexisting swap facility with the Bank of Mexico. That would presumably8/19/86be toward December or January, until the bank loan is paid out in theamount I discussed--let's say $250 to $300 million. Obviously thatcould be changed, but I discussed that order of magnitude and thatprovided him with enough reassurance so that he agreed with the wholething.I told him I would report this to you. I don't expect anyaction; it would be inappropriate to take any action at this point.In fact, I don't think we can take action because it's all acontingency plan. But if you have some fundamental concern about thiswe ought to know about it because it removes the point that reassuredhim to go on with the whole bridge. We also made some otheradjustments to help satisfy some of his concerns. The BIS wants tocharge him which isstandard BIS practice. That is not unexpected; that has been theirstandard practice. But then they wanted to charge aI also told him that as far as wewere concerned, he could have drawings on our swap facility at theTreasury bill rate, which is our standard practice. There is nothingunusual about that, except that I think once or maybe twice--justonce?--when we participated in a bridge of this sort we chargedjust to conform because everybody else was chargingWe were tentatively thinking of doing that this time, but wewent back to our usual practice of not charging any spread. So hewould get our portion [at the bill rate]; I don't know what theTreasury is going to do at this point. That will force the Treasury,I guess, to do the same, so on our half of the official bridge or onethird of the total he will pay no spread. That calmed him down aboutthe fact that this whole thing was costing the Mexicans money. Thereis a back-up facility for the official bridge. If everything fellapart--if, as would be the normal expectation, they haven't paidthrough IMF drawings and the money they get from the World Bank--anarrangement has been made, similar to an arrangement that was madewith Mexico in 1982 when a bridge was provided,8/19/86The whole agreement hasn't been signedyet, but I don't think there are any open issues anymore. Are there,Mr. Bradfield?MR. BRADFIELD. Basically, that's correct. We still have theprocess of getting final comments, but it's basically agreed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will get the actual details of theagreement written out. I think it is in place, basically. Exactlywhen they will draw upon it is not clear to me. Mr. Mancera wasn'ttoo eager to draw on it before he had to because it costs him money.On the other hand, they want to show adequate reserves at the end ofAugust because that's one of the few dates during the year when theypublish their reserves. They will "publish" in this case by a speechby the President of Mexico, I understand, on September 1. Theyactually publish it the very next day on this one occasion during theyear and they want to show adequate reserves as of August 31. Thatraises a different question, which I will return to in a moment. As Isay, this is all set--provided this Committee doesn't forcibly objectto looking sympathetically at a request for a drawing in, let's say,the latter part of November or December if the bank loan doesn't gothrough [by then]. That would basically be a two- or three-monthdrawing. I have told him that I am prepared to recommend such adrawing to you at that time if such a situation should develop--thatis, if the bank loan isn't dispersed. As noted in my memorandum: Inthe context of progress being made in carrying out the Mexicaneconomic program and in light of the agreement by the bank advisorycommittee on a commercial bank new money facility and progress towardconcluding that agreement at an early date--under those particularconditions--I would recommend that we extend to them, all on our own,a short-term swap for two or three months until it can be repaid. Thepayout would be from official money but, in fact, the payout would befrom the bank loan if it came through, let's say January 15 or so; ifthat's the first time they had the money, they would pay it out ofthat. At that point they would have adequate money.So, the first question I will raise with you is whether youare prepared to receive that recommendation in a friendly spiritshould the conditions arise in November or December. As I said, Idon't want any official action but I thought I should know if you werein basically an unsympathetic mood and I think you should know aboutthis in all fairness. I will interpret silence as basically asympathetic mood, I warn you. If that is wrong, please enlighten me.MS. SEGER. Is this tax reform package going to cool thecommercial banks' enthusiasm for this kind of thing even further or amI reading press accounts wrongly?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I am sure that some of the banks willraise the question. The part of the tax reform package that directlyaffects this is the treatment of foreign tax credits and I am not8/19/86exactly sure how they finally resolved that. The Senate bill, Ithink, had a reasonably satisfactory division. I think that was cutback but I don't think it was cut back far enough to--MR. TRUMAN. It's short of the Senate bill.MR. BRADFIELD. I think they still allowed the 3-yeartransition if they continue to do anything and then a phase out of 5years instead of the unlimited time for the Baker countries and 10years for the non-Baker countries. They have put it at 5 years forall countries; they have expanded the list of countries eligible forthe first grace period, and there is a phase-out period for 15 to 34countries. So there shouldn't be any immediate impact on thewillingness to lend overseas in these kinds of arrangements--at leastfor three years, and perhaps for as much as 5 years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But they will argue that it's a problembecause, whatever this will be, it will be a 10-year loan or a 12-yearloan and this favorable treatment will only be for 5 years.MR. BRADFIELD. Five years, but it's phased out at 20 percenta year after that, so it's 80 percent after the [fifth] year and soon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It won't help, but I don't think it willmake it impossible. The theory of the phase out is, in part, thatthat gives the foreign countries time to adjust their own laws so thatthey don't have the withholding tax in the first place--or such apunitive withholding tax anyway. It costs them revenue so it is anadditional problem, but we hope not an insurmountable one.MR. GUFFEY. You spoke of the September 1 date to publishreserves. That has nothing to do with this? There will be no drawingon this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there might be, so I want to returnto that. It's really different from this question, but it also mightinvolve a drawing on the swap. I take it that this doesn't seemunreasonable. I don't know exactly what their reserves are now, butthe indications are that on August 31st they would like to show aroundIt's not in their interest to show too many reservesbecause that would cool off the banks. That's one point of view. Onthe other hand, they are afraid that showing too small an amount ofreserves will frighten people in Mexico and raise concerns on thatside. So, it's kind of a balancing act.In 1982 we did something when the particular conditions thatexisted in the waning months before the election in 1982 were thatthey were running out of reserves but felt unable to take any actionbecause of the pending election in August. Even if they do theplanned disbursement of the official bridge, that would be $850million in the first tranche. This could be changed; it isn'tcrucial. But what we were thinking about, notionally anyway, isdrawing $850 million of the $1.1 billion fairly promptly and drawingthe last $250 million probably simultaneously with the bank bridge,which would likely be in the latter part of September as things looknow. When I look at this it would not hurt my conscience too much ifwe provided something, if they really needed it, in terms of our swap8/19/86over the end of August in anticipation of drawing upon this bridge.It's a little less window dressing under those circumstances becauseit's not that we're putting the money in and taking it out right away;we're just speeding up the disbursement that would take place underthis official bridge anyway. Now, whether that will be necessary ordesirable simply has to wait for more conversations with them. But Iguess we can decide this. We have a Foreign Currency Subcommitteethat would ordinarily do these things or I do them myself in theabsence of the Foreign Currency Subcommittee so long as it's in linewith the Committee's guidelines. But I just wanted to raise thisissue with you and see whether there would be any overwhelmingobjections to doing that if it seemed desirable in the light of theirparticular needs and the anticipated drawings on the bridge a fewweeks later.MR. JOHNSON. Who is this designed to impress?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From their viewpoint, they are concernedabout impressing the Mexican public. What they are specificallyafraid of is that if they show too low a reserve figure on August 31that will contribute to capital flight. There would be concern thatthey really don't have enough money to get through this period and itwould undermine confidence within Mexico and make their problem morecomplicated by fomenting capital flight. That's the way they look atit. But I do think there is this other concern that an unduly largereserve position in the eyes of the banks will only encourage thebanks to say: There's no great urgency about our reaching an agreementand maybe they don't need so much money after all. Those are the twothings that have to be balanced. I'm not certain of this, but I don'tsee why there would be any announcement of when the drawing takesplace on this regular facility. So I assume that people willinterpret the reserve figure at the end of August, if it looks aslarge as as already including a drawing on the bridge. SoI don't know that it means all that much one way or the other.MS. SEGER. How low are their reserves likely to be at theend of this month without this infusion? Is there any feel for that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, their reserves at the end of Julywere what?MR. TRUMAN.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I would guess, although I just don'tknow, that they would probably lose at least in a month--that would be a fair guess--which would take them down toleaving them if that's whatthey want. But that's just a guess. And that includessome nonusable reserves. Their usable reserves are underMR. TRUMAN. Actually, Mr. Chairman, I think thedoes not include all of the nonusable reserves. So that may be anunderestimate of the total reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't know precisely.MR. TRUMAN. They include silver and a few things like that,but- -8/19/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You put the family tableware in the public[unintelligible], I guess. If the drawing is big enough it does,under our normal rules, require an official Committee clearance, whichI don't think we should consider now anyway. We might have to do itby telegram, but--MR. GUFFEY. Is this shared with the Treasury?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This would not be; I don't see any point.Theoretically it could be, but I don't see any point dragging theminto it; I'd do it myself. And similarly, this drawing in November-December doesn't rest upon any Treasury participation, although it maybe that they'd want to participate. Not hearing any objectionsexpressed, we will use our judgment. If it gets above some nominalamount we would have to have an official Committee clearance anyway.But if it gets that far--not that we didn't want to see it[unintelligible]--we would send out telegrams.SPEAKER(?). Aren't you going to get the approval?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think the one thing we do want totake official action on is just approving the basic bridge. I supposewe can approve it with an open-ended amount because it will be roughly50-50, I think, with the Treasury. I just haven't worked that outwith them precisely. It's not critical, but with that reservation asto precisely what the amount is, I suppose what we want to approve issuitable participation in an American bridge of $545 million under theterms and conditions that have been described. That I think we cantake a vote on.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I move it.MS. SEGER. I'll second it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there any objection? If not, thatofficial bridge is approved. I assume a sympathetic view toward theNovember matter--should it be recommended to you under the conditionsthat are described in this memorandum--and a certain degree offlexibility if it appears desirable to do a very short-term drawing atthe end of August.MR. KEEHN. What are the major terms and conditions on thecommercial bank credit? And is that going to take a push and a shoveto get across?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. There are several problems on that,starting with the fact that the estimates that were made on the sizeof the needed commercial bank financing were based upon assumptions ofa $10-1/2 Mexican oil price this year and $11 next year. I emphasizeMexican oil price because about half of their exports are heavy crudefor which the price is quite a lot lower than the prices that you seequoted. Their blended price rounds up to $3 less than, say, the westTexas [intermediate] price you see quoted in the papers because somuch of it is heavy crude and there's a little transportationdiscount, too. Before this OPEC decision, when the oil price was atits low, the blended price of the oil they were selling was less than$9. Obviously, it has been substantially higher than that in the lastcouple of weeks. But on that assumption of $10-1/2 this year and $118/19/86next year their gross reserves would rise by about orin that neighborhood, over this period. In fact, they would rise fromthe end of 1985 to the end of 1987 by about that wouldtake them back roughly in the range, which is something theIMF insists upon. They always insist upon getting reserves back tosome half-way adequate level. The bank financing need, given all theother assumptions about financing, comes out to about $6 billion netto the public sector. Now, that's a little misleading but that's afigure that gets quoted. Those figures assume repayment, net, ofabout [$1] billion by the private sector to the banks. So, if youlook at total commercial bank exposure to Mexico, the assumption isthat it will go up by about $5 billion; the $6 billion figure thatgets talked about is the net exposure to the public sector. But inBaker-initiative terms that are talked about the total exposure to thecountry is $5 billion. Their total exposure now is $65 billion orsomething like that?MR. TRUMAN. It's around $60 billion to the public sector andanother $15 billion to the private sector.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $75 billion? So if you think of it as a2-year program for 1986-1987, which in some sense it is because thebanks haven't been lending anything this year--they didn't lendanything last year, but forget about last year--that $5 billionincrease in exposure is less than 3 percent a year. That is on thehigh side but within the parameters that were talked about in theBaker plan all along. If you look at the period as 15 months it comesout to a higher percentage, but I don't think that's quite fairbecause they haven't been lending anything so far this year. So it'sbroadly within the parameters of the Baker plan but it's also largerthan we or the banks anticipated some months ago before the oil pricetook its last decline. And I'm sure the banks will argue that sincethe oil price is up again they will make a more optimistic estimate onthe oil price and cut down the amount. So, that's issue number one:the amount.Issue number two is the concept stated explicitly in theprogram with the IMF that if the oil price declines below the $9Mexican price there would be additional financing from the IMF and, byimplication, from the commercial banks too. That is symmetrical. Ifthe price went up above $14--I think that was the number they had inthere--there would be less financing. Actually, it's closer to the$14 level than to the $9 level if you took today's figure. But therewas this contingency arrangement which some banks liked and otherbanks seemed to dislike intensely. Similarly, the Mexicans willcertainly ask for a reduction or elimination of the spreads on theoutstanding notes as a straight concession from the banks, mayberelated to the oil price. That is, if the oil price is below acertain level reduce the spread; if it's above a certain level theyrepay it. They also want for presentational reasons--they think it'svery important politically--to get an extra big concession on someportion of the new money which again, in their eyes, would be relatedto the oil price. That would be a big concession--8/19/86They haven't put these cardson the table yet, but in concept it would be something on the order ofI'm justpicking numbers out of the air, but that is the concept. In fact,there was a bond issue sold in the market a few weeks ago by StandardOil of Ohio, or whatever its name is now. Is it still Standard Oil ofOhio? It was precisely on that basis that it was sold in the publicmarket. It had a rate of interest related to the oil price: a lowrate of interest when the oil price was low and a high rate ofinterest when the oil price was high. And it was salable in themarket. A lot of banks have said they object intensely to that as amatter of principle--that they are not in the business of making loanswhose interest rates vary in accordance with some external indicator.They're in the business of making bank loans for other reasons. Therewill be a big conceptual fight about that. So, yes, it's going to bedifficult. That is why I think Mr. Mancera probably has someskepticism about how quickly this could all be put together. In fact,I think it's not going to be fatal if the amount of the loan is cutback a bit. But it can't be cut back to $4 billion; that is out ofthe question; $5 billion with some contingency clauses, maybe. Idon't want to give away the Mexican's negotiating position but I thinksomething can be worked out on an amount that looks reasonable. Butthese terms on interest rates are going to involve very difficultnegotiations; there's no doubt about it.I think those are the principal issues, but I'm sure otherissues will arise. What is unusual about this, in terms of pastpatterns, is the amount of official financing that's involved. Evenwith the commercial banks at $6 billion to the public sector or $5billion overall, there will be somewhat more official financing thanthere will be commercial bank financing, which is unusual. This is abridge, of course. But if you count the official financing calculatedover the full time period of the program there's a lot of World Bankmoney and of course the IMF money and there is an intention of therebeing a Paris club which provides quite a lot of money. The Japanesehave semi-promised some special project financing which could run asmuch as if you believe it. I don't think it'll be thatbig but it could be up to that. In terms of special bilateralfinancing to Mexico, there is CCC financing. I don't remember exactlywhat it all adds up to, net, but it's a little more than the privatefinancings. Fortunately, the amount of World Bank money in anybilateral deal they do with Mexico is new.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I sent out to the Reserve BankPresidents on Friday--you probably didn't get it yet--all of thepublicly available documents laying out the details of the overallfinancing plans: who's in for what and the rest of it. The otherissue that comes up is this supervisory question, of course. Yoursenior supervisory people have a piece of paper that was agreed uponby the federal regulatory agencies that sets forth the policystatement as to the collective attitudes of the federal supervisoryagencies on this whole reserve question. That piece of paper is not8/19/86to be shared with the banks; it essentially says there's a lot of[unintelligible] but we look at these things on a case-by-case basis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't looked at that for some time. Idon't know if that's ever been officially adopted. When the banks geta little further on in this negotiation they may well press us for awritten statement and I'm sure it will look something like this. Butat this stage I don't think it should be given to them.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could well be that in two or threeweeks we could have a joint statement by the regulators, whichprobably will incorporate this language, that could be published orsent to them.MS. SEGER. Are you saying this is a new policy, Jerry? Imissed something.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's not really a new policy, but itgets on paper a philosophy that had been agreed to by Messrs. Clarkand Seidman and our people.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We made a statement along these lines onone or two of these previous occasions, but it arises every time andthe statement gets slightly edited every time. It's not entirely new,and it's not entirely a departure.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It basically says all the customarythings: the decisions are your own; the examiners by the nature oftheir work, of course, have a responsibility to look at these loans;they're going to focus primarily on your system's procedures,controls, etc.; and there is no automatic linkage between decisions,especially when they're in the context of an internationally supportedprogram. They will be looked at case-by-case, taking account of theoverall condition of the bank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps we can return to this subjectlater after the meeting, if you want. The usual complaints go to theComptroller's Office. It follows a long technical proceduresometimes, but we are not exempt from such complaints. Somebody toldme the other day that there was an actual letter of agreement withsome bank in which part of the agreement was that the bank would underno conditions increase its exposure to less-developed countries. Thatletter was being used to say: How can we participate when we had suchan agreement? I don't think the agreement was with our cease-and-desist people; I think it was with the Comptroller. I'm not sure.MR. TRUMAN. It was.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have to be a little suspicious ofthese things. I can imagine that that bank invited the Comptroller toput that provision in the agreement.MR. TRUMAN. We did check, Mr. Chairman, and in thatparticular case it was a general provision about working down theexposure to troubled debtors and that was as far as the letter went.The bank was choosing to apply this particular [interpretation].-10-8/19/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Well, you have to be a littlecareful because banks will be very eager to apply--MR. BOEHNE. In the past there has been a problem of verylarge banks accounting for 85 or 90 percent of the money and then wespend all our energy trying to get [the remaining] 10 percent bydealing with hundreds of regional-sized banks. In putting thispackage together, has any thought been given to where the money iscoming from and how we're going to spend our labor in terms--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you want to discuss this furtherI'd be happy to but I'm just worried about having the time in thismeeting. We're going to have that problem again. Some of the majorEuropean banks, may insist in the end on doingthis in the form of an interest-capitalization deal, and maybe if avery small margin of banks do it that way this all will come out. Butthat bridge has not begun to be crossed yet and I wouldn't breathe aword of that at this stage. It may be that something innovative willhave to be done to pull in that last 10 or 15 percent, as you say. Wecan return to the supervisory aspects of this later so long as theOpen Market Committee aspects are clear. Are there any otherquestions on that? If not, we'll turn to Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments?MR. WALLICH. You know that I have difficulty expressingmyself, but I'd like to ask in this particular instance of either Mr.Sternlight or Mr. Kichline: Does the view of the people in this grouplean more toward one force or another on this issue? I'm not tryingto settle something difficult; I'm simply asking on the issue--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The issue is what?MR. WALLICH. The issue is where do you see the present viewas you look at the business [outlook]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we'll get to that question alittle later--the tendency of business and the tendency of open marketoperations. So maybe we can defer that question.MR. WALLICH. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments or questions?We do have to ratify transactions here, as always.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.MR. ANGELL. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Approved] without objection. Thequestion has been asked from time-to-time--I confess mainly by me, andI don't want to take undue time on this question because it's not amatter of enormous urgency--as to why we purchase long-term securitiesoccasionally. I wonder about it every time the issue arises. So Ihad some discussion about it with Mr. Sternlight and he prepared thislittle memorandum for you on the pros and cons of occasionally8/19/86participating in the bond market, which in recent years we have doneabout twice a year. As I say, it's at rather odd times in a kind ofarbitrary guise, and every time I wonder: Why now? What are weattempting to achieve or prove by buying some long-term bonds?MR. RICE. I was going to ask Peter one question.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make one other comment first.I have nothing philosophically against buying long-term bonds orcoupon issues if they serve some purpose. I'm not arguing a "bills-only" doctrine at all. If we have some purpose we want to achieve bybuying bonds, fine. The purpose is rather elusive in what we do now.MR. JOHNSON. May I express a partial Treasury opinion frommy past?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure.MR. JOHNSON. It was always thought that it would be nice forthe Fed to get into long bonds because the Fed always rebates theinterest and that saves on the interest the Treasury owes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has a slight effect on the rate,depending on how much we do and how much we turn over to the Treasury.Of course, the counter argument to that is: If the Treasury doesn'tlike the cost of the long-term bonds why issue so many?MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that. I was unsuccessful indiscussing that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other consideration, just to throw itin here, is simply emphasized in this memorandum. I'll point it out:These days it may seem a little wild to you but I do worry a bit aboutthe liquidity of our portfolio, given the possible contingencies inthe banking world. If we have to lend a lot of money--in tens ofbillions of dollars--suddenly to the commercial banking system wepresumably would want to liquidate our portfolio to make up for that.Under most conditions it's extremely difficult to liquidate couponissues anyway. And certainly, in those kinds of conditions it wouldbe even more difficult. I would never want to be in the positionwhere I felt that we had any degree of inhibition from liquidatingsecurities because of the composition of our holdings. Now, it isalso true that there is a constraint--what we have to have there incovering the note issues. We could get into a bind regardless of theliquidity of our portfolio by not having the types of assets which thelaw says we have to hold against our note issues. Certain types ofdiscounted paper can be used but not the type that we ordinarily makethese days. And maybe some day we ought to think about changing thatlaw or changing our procedures or something, but that is an additionalconstraint apart from the liquidity of our portfolio. I have hadthese reservations from time-to-time and I thought it would be usefulto have a discussion. Mr. Sternlight could you shed some light on thematter?MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you. You said some of what I wouldsay in your introduction but the question naturally arises as to whythis is on the agenda. The chief reason is that on some recentoccasions when Desk operations were undertaken or contemplated basic-12-8/19/86questions were raised, as you mentioned, as to the need for or thedesirability of those operations. In any event, it's probably a goodidea to take a fresh look at subjects like this from time to time.[Statement--see Appendix.]MR. RICE. Did you say you haven't done anything so far thisyear?MR. STERNLIGHT. So far this year we have not.MR. RICE. Any particular reason for that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as the Chairman mentioned, he has adiscouraging word now and then. Typically, we have done it in periodsof heavy reserve need--once in the spring, usually. Going back tosomething you said earlier, Mr. Chairman, I don't think the times arearbitrary. It has been done when there is a big reserve need, usuallyin April or sometimes in that heavy seasonal need around the year-endperiod. I guess the last time was actually early December '85.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the times are arbitrary only in thesense that there's no particular reason at those times to do couponissues as opposed to something else. But it is clearly consistentwith the reserve needs at the time. You don't do it right in the faceof obvious reserve [reducing] indications.MR. ANGELL. I think you've answered part of my question byindicating that you generally buy the traded security rather than atthe auction.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, at the auctions--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're talking about the [unintelligible].MR. STERNLIGHT. At the auction we would only roll over thematuring amount. As I mentioned, a few years ago at an auction--particularly these big quarterly refundings, where there would be anoption of going into any of three issues--we were dividing ourholdings in about the proportion that the Treasury offered them to thepublic. But that was tending to lengthen our portfolio because theTreasury was putting its emphasis on offering more longer-term debt.In recent years we've tended to slant the mix more toward the shorter-term options, and in the last year we've tended to move even furtherin that direction of slanting our rollovers toward the shorter-termoptions.MR. JOHNSON. Peter, I'm sorry, what [unintelligible]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Planning the rollovers relative to whatthe Treasury has been offering, which is more long-term securities.MR. ANGELL. Yes, but when you've been buying, I presume youbuy the actively traded issue.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we buy depending on what's offered tous. There will be more offerings of the actively traded issues, but8/19/86sometimes there will be an attractive offering of some less activelytraded ones. And I think that probably tends to improve the market insome of those less active issues.MR. ANGELL. So, by buying the less actively traded issuesthen you get a higher yield than you otherwise could get?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it often works that way, yes.MR. ANGELL. I have some hesitation in seeing us buy theactively traded issues, then holding them when they become inactive,and taking what I would call a loss in liquidity that occurs when anactive issue becomes inactive. But it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When is the last time we sold a couponissue or bond?MR. STERNLIGHT. We sold some short-maturity agency issues afew years back. I don't think we've ever sold coupon issues.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Basically when you buy a coupon issue youdon't sell it.MR. JOHNSON. What is the issue about liquidity here? Whatdo we need the--MR. STERNLIGHT. I think we want to be prepared. In 1984when Continental was borrowing massively, we had to lighten theportfolio by several billions of dollars over a short period of time,and it was very useful to have ample supplies of Treasury bills to beable to do that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's it. The liquidity issue[unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. $90 billion?MR. STERNLIGHT. We have some $95 billion or so of bills now.MR. ANGELL. It isn't always true that you can gain liquiditycheaper. Your give-up cost isn't always lower by selling bills;sometimes you can have a give-up cost that's lower selling couponsthan selling bills. But you don't sell coupons.MR. STERNLIGHT. We have not. I think it's a good question--whether we shouldn't develop that potential.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We do so [unintelligible] because of the[unintelligible], which I think is correct. This probably goes backdecades and decades. If the Federal Reserve were to walk into themarket and sell bonds it would have a big impact on the market,particularly since we never do it.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we ought not to be in couponissues unless we have a policy of also selling coupon issues. Thatis, I would prefer that we manage the account in the same way that onemight manage other kinds of accounts. I hesitate for us to be in8/19/86coupons without fully playing both sides; I think if we're going to bein coupons we ought to have the alternative of selling coupons.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there's a lot to be said for beingable to develop some flexibility to sell coupon issues as well asbills.MR. MORRIS. There might be times when the market would besupportive of a policy to sell some along the [unintelligible]. Ithink of October '79 when we had a 2 percentage point increase in thediscount rate; that attracted a lot of attention. In a situation likethat where we want a big response rapidly it seems to me that arelatively small sale of coupons issues could have a rather bigimpact. And there might be times when we want a big response.MR. JOHNSON. I agree. I can see a time when a coupon salewould be useful.MS. SEGER. Especially if we never do it!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can, too, theoretically. I wouldobserve, or bet you, that in 40 years you can't find an occasion whenwe found a suitable time.MR. JOHNSON. But that period that Frank described may havebeen a suitable time, I think. I don't know.MR. STERNLIGHT. Rates were shooting up then.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In retrospect, but--MR. ANGELL. It seems to me "bills only" is a lack offlexibility. But coupons when you can only buy and can't sell is alack of flexibility.MR. STERNLIGHT. You can run them off too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Peter, I find it difficult to seethe circumstances. Theoretically, I can see circumstances in which wewould sell. For instance, that October I at least sat here with somehopes that we would have such a dramatic effect on the market that ina few weeks long-term rates might decline. That shows you how naive Iwas at that time. The last thing I would have wanted to do was tosell long-term bonds.MR. JOHNSON. [And drive up] the yield curve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Drive up the yield curve and oppose thathope--false hope as it turned out. Sure, theoretically, you mightwant to sell them at some times. I also would agree--I just want tomake very clear--that I can see times much more practically when youmight want to buy coupons. If we have a specific reason, I havenothing against it whatsoever. I would not want to give up that toolof being able to buy them. The question is whether we shouldroutinely buy them.MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me we have two different discussionshere. One is that we might sell them in special circumstances. But-15-8/19/86Wayne raises the point of why not condition the market in such a waythat we can sell them routinely. And I think that's a moreinteresting question. What would be involved in, over time, trying tocondition the market [to the view] that if the Federal Reserve soldcoupon securities that it wouldn't produce an earthquake?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, probably some educational effort andstarting out with shorter maturities. We did a little conditioninglike that before we sold some short agency issues. And that was takenreasonably well. Of course, there are really not all that manyoccasions when we sell bills. The potential is there, but I thinkwe've gone over a year now without selling a bill. The long-termtrend is up.MR. BOEHNE. But there seems to be merit at least inexploring how one might improve the liquidity by setting the stage forbeing able to sell these on a rather routine basis, at least asroutinely as selling bills.MR. JOHNSON. If we put out a press release that says wewould sell Treasury securities in the same proportion that we buy themin these contingency situations, we could do that on a regular basis.MR. ANGELL. If you put out such a release, the bond marketsare going to be immediately affected by that release. And youprobably are not going to want to have that impact.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're right. That's why we haven't soldany.MS. SEGER. Have you sounded out many primary dealers on thismatter?MR. STERNLIGHT. On the selling of coupons, or--?MS. SEGER. Well, both sides: being in the coupon marketperiod, as a buyer or a seller.MR. STERNLIGHT. Sometimes they will bring up the matter,saying "You haven't been around recently to buy coupon issues," orsomething of that fashion. I have not raised it.MR. ANGELL. If we put out a release and said that we'regoing to buy more coupons and we're going to sell more we might get bywith doing that and not affect the market. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. That was the point I was getting at: talkingsymmetrically about buying in the same proportion that we sell, alongthe lines that since we've been cutting back on the proportion of theTreasury's issues--. I think that would balance the market; maybenot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In order to be able to do that Ithink you'd have to get to the point where you're pretty active.8/19/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And what's the point of being so active inthe market?MR. JOHNSON. Well, I agree with that. I'm not for changingjust for the heck of it.MS. SEGER. What would your maturities be in an average week?I can see what your total bill holdings are, but when you're talkingabout being prepared for the failure of XYZ bank in short order--.Without selling, I would suspect that you have some sort of ladderingin your portfolio that each week you must have bills maturing andalso--maybe not every week but fairly often--some of your existingcoupons coming due.MR. STERNLIGHT. There are a lot of coupons due within a yearthat mature every month or every--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With maturing coupon issues, the pressureis always to roll those over so the Treasury isn't pressed with thebigger job of placing them in the public market. I don't know. Havewe even let a coupon [run off]?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think we pretty generally have rolled overcoupon issues. It would be a complicated thing to work out. In thecase of bills, Mr. Chairman, if we run some off--which is a reasonablycommon occurrence--then the Treasury automatically announces thatthey're selling X billion so that the market will pick up more. Butwhen they announce their coupon offering, what they offer to the Fedis separate from what they offer to the public. If we ran some off itwould, at least under current procedures, hit them as a cash loss.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I look at this thing rathersimplistically. It is arbitrary, but I kind of like what we're doingand that is maintaining what I at least envision as something close toa minimal level of presence in the coupon market. From myperspective, that's fine. I don't think we can reasonably embark uponany ambitious program of working on both sides of that market withoutsome very, very basic changes in the whole approach to open marketoperations. But both for contingency reasons of a slightly differentnature and just to maintain that point of contact with the market, Ithink showing ourselves--even if it's only on the buy side a coupletimes a year--makes some sense.MR. ANGELL. I would like to see the weighted averagematurity over time. The data we have doesn't give us that. It wouldbe very helpful to have a history of the weighted average maturity.MR. STERNLIGHT. I could provide that, certainly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can provide that, obviously, but theweighted average is not what you're selling. You sell the very shortstuff that you have; whether you have a 10-year bond or a 30-year bonddoesn't make much difference. You're not going to sell either one.That is the argument that's made. I don't understand it, frankly,because I don't see what purpose is served by it.MR. BOEHNE. [Unintelligible.]8/19/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the issue, I guess. I don'tunderstand it, but that seems to be the issue.MR. GUFFEY. I guess I've always been--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Unintelligible] a heck of acontingency to it. Just as you can envision a set of circumstanceswhere you might think it desirable for some policy reasons to beselling bonds, it's hard to conjure up when to do it. I think it's alittle easier from a policy perspective to conjure up a situationwhere it might make sense to be buying.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no difficulty in conjuring up apolicy where you want to buy; I have no problem--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But if you want to have policyflexibility, it does seem to me to be marginally advantageous tomaintain some presence in the market so that when you want to do thatyou don't produce the very splash effect that prevents you right nowfrom selling.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My difficulty then is you get a policyreason for what--to buy bonds [if] you want to make a splash?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Maybe; in which case the argument ismoot. But it may not be that clear that you want to make a splash.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So far the liquidity argument is one[against] the central bank holding any long-term securities. But onthe liquidity issue, obviously, we've been buying so much in the pastyear that Treasury bill holdings look more adequate now than they didtwo or three years ago. All you have to do is [consider] two or threeyears ago putting Continental together with--all apologies to thepresent company-- and a few Texas banks and you've gota big liquidity need rather suddenly.MR. JOHNSON. I'd forbid that coincidence!MR. BLACK. I think that's a more important point, Mr.Chairman. You touched on it a while ago about the collateral coverfor Federal Reserve notes. It'd be sort of ironic if the collateralcover, which was designed to make them safer and presume there's alimit to the issuance of money, led to an overabundance of demanddeposit money because we didn't have the free securities to sell tosop up the reserves injected by borrowing. So, if there's anopportune time, I think we might well want to consider lowering thegold certificate requirements and then eventually eliminate thembecause that's getting pretty close now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All these sins we've made in the past--eliminating all these safeguards that were in the law--we can now makeanother one.MR. BLACK. They never really had any any effect on limitingany of those things. But to me the argument that Peter makes is mostpersuasive. And also, it gives him a chance to keep up with what'sgoing on in the market. That's the most persuasive argument. So, I'dopt for staying where we are, but I don't think it's any big deal one-18-8/19/86way or another. We're increasing liquidity all the time because he'snot buying enough [bonds] to lower our liquidity. So if liquidity isgetting better it's not really a big issue.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is not a big issue; it comes up fromtime to time. But if we continue buying I would [unintelligible] anddo rollovers into much shorter issues. That's the alternative.There's some value in buying [but] we pick up liquidity by doingrollovers into much shorter issues. I don't see the value in buying.MR. BLACK. Yes. It's interesting to have someone who hasbeen at the Board and also at the New York Bank with the other view--someone who has been both places looking at this "bills only" issue.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not for "bills only"; I'm perfectlyready to buy long-term bonds if there's a purpose in buying long-termbonds. But I have a little difficulty being willing to buy them whenthere is no purpose in buying them.MR. BLACK. You occupy a unique position having been in thetwo prime places when these different arguments have been made in thepast.MR. MELZER. If you stop buying long coupons right nowthough, it will be very visible, it seems to me. If you did a couponpass and didn't touch long coupons, I think somebody would try to readsomething in there with respect to inflationary expectations orwhatever. So we're better off not to do a coupon pass at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we haven't done any for the lastthree months when we ordinarily might have. Presumably, if there isan ample supply of bills we just wouldn't do the coupons at all.MR. GUFFEY. Well, we did pass this spring, which wouldnormally have been a time for a coupon purchase, right?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. For a reason?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the Chairman had reservations aboutdealing in this market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The reason was that we had scheduled thisdiscussion and decided this was the first meeting in which the agendawasn't cluttered with other things.MR. STERNLIGHT. And there may have been times when we wouldpass a period just because at the time we had the reserve need themarket was under this or that special influence that we didn't want tobe in the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It hasn't been that rigid, anyway. We'veonly done this twice a year. Well, I don't think it's worth a lotmore discussion right now. We can continue what we're doing and letit just fade for a month and reach a concrete decision next month orreach a decision now. Do you want to let this matter gestate a monthor do you want to reach a decision?-19-8/19/86MR. ANGELL. Gestate.SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible] just this month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we come back and make afirm decision on this less-than-overwhelming matter next month?MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions?MR. PARRY. Jim, do you have those numbers for inventoriesand net exports in the second quarter in real terms?MR. KICHLINE. In dollars?MR. PARRY. Dollars.MR. KICHLINE. The change in business inventories of minus$28.3 billion had been minus $20.3 billion. So it's a large downwardrevision of $8 billion in real terms. Half of it is in farminventories; half of it is in nonfarm. Net exports now show a changeof minus $24.6 billion compared to minus $20.4, so that's a decline of$4.2 billion.MR. BLACK. Jim, do you have private domestic final purchasesin percentage terms?MR. KICHLINE. I have gross domestic purchases here.MR. BLACK. What would that be?MR. KICHLINE. They had been 3.2 percent and are still 3.2percent. Final sales were actually revised up, obviously, in thissituation. They had been reported at a 3.4 percent increase and theyare now at a 3.8 percent increase.MR. PARRY. That change in inventories from the first to thesecond quarter is very substantial. I don't recall exactly what youhave for the third quarter, but does that raise the possibility inyour mind that we actually could get more growth in the third quarteras inventories perhaps come back into better alignment with whatactivity is?MR. KICHLINE. Well, there are a couple of things about thisnumber. First of all, under the new procedures [the CommerceDepartment] releases details tomorrow. So, we don't have the details.MR. PARRY. We don't know--MR. KICHLINE. Part of the farm [story], I think, may be theCCC because government purchases were revised up. So the question isreally on the nonfarm side. From the little information that we havearound, it appears that it's a revision in part in the deflator--ahigher deflator and thus lower real expenditures. The question is: Isit in oil or is it something else--perhaps merchandise trade? Wedon't know. In our view, we have a further runoff in the thirdquarter, which is mainly in autos. Outside of autos our forecast8/19/86entails something flat. In fact, supporting your supposition, we havevery strong consumer spending in our forecast, as I mentioned, and wedon't have much in the way of production. The question is: Is itgoing to come out of inventories or are we going to have more importsor are we going to have rising production? It's a question.Essentially, given these data along with what was happening, one canargue more strongly that expansion in demand is going to lead directlyinto production because inventories in most sectors, outside of autos,are very lean.MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. MELZER. I was going to make a comment along those linesbecause as I looked at your numbers--with personal consumption goingfrom 1.7 percent in the fourth quarter of last year and then to 3.6percent [in the first quarter] and 5.9 percent in the second quarterand employment growth and personal income growth and so forthseemingly staying pretty much on track, at least over the course ofthis year--one really has to question the dropping down of personalconsumption to the 2.4, 2.5 percent level, looking forward. Youactually raised those same questions in your comments already, so Idon't want to elaborate on it. But it seems to me in looking at this,one could say that there was some uncertainty in that direction in theforecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question which often arisesanyway and I think it was what Governor Wallich had in mind: Inassessing the overall tenor of this forecast, are the forces in thedirection of sustained expansion or hesitancy?MR. KICHLINE. Well, the forecast--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where do the risks lie?MR. KICHLINE. The forecast, I think, is reasonably balanced.There are risks on both sides of this and I wouldn't say they areskewed in any significant way. Obviously, we have a forecast thatshows improvement over time. Some of the risks have been talkedabout, certainly [at the FOMC meeting] in July. On the down side, forexample, one of the risks relates to what's going to happen to thetrade sector; it's clearly a key in this forecast. And that raisesquestions about foreign growth and demands for our own exports. Oneof the downside risks is in business fixed investment. Frankly, inthe office and commercial area it now seems that both commitments andstructures are going down at a tremendous rate. That sector could beone for which we perhaps have underestimated the severity of thedecline. On the other side, I'd say we do have a slackening in growthof consumer spending that we think is consistent with what's happeningto disposable income. There's just no question, if you look at thedata, that consumers have been quite willing to spend and[unintelligible] generated enough income in this forecast, it seems tome, that consumer spending at the rate we have could look verymoderate. So, there are risks on both sides, and I think it's ratherreasonably balanced at the moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The forecast, as you have mentionedseveral times, is heavily dependent upon a rather strong improvementin the foreign trade balance in real terms, not necessarily in8/19/86monetary terms. It may be worth having Mr. Truman justify theforecast.MR. TRUMAN. I should say that the GNP numbers that were putout, which show some downward revisions on the export side and anupward revision in real terms on the import side, were in line withwhat we had guessed--based upon the preliminary numbers on the tradeside that are still not available [in final form] for the secondquarter. So, although the revision was downward on the overallsituation, both components of it are consistent with how we have beenreading the incoming numbers. The forecast for the external sector isbasically contingent upon two factors. One relates to the exchangerate effects, which have been slow so far in coming. They have notyet come through in terms of showing much effect on slowing the growthof non-oil imports or speeding the growth in the volume ofnonagricultural exports. [We believe] that we will in due coursebegin to see those effects; and the anecdotal information, from what Ihave seen, is consistent with that. We're now getting some stories offirms moving from the category of "we're eager to compete" to "we'rebeginning to get some orders in the fall" from that. The otherimportant factor is that we are assuming that the lull in growth inthe first quarter in other major industrial countries, at least as faras Europe is concerned, will be replaced by faster, though notexuberant, growth over the next six quarters. A third factor, whichwe may not have taken into account quite as much, is that in the lastseveral quarters with the Mexican situation we have lost exports andincreased imports because they have moved [down] their exchange rateover the past year against the dollar; the rate had gotten out of lineagain, essentially since July of 1985. They also have lost income.The two things together have had an impact on our trade with Mexico,which is one [unintelligible], if anything, we should at least bereducing in emphasis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe it would be worthwhile getting anycomments Committee members may have at this particular point on theexternal prospects.MR. HELLER. Well, I think it would be very nice if theforecast came true, but I'm pretty pessimistic. [I doubt] that we aregoing to see [export] growth rates of up to 15-1/2 percent on aquarterly basis. Certainly, in Europe and Japan it's going to be verytough for Americans to make rapid inroads into those domestic markets.And at the going exchange rates, I don't think we really have acompetitive advantage, although we have roughly leveled the playingfield versus other industrialized countries. I don't see the growthin the LDCs--and I think that's where the relative exchange ratemovement probably has a bigger role to play, because when you'recompeting in [third] markets you're on more equal terms than whenyou're competing in foreign home markets--in spite of the generosityas far as Mexico is concerned. The federal deficit, I think, plays arole too. And that certainly isn't going to come down as fast as thetrade balance comes down [in your forecast], from $146 billion to $82billion at the end of the forecast period. That's a terrific swing.My last question to you really would be: What do you assume as far asexchange rates are concerned to make that scenario compute?MR. TRUMAN. We're assuming a further moderate decline, atleast on the scale that we've seen over the past 17 months or so now.-22-8/19/86So, the dollar declines at roughly a 10 percent annual rate throughthe end of the forecast period. Given the lags in theserelationships, though, most of that decline will not affect thenominal value of the trade balance; in fact, we even have [forecast]an adverse affect on it. As a consequence of that--you're quoting GNPnumbers I guess--the trade balance [deficit] itself goes from the $150billion range where we are now to only about $130 billion in thefourth quarter of 1987, just--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This gets confusing. Now, what--MR. JOHNSON. I think you're quoting--MR. TRUMAN. The $82-1/2 billion that Governor Heller quoted.MR. HELLER. Net exports.MR. TRUMAN. Net exports on a real basis.MR. HELLER. Right.SPEAKER(?). In the fourth quarter of 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get a big difference between the realfigures and the nominal figures, which gets very confusing. But areal increase in exports is still there in the forecast unless,assuming the question--MR. PARRY. As I'm sure you know, there's a lot of portactivity on the West Coast and the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A lot of what activity?MR. PARRY. Port activity on the West Coast. Theinternational trade picture there is very mixed. The public figureson port activity really don't provide much of an indication of aturnaround in the net export picture. But having said that, wecertainly have picked up information that there are several keyproducts where the situation has changed rather dramatically. Thereare larger exports of such things as citrus and almonds, particularlyto the Far East. Wine is doing quite well and, just looking at itfrom the net export position, there has been a very substantialdecline in imports again. Wood pulp is up significantly as well asseafood. So there seems to be some change but it's more anecdotal atthis point and hasn't shown up in the port [activity figures].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I have just a little different impression,Mr. Chairman, on the trade front. Some of the retailers that I'vetalked to recently have been reporting some price increases of goods.It's still very spotty, but it does seem to be appearing more and morein autos and apparel. It doesn't seem to be getting through to themanufacturers, and the reasons that I hear for this are: first of all,that the quality of the goods coming in from abroad is very, very goodand highly competitive with U.S. goods; and secondly, that somecustomer loyalty to some of these products apparently has beendeveloping. It's hard for me to believe that price is not going to be-23-8/19/86an important ingredient down the line, but at the moment the priceincreases have not yet overcome the tendency of the purchaser to buywhat he is used to buying given that he's also getting a good qualityproduct. The other thing that I'm hearing a lot is that theimprovement in the dollar vis-a-vis our trading partners, because ithas been confined to the European currencies and to the yen, has notreally helped a lot of industries in the Southeast. I've reportedthis before. This is particularly true with respect to Canada and tothe east Asian countries such as South Korea. So we're not seeing inthe Southeast any particular improvement in the trade sector yet.MR. BOEHNE. The same is true in the Mid-Atlantic states.You hear some anecdotal evidence here and there that suggests thatperhaps there are a few more orders. But there's a great deal ofskepticism that any kind of a major turnaround in the trade sector isgoing to occur. In addition to the arguments that have already beengiven, the market share argument keeps coming up: that withunemployment high in European countries, it's just very difficult tolose those markets even with thinner margins. So we don't seeanything that would lead us to share the kind of optimism that'simplicit in the forecast.MS. HORN. An argument we hear in our area that would put uson the side of not being very optimistic is that a lot of ourmanufacturers are conducting trade with countries with an exchangerate that hasn't moved very much. We hear that time and time again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. One of the problems, Mr. Chairman, is that thelags are so long that I, too, am a little pessimistic about ourability to turn the situation around. I looked at the last twoperiods of decline in the dollar since 1970 and in those two periodsthe lag before we got a substantial change in net exports, apart froma bottoming out process, was 7 to 8 quarters. If we get this kind ofsequence again, that means that we shouldn't expect to see much beforethe fourth quarter of this year or perhaps not even until the firstquarter of next year--unless something in this cycle is going toshorten the lags. And I suspect that's not going to be the case. Thelags are long and I think we have to be a little patient.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I think we not only have the normal J-curveeffects here, but we also have to look at this in terms of thedeflationary environment. That is, the J-curve effects in aninflationary environment could be quite different than in adeflationary one. We've already seen the impact of oil prices interms of wanting to hold inventories during a period of decliningprices. And we've now gone through a period with decliningagricultural prices because of a U.S. policy change. We're now seeinga period of falling agricultural prices with a huge feed-grain crop,corn crop, coming on this fall. You tend in those circumstances toexpect to find people delaying their purchases because they expectprices to be lower; so inventories will tend to be drawn down. Ithink our agricultural exports are probably not going to be picking upvery much very soon.8/19/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I'd just add to this a little. I agree thatconsumption seems to be doing quite well, but I think that we'reprobably putting too much emphasis on the G-10 trade-weighted dollarfor the reasons that already have been mentioned. We're doing quite abit of trade with a lot of countries whose currencies are stilldepreciating relative to the dollar; Canada and Mexico, our bordercountries, are good examples of that. It's not unreasonable to expectto see a continuation--well, there may not be a deterioration in ourimports but, of course, if oil prices bounce back up a little we maysee a further deterioration in imports. And with all the relativeweakness in European and Japanese demand we're certainly not going tosee improvement on the export side of the market. It is verydifficult for me to see where this domestic production is going tocome from. I still think that we're probably overestimating theimpact of the trade-weighted dollar against the G-10 countries. Ithink that's the problem.MR. TRUMAN. Well, in fact, we have tried to make anallowance for that in the forecast. That's one of the reasons why wehave not gone with traditional model estimates as our basic forecast;we adjusted the G-10 [index] in putting the forecast together. Imight add that I have a table here of our forecast and 8 otherforecasts of the current account for 1987 and of the 9 forecastslisted on this table we have the largest deficit at $135 billion; thelowest is $98 billion. Now, there are price and quantity effectsinvolved; so we may be too pessimistic on the price side and toooptimistic on the quantity side. The two together, in any case, wouldproduce for us a much higher current account deficit than anybody elsewho is represented in this listing.MR. GUFFEY. From our perspective in the heartland, there hasbeen some encouragement taken from the recent legislation for exportsubsidies of farm products--farm exports being a very big componentpart of our exports. I guess my question to Ted would be: Have youfactored in the result of that subsidy program?MR. TRUMAN. We have. We had built in a drop in exports ofthe agricultural sector in the first and second quarters inanticipation of that program. That is one basis for the modestincrease we have, which is on the order of $2 or $3 billion in 1982dollars, in our agricultural exports over the period.MR. KEEHN. I have a fairly specific comment, but one thatrelates to heavy manufacturing. I had an opportunity a couple ofweeks ago to visit withI think that reasonably describes the company.Their principal market, of course, is He observesthat that's an industry that has a very, very significant worldwideovercapacity. Gradually, the business of the manufacture ofhas been coming under foreigncontrol; as you know, within the last week there has been a furtherdevelopment on that. As a consequence, they just haven't had anybenefit at all from the change in the value of the dollar and they saythat the pricing in the market is just absolutely fierce. Theyfinally, and maybe belatedly, have come to the conclusion that theyjust can't compete [unintelligible]. And they're going to begin to8/19/86move a greater percentage of their production offshore as a way oftrying to maintain their position. They just concluded that theycan't compete when they manufacture domestically and that they'regoing to make a change. These [changes] tend to be fairly permanent.But it's the only way they see that they can remain viable in a verytough market.MR. JOHNSON. May I ask a question? I heard a story theother day that there's a massive shift in demand into Canada for U.S.autos--General Motors and Ford-type automobiles--and that they'rehaving to put sanctions on the dealerships in Canada to keep the flowof traffic from going over the border, given the exchange rate shift,to buy automobiles. I don't know if that's affecting the domesticsales level any, but have you heard anything like that?SPEAKER(?). No.MR. TRUMAN. I heard that same report. They were talkingabout something like $3,000 on a--MR. JOHNSON. Yes, a huge [difference].MR. TRUMAN. The report said that a car you could buy for$12,000 here you could buy for $9,000 in Canada, which was somethinglike a 25 percent markup here. The Canadian dollar has notdepreciated 25 percent.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, it doesn't--MR. TRUMAN. So, it sounds like they started out with adifferential pricing policy that has come home to haunt them. Itseems to me a segment of the market--MR. JOHNSON. I couldn't tell if that was the case or not,but it sounded like they were inundated with U.S. crossovers and Ijust wondered--MR. BLACK. Are these American cars?MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. TRUMAN. There was a joint agreement so that the trading,at least at the dealer level or the manufacturing level, is freebetween both parts and cars.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not clear if some manufacturersexport the cars up to Canada and import them back down or--MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't know if manufacturer--MR. TRUMAN. Then they resell them in both markets; they aresold in both markets and they have different prices, not just a lowerprice in Canada. So, a large number now have sanctions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I wasn't going to comment on this, but since itinvolves going back and forth to Canada, people from Detroit-26-8/19/86understand all this because they've gone back and forth to buygasoline when it was cheaper there than back in Michigan and the same[is true] with automobiles. They really watch this very carefully;they run over [the border] for meals, etc. So I'm sure they psychedit out.I just want to report on some empirical research I did acouple of weeks ago by strolling through some local department storesand appliance stores. When you do that you see a lot of merchandise,at least in women's clothing, say, that is from Korea, Hong Kong,Taiwan, and even China. So, again, I think that looking at thetypical series we look at for the weighted-average value of the dollaris just not that illuminating because the currencies of thesecountries have not appreciated against the dollar. So there hasn'tbeen a big advantage for us here. In appliances, I was stunned tofind the inflow from Korea. I used to think it was the Japanese thatwere providing all these TVs and so forth, but the Koreans are sendingin a lot. Also, I saw quite a bit from Taiwan. So, I don't thinkthat we're going to get a lot of consolation from this particulardistribution of imports. And, in talking with a lot of industrialistswhose main competition comes from Canada, they are not getting goodvibes at all. The Canadian dollar is continuing weak relative to theAmerican dollar.MR. TRUMAN. Their trade deficit is beginning to increase.Their trade surplus is declining; the current account is increasing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me defend the weighted-averagecalculation, for what it's worth. The theory about these countries isthat sure, the Korean currency, say, may not change but their balanceof payments won't change either. And they now have an enormousincentive to divert some exports to Europe and Japan instead of to theUnited States and to buy more in the United States relative to whatthey buy in Japan and Europe. Now, it may [not] work out so neatly,but that's the theory.MS. SEGER. Yes, but if you're talking to someone from BobForrestal's area or some Senator from South Carolina, I think thatthese kinds of relationships are significant because they have a lotto do with protectionist sentiment, even though it all may come out inthe wash.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. First, I would follow up on a comment that RogerGuffey made. I think there are a few flickers of optimism,particularly among the wheat producers in our District. And that wastrue even before the export subsidy program was announced,[unintelligible] more price controlled. But beyond that, I would saythat we are seeing some sustained and probably growing protectionistsentiment in the District. There's no other way to describe it.Also, I'd like to follow up on something Governor Heller mentioned andI hope this isn't an extraneous question: Jim, you do have a verysignificant narrowing of the budget deficit next fiscal year and it'snot clear to me how much of that is due to Gramm-Rudman or other overtsteps to reduce the deficit and how much is based simply on readingsof the current services budget as it now exists.8/19/86MR. KICHLINE. Our current fiscal year 1986 budget deficit is$225 billion and we have it going down to a little under $170 billion,to $167 billion. Included in those numbers is essentially $45 billionof explicit deficit-reducing actions, $9 billion of which already havebeen enacted in a reconciliation bill so that $36 billion remains tobe done at this point. That was our reading of a combination of whatwould be done in the budget process in reaction to Gramm-Rudman aswell as revenues from tax reform. We had assumed about $15 billion ontax reform; now the estimate, if it goes through as currently planned,is that there would be a revenue increase of about $11 billion. Sowe're a little too high on those revenue increases. The rest wouldrepresent economic growth. Basically, the answer to your question is:[deficit reduction] in the $35 to $40 billion area, with explicitactions that would need to be taken to be consistent with theforecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Yes, I'd like to return to the trade issue aminute. Clearly, the lags are very long in terms of improvement. Ireally don't have great difficulty with where the Board staff'sforecast ends up at the end of 1987. We're slightly more pessimistic,but not much more. It would seem to me important for those who arenegative to quantify how much they are negative. If they don't seeimprovement, then I think that turns what might be an acceptableeconomic performance in 1987 into something that clearly isunacceptable. So, I'd like to know what the degree of pessimism ishere on the part of those who are not optimistic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you pessimistic, Mr. Corrigan?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I was going to say partly what Bobjust said. If we don't get an improvement in the trade balance alongthe general lines of the forecast the outlook [for the domesticeconomy] does go from something that is marginally acceptable tosomething that's pretty anemic. Having said that, the further ironyof the situation, though, is that to the extent that you try and fixthat up--at least through monetary policy--you run the risk ofaggravating the trade side of it in the short run, aggravating thevery problem that you're trying to solve. It's very hard when you gothrough the numbers--by country, by product, by anything you can thinkof--to see exactly where the improvement is going to come. Frank, Itoo looked at that '77, '78, '79 experience in terms of the dollar.And that says to me, if anything, that the lags will be longer, notshorter, for two reasons: (1) the level of the dollar was much higherto begin with so that there's more profit margin cushion on the partof the foreign exporters; and (2) the patterns of economic growth inthat period from late '77 to early '79 were generally more robust on aworld-wide basis. The difference between the growth in domesticdemand in the United States vis-a-vis the other industrializedcountries today versus then is really very sharp. That too says, ifanything, that the lags probably will be longer.I find this discussion about autos fascinating because I havea great deal of difficulty understanding how we're going to solve eventhe auto problem when, in the face of very sharp rises in importprices, domestic producers now are slipping in what strike me as verysubstantial increases in domestic automobile prices. This latest8/19/86round of Chrysler price increases of 6-1/2 to 7 percent across themodel line strikes me as astonishing in the current environment. Theother point I would make, simply because it has been raised, is that Ithink the implications of this tax bill are a crap-shoot in terms ofthe near-term implications for the economy. I don't know, Jim, if youhave any views on that, but it just strikes me as so incrediblycomplex that I am very hard pressed to have a judgment as to the neteffect of it over the next 5 or 6 quarters.MR. KICHLINE. Well, for what it's worth, what we have in theforecast is a negative impact, principally in the business fixedinvestment area and in multi-family housing. We have felt that theuncertainty of the current environment may be depressing spending andthat passage and clarification of the rules might lead, at the margin,to some increase. But, on balance, we view it as a net negativefeature of the forecast.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I can't quite shake myself frombelieving, even though people tell me not to believe it, that at leastthe near-term effects of it could very well be inflationary. I don'tsee how you can shift as much tax burden to the business side withoutexpecting that some, or perhaps a lot, of that is going to be fedthrough on the price side. And those higher prices are going to befinanced by the personal tax cuts.MR. BLACK. Well, phasing out the deduction of consumer loansover time should speed up some consumer expenditures now.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know.MR. BLACK. I would think.MR. MELZER. Also, the elimination of the deductibility ofsales taxes has been cited in that connection. Make your big ticketpurchases this year because you can't--MR. BLACK. Right. Yes, that's another good point.MR. MORRIS. I feel that the tax change is so comprehensivethat we're just going to have to play it by ear. I don't think wehave any idea what the effect will be. Given all of the interactionsin this bill and the dramatic changes, I don't think we're in anyposition to forecast what the effect is going to be on investment, onconsumption, or on anything else. I think it's just beyond us. It'sone thing to have an incremental change in one tax, but it's quiteanother to have a wholesale revision of the whole system. It seems tome it's just unpredictable.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. Speaking from [the perspective of]somebody who tried to do that for about 2 or 3 years while we wereworking on it, it is too complex, definitely.MR. MORRIS. I've had a number of businessmen tell me thatthey think just resolving the tax issue and eliminating theuncertainty as to how investment is going to be taxed is going toexert some stimulus on investment, including multi-family investment.A guy who is running a lot of tax shelters says his firm is regearingand is going to start building projects on an economic basis.8/19/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. ANGELL. Does that mean that vacancy rates will onceagain enter into the picture?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It means they won't build anything.MR. MORRIS. They'll build in areas where the vacancy rate isstill lower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we probably are getting offjust this external side. Let's wind this up with any comments anybodyhas about the business outlook generally. Mr. Wallace, do you havesomething?MR. WALLACE. Mr. Chairman, I want to raise a question withJim about his forecast that is unrelated to the trade issue. Jim,you've mentioned that your forecast is based on an assumption of a $16oil price by early 1987. Are you assuming that there will bestability at that level and that that will be reflected in economicactivity in 1987--that is, increased exploration and drilling and soon? Our people, for example, feel that there's going to be someconsiderable lag before an increased oil price is really going to befelt in the economy.MR. KICHLINE. I think the path that we've assumed issomething like $11 this quarter, $14 in the fourth quarter, and then$16 in [early 1987]. The $16 thereafter is, in part, ignorance; we'vejust assumed stability at around $16. What that does on the priceside for petroleum products is that in the fourth quarter we'll beginseeing some price increases and under that scenario in the firstquarter and in the spring they should be fairly large. Then it sortof flattens out. Outside of oil prices, in other service fuels,electricity and natural gas, that sort of thing, we think prices willcontinue to drift down; they've been laggards in this process. Onactivity, we ended up essentially suggesting that by the fourthquarter the halt in the decline in petroleum drilling will stop. Andby the second half of next year we've added several billion dollars inincreased activity. We may have it wrong, but the main story is thatthe decline stops sometime around now and we're just going to seesmall increases in 1986, but probably more later on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. To continue along the line of inflation, Jim,your forecast for the fourth quarter of 1986 shows a fairlysignificant drop in the inflation rate from the third quarter. I knowmost model forecasts are monotonic and I wonder if you had somethingin there that is special that we should note since the price level inyour forecast is probably a lot lower than a lot of other people have.MR. KICHLINE. This is the fourth quarter of 1986?MR. PARRY. Yes. The deflator goes from 2.5 percent to 2percent and that's not usually what happens in a model forecast.MR. KICHLINE. No, this isn't a model forecast.-30-8/19/86MR. PARRY. Okay.MR. KICHLINE. I think what happens is the initial perverseeffects of higher oil prices; oil imports coming in at a higher priceare subtracted out, which affects the fourth quarter.MR. PARRY. Okay.MR. KICHLINE. In effect, it's the arithmetic of GNPaccounting in the deflator in that quarter when oil prices are rising.MR. PARRY. So the domestic deflator probably would show thiscontinuing increase.MR. KICHLINE. It would show higher prices, right.MR. PARRY. Okay, thanks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I would just make a general observation. We'vetalked a lot about the dependence of this forecast on the foreigntrade side and the substantial improvement there. But it seems to methat in some sense this is a reasonably conservative forecast evenwhen you make that observation. As I look at what's in the forecastfor consumption, for government spending at the federal level, forresidential construction perhaps, and for durable equipment, it seemsto me that those are all relatively conservative outlooks. I cancertainly imagine without much difficulty that one or more of thosecomponents may do somewhat better than this forecast embodies. So,even if we don't get the material improvement in the trade picturethat we're talking about, or if it's slower to come, or whatever, I'mnot sure that that jeopardizes the forecast to such an extent that theoutlook next year becomes unacceptable, at least to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else have any general comments?MR. JOHNSON. One last comment to follow up on Bob Parry'squestion. I'm not sure I can think far enough ahead to 1987; I'm moreconcerned about the rest of 1986. I'm not that pessimistic regardingthe trade side except that my major pessimism lies in the area ofgrowth in the industrialized countries. It appears that Germany maybe on a better track now, but I'd like to see those numbers in detailbefore I'm convinced that they're going to do better than 2 percentgrowth this year. And Japan doesn't look like it's going to beimproving. So I just don't see the pickup there. I think that Japanis at the beginning of a long transition process and that we'reprobably not going to see them improve dramatically for some time. Imay be wrong about that but it appears to me that they are not goingto be making any major contribution to export demands. The rest ofEurope doesn't impress me all that much, but I'm hopeful that Germanyis starting to pick up. A lot of my opinion about 1987 and the restof 1986 will depend on how solid this German growth is, but I'm notparticularly excited. I think we're doing reasonably welldomestically but so much is being affected by the trade side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.-31-8/19/86MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we come out about where I thinkGary Stern came out in saying that the staff's forecast is probablypretty reasonable. Like most people around the table, we think thatthis J-curve is going to be a little lazier J-curve, to use ametaphor, than the staff has assumed in its projection. By the sametoken, we believe consumption expenditures probably are going to be alittle greater because of the low interest rates and the low inflationand the high increases that are occurring in personal disposableincome. And I think this tax bill probably will have a positiveeffect upon consumer expenditures. I end up by saying that if we doachieve the results the staff is projecting I think that's a darn goodset of results for this stage of a business cycle, given all thesestructural problems that we have in the economy now. I don't think wecan hope for much better than that.MR. ANGELL. I, too, would like to respond to Bob's question;it's a very good question. It's easy to say somebody's forecast iswrong without trying to do your own. I would tend to put off by maybeup to two quarters the improvement in the net export picture. Thestaff has a $26 billion improvement shown between Q3 and Q2 and a $28billion improvement of Q4 over Q2. It seems to me that that could bevery difficult to accomplish, particularly because oil prices might becausing people to want to have higher oil inventories--and higher oilinventories don't come out of U.S. production, they come out of moreimports. If that export picture doesn't improve then it seems to mesomewhat difficult to get quite as much improvement in the U.S.government budget deficit as shown. So, I would just tilt a bit inthat regard. I think there is a reasonable chance of getting the[staff's] 1987 growth rates in the export sector; if we don't we're introuble.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else have any general comments?Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I'd just [emphasize] the point that I tried toput out before. It seems so simple to say but it still is verydifficult for me. I hope you'll just bear with me; maybe I will notsay anything now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else? If not why don't you giveus a little run-down, Mr. Kohn, and we'll go and eat a doughnut.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.][Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Reverting to Mexico for just a minute: Mr.Truman pointed out to me that the IMF has more than you want to knowabout the Mexican program in an IMF document, which he will be glad tomake available to you. It is only 53 pages, single-spaced.MR. TRUMAN. It's 68.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sixty-eight, single-spaced or-doublespaced. I have reached the advanced age where I can't read IMFdocuments. I haven't found that a great loss. Returning to ourpresent problems and dilemmas, I think we are in a situation wherethere aren't any good choices. Let me just make a couple of points.8/19/86A number of the Reserve Banks have proposed a reduction in thediscount rate. I think that is obviously on the table as a policyvariable in the period immediately ahead. [We'll be] judging moreafter the conversation than before in terms of how desirable that is.I have a few comments on the international setting which, ofcourse, we can't expect miracles from, given all the lags. But it israther [unintelligible] in the short run in terms of exchange ratemovements and somewhat [unintelligible] I hesitate to say in thelonger run, but not immediately in terms of prospects for growthabroad. I think the situation in Germany, which is of course typicalin Europe, is dominated by what appears to be a rather satisfactory--and they would almost say better than satisfactory--economic outlook,as they read it. They did not do well for a couple of quarters ormore; but apparently the gross national product will have a very largerebound in the second quarter. The decline in the first quarter wasprobably partly statistical and the increase will be partlystatistical, they think, however you look at it. I don't know whetherit will be as strong as they think, but they are expecting the data toshow a very strong second quarter. And they are anticipating acontinued pretty good rate of growth, in the area of an annual rate of6 percent or more, through the rest of this year anyway. It remainsto be seen whether that materializes; they need that kind of growth tocome up to 3 percent year-to-year increases, which is what they weretalking about earlier. At some point we were talking 3-1/2 or even 4percent; we're clearly not going to make that. Still, in their view,they think they'll make the 3 percent, which requires rather stronggrowth from now on.German monetary growth is significantly in excess of theirtarget--not significant in our terms, significant in their terms.They usually meet their targets and that doesn't give them anyeagerness to move. If you just look at Germany, I think that is allunderstandable, if you have any confidence in their outlook. TheGerman failure to move on the discount rate not only gives us problemsin terms of the immediate exchange rate repercussions of what we dobut I think it also, rightly or wrongly, blocks action elsewhere inEurope where the economic outlook is not so ebullient. The French andthe British have been very reluctant to move because of their concernabout their own exchange rates vis-a-vis the mark if the Germans don'tmove. They would be delighted to see the Germans move. Whether theGermans move or not, I think there is virtually no chance of theirmoving on their own initiative. Whether they would move under somepressure within Europe instead of pressure from the United States--.That may be counterproductive because they have made it an issue ofnational honor not to respond to external pressure. But I think thereis a reasonable chance that they would move if other people move firstand the exchange rate, in fact, reacted. Then they could just throwup their hands and say: We don't think it is a good idea but externaldevelopments give us no choice. That is not certain, but I think itis a reasonably good prospect. In fact, I think thatAs for Japan, I don't feel I know much about the outlookthere. I don't see any reason for thinking it is as strong as theGermans think their outlook is. It looks like a very sluggish picturebeing affected by the external squeeze, if that is the right word.8/19/86It's hard to call it a squeeze when they have a surplus of $70 billionor so. The external surplus is no longer rising except as a result ofthe oil price decline, and I guess there are some real declines intheir exports that feed back into their domestic growth. They do talkabout putting together some kind of a fiscal package, but I think thatreally has a long fuse on it in terms of affecting the economy. Thatdoesn't do us much good in the immediate exchange market situation.Again if they move at all, [it might] be merely a reaction to beingforced into it. I haven't had any real contact with them recently butit doesn't sound all that encouraging.The other point is that certainly the Germans, and I am surethe Japanese, would be much happier if we would intervene, along withthem, at some rate not very far from today's rate. We might in somesense be close to a point of "buying" a discount rate decline inexchange for a promise to intervene visibly, if not aggressively, tosupport the dollar. I am not sure that wouldn't be a reasonablebargain for us to make, but the bargain has not been struck anyway.They would like us to intervene without them doing anything, whichjust isn't a negotiating posture; I don't think the United States willfind that acceptable. Conceivably, if everybody moved that might be away to encourage some action. I think the upshot of it is--I am surein the case of the Germans, I can't be absolutely sure in the case ofthe French and the English or the Japanese [unintelligible]--that ifwe move in the immediate future, within the next week, I don't thinkthey will do anything; but they might do something in reaction to whathappened.MR. RICE. I don't understand that last point. If we loweredthe discount rate, the Japanese would not follow us but would insteadintervene to maintain--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think they would probablyintervene too, but what they'd like us to do is intervene. They kindof say: Well, you go ahead and reduce your rate and then we will allintervene to support the dollar. The Germans would say that too. Yougo ahead and reduce yours if you think it is necessary and then whydon't we all conduct joint [intervention].MR. RICE. And as a last resort--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm saying I think it might be areasonable view that they also would reduce their rates.MR. RICE. I see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, I am not sure that the Treasury wouldthink it is a reasonable deal. I am saying that from my point of viewit seems a reasonable deal.MR. GUFFEY. The last time we took the lead in reducing thediscount rate there were clearly great expectations, I thought, thatsome of the secondary countries such as France, the United Kingdom,and others would follow along, and they did not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I tell you there were very clearexpectations; they had told me they would. What changed their mindswas that during that week both the franc and sterling weakened, in-34-8/19/86their terms, significantly. That probably [now] appears as a verysmall blip on the charts. But they were both very sensitive to thatfact. We probably discussed that as late as a Tuesday, at an OpenMarket Committee meeting, and they had told me the previous weekendthat they would move. But on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, or atleast on Thursday and Friday, their exchange rates weakened--theBritish pound because it kind of got caught up in this oil situationand the French franc for other reasons, I think. They just feltuneasy about moving when their exchange rate was weakening. And thatis the same hang-up they have now since the franc has weakened furtheragainst the mark. What is sterling doing?MR. TRUMAN. It has gotten some strength but net, on balance,it's down against the dollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think both the British and the Frenchare probably in an untenable position. They would both like to easebut neither wants to pay any price in terms of their exchange rate.MR. GUFFEY. Then you wouldn't expect them to move untilGermany moves?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the answer to that questionis no. Whether I would exclude it entirely, I don't know. I amafraid neither of them will move without the other moving and I just[unintelligible]. I can find that out, but my suspicion is theywon't. I can't entirely exclude a move, but the straight answer toyour question is: I wouldn't count on it purely because of [concernabout] exchange rate movements. There is no doubt that they wouldlike to move. If the Germans moved, [the British and French] wouldmove in a second. But one thing I am sure of is that the Germansaren't going to move in a second.MR. BOEHNE. Is the timing issue with the Germans a questionof the time between when the Federal Reserve would move and when theywould move? Or is their timing dependent on some other factor?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't characterize it as a timingissue. From their basic standpoint, they don't want to move. Justlook at their internal situation. They might move in response toexternal developments and a very strong mark. That would make themove come later in time, but it is not that they think it will begreat to move in September as opposed to now. If nothing changed andthey weren't under any pressure to move externally by September, theywouldn't move in September either. They basically don't want to move.And that is easy to understand, if you just look at their domesticpicture and you give credence to their confidence about their ownoutlook. It may not be as ebullient as they say, but that is what theargument is; it does look strong if you just look at Germany byitself. They have had a big increase in real income because of theexchange rate and oil. They have had a pretty big wage increase andno price increase is another way of looking at it. They have a verystrong consumption picture at the moment; I don't know whether to callit a boom because it hasn't been going on that long. But they hadstrong consumption in the first quarter when GNP went down. They wereestimating--not in our terms, but the way they look at it--an increasein real consumption at a seasonally adjusted annual rate, I forget theexact figure, of 12 to 13 percent in the second quarter. Now, those-35-8/19/86are partly phony statistically because they don't make working dayadjustments. I don't understand it: they seasonally adjust the figurebut they don't adjust it for working days. I guess it is a straightseasonal adjustment procedure and it doesn't take account of differentnumbers of working days. They have a sharp alteration of working daysbetween the first and second quarters, so the first quarter wasn't asbad as it looked and the second quarter won't be as strong as it looksstatistically. But nonetheless, it will look strong--they think verystrong.MR. KEEHN. If we moved unilaterally and the Germans did not,what kind of pressures would occur on the dollar? Or is it on aslightly different track than it may have been in the past?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is anybody's guess, I suppose.You would think that the dollar might [weaken], given not very strongconfidence in the market. Anyway, it would depress the dollar butthat is the chance you take. How much, how far? I don't know whetherMr. Cross has any inside story.MR. CROSS. No, I don't have any inside story. But Icertainly know that a great deal of attention was paid to the factthat we moved unilaterally without the others the last time. Thatmade quite an impression in the market and I certainly think they arewatching very closely. There is a risk there, but it is hard toassess how big it would be.MR. MELZER. We had a 4 to 5 percent decline in the dollaragainst all the other major currencies. I would think that would evenaccelerate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, peculiarly, it went up for a coupleof days [unintelligible] then came down.MR. GUFFEY. They spent quite a large sum of reservessupporting it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Japanese--MR. CROSS. The Japanese fought it.MR. GUFFEY. Hasn't Germany as well?MR. CROSS. No, Germany has not.MR. MELZER. Part of the psychology with respect to thedollar seems to be looking to the level of economic activity here. Tosome extent you would think, initially, that a pickup in activity herewould be a positive factor, some kind of insurance policy. Then Ithink about what we were talking about earlier: that the risk, if youwill, is on the consumption side. If the consumption side picked upone could conceivably feel initially, given that psychology, that thepickup was an insurance policy--insurance that we wouldn't get into afree-falling situation. But I worry a little about that psychologyturning on us because if our consumption did pick up we could continueto run large trade deficits. At some point, inflationary psychologycould possibly start to filter in there and [with it] the-36-8/19/86unwillingness to continue to hold dollars at these rate levels orhowever you--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that; people can make thatargument. I wouldn't put much weight on this. What if we ease?Let's say we reduce the discount rate and that would make people feelso good about the economic outlook that the psychology of the economicoutlook would outweigh the change in interest rates. I think that isa theoretical possibility. In the practical sense, [the probability]that a half percent reduction in the discount rate is suddenly goingto make people feel ebullient about the business outlook is close tonil. If it did, I think you would forget that psychology. I justthink the chances of that happening are extremely minor. Now, if itwas followed not just by strong consumption figures but by accidentyou got stronger investment figures and you had good employmentfigures for August then, yes, the dollar could strengthen regardlessof what we did on the discount rate. I don't think it will be becausewe reduce the discount rate.MR. HELLER. Your own staff projections assume already adecline of the dollar of 10 percent to make the projected tradepicture come true. So, if we don't get any dollar decline at all,presumably the trade picture would be a lot worse than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you put a lot of weight on our staffforecast, that's right.MR. HELLER. At least for consistency purposes. Well, thefeeling around the table was that people were a bit more pessimisticthan the staff was, so you clearly need the exchange rate story--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Analytically you are correct, if yourstarting assumption is correct. One of the real dangers we have here--it may be more apparent in the case of Japan now than in Germany--isthat that same dollar decline would further depress business activityand expectations in Japan. It works against you. You may gain on theprice side and lose on the income side.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You kind of stretch out the J-curvein the process.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In nominal numbers you stretch out the J-curve.MR. JOHNSON. That is one of the problems if they justcontinue to resist on their discount rate.MR. ANGELL. But it is something of a problem, it seems tome, to assume that we know that at the current level of the dollar thetrade will work when that J-curve is fully operational. If we were tomake a stand on the dollar at this point and turn out to be wrong--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When we talk about intervening, I am nottalking about a life or death struggle to protect any particular levelof the dollar. My own feeling is that if we are not competitive,particularly against the yen, at these levels heaven help us. I don'tknow how we will get out of this problem. But that may only beevident in a much more fully employed economy abroad where there are8/19/86some pressures on capacity and all the rest. And we are some yearsaway from that. That is not going to develop this year and it isn'tgoing to develop next year; it may develop in 1988, but you've got towait until 1988.MR. ANGELL. That hurts us, not just with regard to ourexports to Japan, but it hurts us with regard to our exports to manyof the [unintelligible] and the Third World countries where Japan isgoing to try to make up for their lack of growth in [exports to] theUnited States. They are going to try to beat [us in] those othermarkets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at Japan as the big surpluscountry in the world, which it is, and say that is where theadjustment has to fall, the adjustment is not necessarily in tradewith the United States but in trade with Third World Countries. Whenyou look at how [un]willing they are at any exchange rate to welcomemore textiles from Korea, or more cars from Korea--or steel, I guess,is the more relevant product from Korea--they are going to scratch anddig and resist importing steel from Korea like crazy even thoughKorean steel is selling at half the price of Japanese steel. It mayhappen over time but it isn't going to happen very fast. The onedeveloping country that is running a big surplus on current account--the others aren't running big surpluses--is Taiwan. Their currentaccount is really huge; for the size of the economy, it is absolutelyenormous. That is the one LDC that has an adjustment problem of itsown. Korea has a lot of debts; they are not running a big currentaccount surplus. Canada is not running a big current account surplus;Singapore isn't; I don't even think Hong Kong is. Taiwan is, but thatis only one country.MR. HELLER. On current account you also get the bigstatistical discrepancies worldwide--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Half of our deficit is in the rest; itscounterpart is the statistical discrepancy.MR. HELLER. So that is a lot worse in the current accountthan the trade account.MR. WALLICH. I think that what we need is a lower currentaccount [deficit] and that means less favorable internationalrelations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need a lower current account deficit, Ithink, over time. The question is, how do you get there without--MR. JOHNSON. I don't think we want to create a psychologythat would lead to a real impression that we were aggressivelypursuing a lower dollar policy. I think that is something we shouldtry to avoid at all costs; at the same time, I wouldn't be that upsetby some sort of symbolic intervention--because I think that is what itwould be, basically.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we were intervening, just to make itclear, I presume what we would do is intervene around 150 yen, whichis already lower than what it is now, and 200 marks. Getting down tothere, say, with a reduction in the discount rate, would be very easy-38-8/19/86to contemplate. We are already about one-third of the way to thereduction that Mr. Truman is projecting for an 18-month period.MR. HELLER. I want to come back to the interest rates andthe exchange rates. To not cut the discount rate or lower interestrates in order to avoid the drop in the exchange rate I think wouldreally give the wrong signal to all our foreign countries. And thatis exactly what you are saying. By doing that, you are in essenceforcing their domestic hand, which you want to do anyhow. That iswhere you want to be and the exchange rate is the threat--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't seem to "force" very well.MR. HELLER. Well, then the exchange rate is the thing thatwill do it eventually. I am the last person who would like to see alow dollar for international financial purposes. But on the tradefront, it may forestall the protectionist [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the protectionist side, we are runningout of steam. This point of protectionism is the same: I don't carewhere the dollar is, I don't see any results. They just wantprotection in the same period but it doesn't hurt [unintelligible].But I think we could have managed in the worst of all worlds where youget a lack of confidence in the dollar and it damages their outlookand it damages our outlook at the same time and forces interest ratesup in the end instead of down. Then we are in an unholy mess. But weare playing on the fringes of that whatever--MR. MELZER. I noticed--I may be pre-conditioned to look forthis sort of stuff--that in the last month there seem to have been alot more stories in the popular press about reviving concernsdomestically about inflation. I have seen three or four differentones and I don't think we can lose sight of that either in looking atour monetary policy in the context of the purely domestic setting.MR. BLACK. I would like to latch on to that because I agreewith Tom on that. We have a lot of problems in this country, noquestion--in agriculture, manufacturing, energy, and so forth. Thenear-term outlook for investment certainly doesn't appear to be verygood. But most of these problems are due to such things as structuralchanges in the international market, the federal budget deficit, anduncertainty over the impact of the tax bill. And there is not a lotwe can do about that with monetary policy. We could undo a lot of theprogress on inflation if we overlooked those concerns.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To my mind, the problems are not verysoluble. I see that time is passing. Maybe we better get to adecision here. Just in the interest of short circuiting this, giventhe time--I don't want to short circuit any discussion that peoplewant to have--I suspect that the idea of tightening monetary policy atthe moment is not very appealing. [Hearing no objection] we canreject that option. If we were going to ease, in the broader sense, Iam not sure that the best way to do it is by easing what is already avery easy open market posture. That leaves me the very easy decision,insofar as open market operations are concerned, that we have to stayabout where we are. That leaves open the question of the discountrate very specifically.MR. RICE. Well, I think you said it.-39-8/19/86MR. JOHNSON. If we did that, that would put us in a posturelike the last time: the same borrowed reserve target and a lowerdiscount rate and a lower funds rate.MR. RICE. No, I meant that we ought to stay on the currentpolicy course and not move toward ease.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a little artificialdistinction and ask, regardless of the discount rate: Would anyonewant to argue differently than staying roughly where we are?Actually, we've been playing it slightly on the easy side from wherewe were about one month ago--you can see it in the funds rate--whenyou adjust for Tulsa, Oklahoma borrowing.MR. HELLER. May I ask you a quick question? Please rule itout of order if you don't [think it's appropriate]. In the Bluebook,and also earlier in the discussion, it came up that [the staff]expects monetary growth to slow down in the next two or three months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We often expect that and it often doesn'thappen.MR. HELLER. Well, it is a very comforting thought. Why?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't put much weight on it, but if Imay summarize--Mr. Kohn can go on and give you a more erudite answer--when you put this stuff in the equations and you assume no short-runchange in interest rates--and there hasn't been much in the recentpast--the result always comes out that monetary growth will slow down.Whether it does or does not depends upon what [else] happens. Butthat is the way the equations tend to look.MR. JOHNSON. One-time adjustment to the change.MR. KOHN. I am not sure whether this is more or lesserudite. I think there are two things working: one is that some ofthe boost [to M2 growth] in July was what we think was a one-timespurt because the banks did accumulate record volumes of Treasurysecurities and financed them with overnight RPs, which end up in M2.So we don't--MR. MORRIS. Why is it a one-time spurt?MR. KOHN. Well, we don't know; we are assuming that. It wasa record; it was unusual; it broke a pattern; and our understandingfrom contacts with the banks is that it was in large measure aninterest rate play, particularly in the early part of July, given ananticipation of a discount rate cut. It continued a little past thatbut it was an unusual event that we wouldn't necessarily expect to berepeated. That can't be ruled out.MR. MORRIS. Typically in our banking system, when we arepumping in reserves greater than are needed to finance loan demand thebanks naturally put the remainder in the securities markets. Thequestion is: Why is it going to be different next month?MR. ANGELL. But they don't necessarily repo them.8/19/86MR. BLACK. You have a chicken and egg question here, too, asto whether they buy these investments and then we supply the reservesto support the deposits created or whether we're putting the reservesout first.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're really putting the reserves outsecond.MR. JOHNSON. Reduced interest rates--MR. ANGELL. Because, otherwise, they wouldn't repo them.The reason they repo them is because we didn't put the funds out.MR. JOHNSON. We are following the market.MR. KOHN. The other facet, I think--and it relates a littlemore to the Chairman's comments about the equations--is that, in arelatively stable interest rate environment, we would expect offeringrates on these time deposits, even on the more liquid deposits, tocome down and adjust to the current level of market rates. And thatshould slow down some of the shifts of assets into M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, I guess CD rates now are quitelow relative to the present discount rate; they are right on thediscount rate.MR. KOHN. Right on it, practically.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understood Mr. Kohn right earlier, hewas saying that if you combine an unchanged open market policy with areduction in the discount rate, the probabilities are quite high thatyou will continue to get very rapid monetary expansion.MR. PARRY. What is the assumption about borrowing?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Say, around $300 million of realadjustment borrowing, discounting this Oklahoma situation.MR. JOHNSON. Your target here does not assume anything onthe discount rate?MR. KOHN. Well, alternative A is consistent either with adiscount rate cut or continuing the $300 million--MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. PARRY. Wouldn't "B" be roughly consistent with that? Itseems to me that "A" would be consistent with a discount rate changeof more than one-half point.MR. KOHN. Our estimates of the monetary growth we wouldexpect at current interest rates we put under alternative B.MR. PARRY. Oh, really? But you have a midpoint on the fedfunds range which differs by a full percentage point. That's all[unintelligible] associated with "A" or "B," one-half percentagepoint.8/19/86MR. KOHN. The ranges for the fed funds rate are moresymbolic than real. That is, they weren't necessarily centered on themidpoint of the fed funds rate we were assuming.MR. ANGELL. We have a bit of double counting here; last timewe changed the fed funds range a full point with a half-point changeto the discount rate. I would think we wouldn't want to change thefed funds range from 4 to 8 percent. I don't see where that iswarranted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. JOHNSON. I think you want to do something to themidpoint to reflect the discount rate change, not the funds raterange.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We changed them the last time.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, okay.MR. PARRY. Just to pursue the point a little further: If wereduce the discount rate 50 basis points and keep borrowings at thecurrent level, it seems to me we're talking about a funds rate that isabout 5-3/4 percent. That seems to me more consistent with "B." Iwould call that more "B plus" than "A." So it would seem to melogical to go for alternative B even if one were in favor of a half-point reduction in the discount rate.MR. JOHNSON. Wait. Do you mean by that, Bob, that you arejust interpreting "B" as consistent with $300 million of borrowing?MR. PARRY. No. I am not talking about keeping borrowing thesame in both discount rate environments.MR. BLACK. But with the fed funds rate down to 5-3/4 percentwouldn't you think that was easier?MR. JOHNSON. Well, that is what I think Don was--MR. PARRY. No, I am saying I think it is closer to "B" thanto "A".CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we ought to worry aboutwhether it is precisely "A," "B," or "C." At this stage, we ought todecide what we want to do. There may be disagreements about thisbecause people have different ideas about what should be done with thediscount rate. I guess I am arguing that the decision ought to beleft to the discount rate as the more appropriate tool now. Whateverway that decision goes, the question in essence is: [Do we wantborrowing of] something around $300 million or a little less than $300million if the discount rate doesn't move?MR. GUFFEY. My preference would be for a discount ratedecrease of one-half percentage point with the $300 million borrowinglevel, which would result in roughly a 5-3/4 percent [funds rate].Or, if we wanted to go some place between "A" and "B," if you will, toraise that borrowing level to the $400 million range as opposed to the$300 million range would give us some flexibility if we wanted to go-42-8/19/86on down adjusting the borrowing range. But in terms of the greaterquestion as to whether or not I would opt for some ease, the answer isyes. The way I would love to do it is with a discount rate decrease.I would not favor some lesser borrowing level because I think we aregetting fairly close to some sort of frictional level. We could losecontrol. Then, you are right on an interest rate target. The secondpart of that recommendation does include the international. It seemsto me that we are the only catalyst and have the only tools that wouldmake the Germans and the Japanese move if they are going to move atall. If we don't move, they are not going to move. To the extentthat the lower dollar would help us on exports, or as an alternativethat they would move and give us a little more stimulation, I thinkthat is the prescription that we need to follow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The assumption you make is the onlyoperational assumption now with a high degree of probability to beright--that they are not going to move without us.MR. GUFFEY. I thought that was the sense of the discussion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they may not move with us.MR. GUFFEY. I understand that. But if they do not, then thedollar will fall in some relationship to their currencies and make usmore competitive in international markets. Either one of those two:if they move, that would be the better of the two; but if they don'tthen we get, hopefully, some benefit from a bit of ease domestically.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. That's my same sense except that I prefer tokeep the borrowing level about where it is, at about $300 million.And, I think something like a half point on the discount rate might bepretty good.MR. RICE. I support that too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I was just going to go back to theforecast, Mr. Chairman. I think that the Board staff's forecast is areasonable one but I think it is fraught with an awful lot ofuncertainties. And frankly, I think that the risk is on the downside, both with respect to the trade deficit and consumer spending.There is an awful lot in this tax bill that could turn consumerspending around one way or the other. With that kind of uncertaintyand the risk I see for lower growth, I think that some move towardfurther accommodation is called for. Now the method of doing that[involves], obviously, some difficult judgments. My preference wouldbe to keep the borrowing at $300 million and to move the discount rateby 50 basis points. Having made a few of these discount rate cutsover the past several months, I think that we're perhaps at the pointthat we may, in fact, be forcing the Germans and Japanese to make acorresponding move. But even if they don't I think we should goahead. In the absence of their moving, if there were considerableconcern about selling pressures on the dollar, then perhaps loweringthe borrowing to a frictional level of $150 million and no discountrate change--in order to probe the fed funds market--might be called-43-8/19/86for. But that would not be my preference; I would prefer a ratechange and approximately $300 million on borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I have to admit that I am concerned about what weare talking about in terms of reducing the discount rate at this time.I am not fundamentally opposed to that kind of move, but I think thetiming is critical. It seems to me that we are sitting here in asituation where we have very little data on the current quarter butthe data we do have--both employment and retail sales numbers--are onthe positive side. We had rapid growth in the aggregates in July; wedon't know with much conviction what they are going to do going out,but we are certainly coming off that. We have been listening to Samand others talk for some time now about the vulnerabilities of thedollar and this just does not strike me as a very opportune time totake this step. I certainly can see circumstances going forward wherethe environment might be far more preferable to the current one. So,I would be somewhat hesitant at this point. I can certainly live with"B" as specified, but I am not very comfortable about a discount ratereduction soon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. Gary, you have said everything I was thinking--almost. I would agree with that position in general. I have just acouple of other observations. It seems to me that we are taking, in asense, a marginal approach to policy. If we take a look at what hashappened in the intermeeting period in terms of the economy and we arenot happy with that then we think about easing policy further. And Iam not sure that we have given enough time for the accommodativepolicy that we have been pursuing for some time to take effect. I amconcerned about the risk that Gary cited and I share his feeling aboutthe outlook right now. I mentioned some of the commentary in thepopular press about inflationary expectations seeming to be reviving;I might also mention that long rates since two discount rate cuts agoare actually higher now than they were then. We have had a steepeningin the yield curve. I have a little trouble with the thought thatsomehow lower rates are going to help the economy here. I think themarket place, in a number of different ways, is telling us to becareful in terms of inflationary expectations. So I would be in favorof alternative B, the $300 million borrowing target, and no change inthe discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. I am very closely in agreement with Gary Sternand Tom Melzer on that. I consider this scenario that the staff hastraced out in its projections to be a very fine outcome for this[stage of the] cycle--in the fourth year and into the fifth year. Ican see the arguments on the international side, but trying to nudgethese other countries into action--. I just can't see how any furthereasing will do anything to our domestic problems, most of which can'tbe addressed by monetary policy. The aggregates are running throughthe ceiling and I can see and understand very well why we'vedowngraded Ml. I even agree with that, which may surprise some ofyou. But somewhere along the way the aggregate numbers are going tomean something. And at some point we are going to have to get back to8/19/86some kind of procedure in which targeting aggregates and trying to hitthe targets is part of [our policy approach]. Or else we are going tobe back in an inflationary environment somewhere along the way; Idon't know how soon, but it is coming. So, I just can't see the caseon the domestic side at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallace.MR. WALLACE. Mr. Chairman, as you know, we have supported afurther discount rate cut and, therefore, I would support the approachthat others have expressed around the table. However, in the absenceof that, in view of what I would regard as continued weakness in theeconomy--especially from where I sit--I would favor an action such asalternative A. I think we should use this window of opportunity tolet interest rates move down further before we are faced with thereality of a resurgence in the inflationary [unintelligible]. But ifthe discount rate cut is in prospect, then I would favor [that].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I favor a borrowing level ofapproximately $300 million and a half percentage point cut in thediscount rate. My view is conditioned by my outlook for prices. Isuppose four years of a rather steady number of around 4 percentfollowed by this remarkable year, even when you make adjustments forenergy and food, draw me to conclude reluctantly that the outlook forinflation may be reasonably good. I say I view that reluctantlybecause I have great concerns that, with the kind of money growth wehave been seeing, we do have a long-term problem with inflation. Butnow I view the current environment as a moment where we do have roomfor ease because of the inflation picture. So, my recommendation foreasing is not based so much on my view of the outlook for the realeconomy as it is on my outlook for inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman I would like to associatemyself with the Stern and Melzer camp. I have an intuitive feelingthat 1987 could be significantly stronger than we are now thinking fortwo reasons: (1) I don't think we know much about the timing or theamplitude of the decline in the exchange rate; and (2) I don't thinkwe know much about the economic impact of the tax bill. That couldcut both ways, but I think it does mean that there is a possibilitythat we could have a significantly stronger 1987 than we are nowthinking, even though I can't give any numbers to document my gutfeeling. I am also impressed with the fact that we are generating alot of liquidity in the system. Maybe Don is right that we had a one-shot jump in July. But even though I haven't been known to be aslavish follower of the aggregates, I am concerned about the buildupof liquidity in the system. Sooner or later that could causeproblems. So I think we are in a situation where we ought to exercisea little patience, at least until the next meeting, and adopt a"status quo" policy here, which I interpret alternative B torepresent. I would like to see us wait a little longer before we moveon the discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.8/19/86MR. KEEHN. While our economic outlook continues to bepositive, I do think there are some growing risks that loom on thedown side and I think we would have a better opportunity to maintainthe growing economic expansion if we were to reduce the rate structuresomewhat. Real rates continue to be a little on the high side. Ithink that we have an opportunity here to reduce the discount rate andI would be in favor of doing that. Therefore, I would recommend thatalo'ng with a borrowing level of $300 million. Certainly, this wholeissue is vastly complicated by the international situation, which isterribly tough to judge if you are not intimately involved in it. ButI think, as others have said, that there is a chance that if we wereto do a discount rate cut, it would put some additional pressure onthe other central banks to move and, therefore, I would be in favor ofdoing it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. Since I am concerned with the generalsluggishness of the economy and the specific areas of significantweakness, I think that the risk in the staff's forecast for the nextsix months and for 1987 is probably on the low side, particularlybecause of questions about tax reform and the various points madeabout international developments. I can live with alternative B,assuming that it will be accompanied by a half percentage pointdiscount rate cut and a borrowing target of about $300 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I support alternative B withborrowing at $300 million. But along with all the other worries thatI have I must say that I also have the worry that there is at leastsome danger that we could be sowing the seeds for a greaterinflationary problem down the road. It appears to me that at least interms of the price effects, the beneficial effects of the oilsituation may already be behind us. Import prices are rising and arecertainly going to rise more. Indeed, if they don't rise more thechances of getting a correction in the trade balance are diminished.The service sector doesn't look all that hot from a price and wageperformance [perspective]. And like Frank, I am not very slavish onany of the Ms but I can't completely disregard the pace at which allof them seem to be growing, at least at the moment. Partly for thatreason, I am not so keen at this precise moment on the discount ratepart of the package either. I certainly would be keen on it in acontext in which I felt some greater assurance that we might get somesupport abroad. Even aside from that, I guess I am not quite surewhat a discount rate cut does now. Clearly, it reduces debt serviceburdens--not just for LDCs, but for everybody. That is good, if itdoesn't have the perverse effect of encouraging still more debt. Butthe effects of lower interest rates in the short run in terms of theexchange rate, in terms of the trade account, and in terms of stallingthe prospects for growth in Japan and elsewhere, are really bigquestion marks to me. It is just not clear, aside from that debtservicing aspect of it, what a lower discount rate is going to do.And ironically, I suppose, I see some danger that it could have someperverse effects. Now, I think those perverse effects would begreatly minimized in the context in which there was some greaterprospect for movements elsewhere. Unfortunately, that doesn't look sogood. In that setting, if the discount rate has to come down, I-46-8/19/86probably would be inclined to tilt open market operations andborrowings on the up side. We have been rather systematically tiltingoperations on the side of ease and tilting borrowings on the low side.In a setting in which the discount rate were reduced, absent movesabroad, I would be inclined to reverse the tilts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I would favor alternative B. I have many of thesame fears that have been mentioned by Presidents Corrigan, Stern andMelzer about an easier policy. I am especially troubled by theimplications of an easier policy as far as the growth of theaggregates is concerned. With regard to the discount rate, I think acase can be made that there is no urgency at this point and that,really, there probably is a reason to delay a decision for a couple ofweeks. In the next couple of weeks we are going to get a lot of dataabout the economy. Although that may not provide any definitiveinformation, it is certainly going to provide a lot more informationabout the beginning of the third quarter than we have at the presenttime. So, it seems to me that "B" with no change in the discount rateis a reasonable course to follow for the next couple of weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, when you total up the reasons for easingor not easing, I find them fairly evenly balanced. But I come down onthe side of not easing at this point. I don't feel any greatcompulsion for a drop in the discount rate. So, my preferred coursewould be to sleep on any change in the discount rate for several weeksand keep open market operations around alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative B with the viewthat we ought to stay about where we are with respect to the growth inthe aggregates. I expect that the economy is going to turn out to bevery difficult to get a grip on. And I would agree with some of theviews expressed earlier that we don't need a discount rate cut fordomestic reasons. I don't see what it will do to improve oursituation domestically. However, I think the argument for reducingthe discount rate to prod the Europeans and the Japanese to stimulatetheir economies is an important one. That turnaround in net exportsat the present time is probably very crucial to maintaining asatisfactory rate of expansion in our domestic economy and in my viewthe way to move in that direction would be to reduce the discount ratealong with alternative B. No one wants to add to liquidity in theeconomy right now, but I think the risks of not trying to do somethingto affect the trade sector are great enough to assume the risks thatgo along with expanding the liquidity in the economy and so forth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I am very sure that monetary policy does matter.That's why it's such a difficult call here. I don't share the notionthat it doesn't make any difference; I think it makes a great deal ofdifference. It seems to me that we have more balanced risks to worryabout this time than I [saw earlier]. I don't like easing in the faceof the monetary aggregates being where they are. I don't like easing-47-8/19/86when I have a sense that commodity price developments suggest anotheroutlook. At the same time, I think there is a greater risk that this[economy] could deteriorate further on us and compound governmentrevenue [problems] by growing at a rather anemic rate. I think that'sa pretty dangerous risk. I think there is a dangerous risk in thatthe world trade pattern is still stagnant, not expanding. I thinkthat Tom Melzer and Gary Stern are right when they say that inflationexpectations have changed. But that's what worries me on the otherside, because I see inflation expectations rising and the rate ofinflation not rising. And that tends to cause me to believe thatoutput is going to be slow, not fast. So, given this severedifficulty, I am very hesitant about being on the side of an easierstance which could best be accomplished by a discount rate cut andleaving borrowing at $300 million. But I do believe that we are in aplace where if we do get some indication that prices are moving toohigh that we then have to be prepared to take the next step--whichwould be to say that discount rates can go up as well as down. I havevery little faith that we are going to be so accurate as to get thisthing tuned just right without overshooting, but I am afraid not totake the steps. So I am reluctantly for easing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Heller, will you add something on yourmaiden voyage?MR. HELLER. I think I can't wait any longer here. Listeningto the discussion, it's just about evenly divided between the discountrate cutters and noncutters. I think that shows how tough the job isgoing to be. As far as monetary policy is concerned, I think it'svery important to preserve the credibility of the Federal Reserve, tostick to preannounced targets and not to get out of the target ranges.The A alternative gets awfully close--if only I had my bifocals--tothe line that I would really like to stay a bit below. I would agreevery much with the discussion around the table about alternative B.As far as the discount rate is concerned, as I look at the economy, Idon't see that much strength in the immediate future. Given consumerspending and the high consumer debt levels that are already there andthe prospect of not having these consumer debts tax deductible in thefuture, I think consumer spending will be soft during the coming year.On the investment side, I certainly don't see any prospects for sharpincreases in investment and the fiscal picture, with the tax reform,would support that view. On the trade balance, as I said earlier, Iam not quite as optimistic as the forecasts that have been made by thestaff. It clearly will improve, but I think it will be very roughgoing, especially in Europe. Therefore, largely for the internationalreasons that also were cited by Mr. Rice, I would favor a discountrate cut at the present time.MR. JOHNSON. Some people said alternative B withoutspecifying a borrowing target. I am a little confused--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] I think we have got totry to get a decision. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. As I look at the longer run, I am moreconcerned about the inflationary effects of this--what it might bewith a 6-year [unintelligible]. So I would go with the monetaristsand say we cannot go on with the M1 and M2 growth that we have beenhaving. That just can't go on indefinitely. Easing, by the same8/19/86token, presents an element of risk. So regretfully, I think that wehave to work at the present level of operation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think all of the situations have beeneloquently described here and they leave most people with a sense ofsome unease because we are fine-tuning around what is hopefully abottom. The good news is that we are trying to fiddle around with thecorrect amount of shading, possibly further ease, in the hopes ofmaybe [unintelligible]. There is no way of squaring the circle and Ihaven't really tried, but I feel for the views that have beenexpressed on both sides. We are sitting here pumping up liquidity andpumping up debt at the same time, and somehow no good comes of that inthe long run. I don't know whether it's [inflationary] or what. WhatI would suggest in listening to this is probably the [unintelligible]to the widest possible consensus, partly because I think it isprobably right. I think it is probably right in probing aroundspecifically for the operational language here to say that theCommittee seeks to "decrease slightly" and leave in that "takingaccount of the possibility of a change in the discount rate." The wayI would interpret that is that even though the Board of Governors maynot decrease the discount rate right now, we will continue thisprocess of leaning slightly on the easier side in open marketoperations, and maybe get down towards $200 million or so onborrowing, leaving aside the Oklahoma borrowing. If we do reduce thediscount rate, not necessarily immediately, and we didn't like therepercussions on the exchange markets or some other things we leaveopen the possibility of increasing the borrowings slightly to, say,around the $400 million level. I think both of those [scenarios] areconsistent with language that says easing slightly in terms of theoverall picture, including the discount rate. That would leave alittle flexibility on the open market side to either ease a bit ifthere's no discount rate change and, on a contingent basis but not ona planned basis, to tighten just a bit if that seems desirable in theway of exchange market reactions or domestic reactions. In eithercase, it's rather a small band.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, what's the argument for easing onthe open market operation side if we don't reduce the discount rate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's a way of probing. Somebodysuggested this as a way to get a bit of ease without making the overtmove of a discount rate change. It's kind of a substitute but not afull substitute. It tests the waters as to what the exchange marketreaction might be or whatever.MR. RICE. That's not what I had in mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I couldn't say that that is what anybodyhad in mind, but we are sitting here with a group that is going tomake the decision--MR. RICE. If I am going to ease, I want to lower thediscount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the terms that we used the last timethat was easing. That's why I think this language we used the lasttime is suitable for either course. The only real difference I'msuggesting from that language, just to capture this a little more8/19/86closely, is to change "decrease somewhat" to "decrease slightly."That's the tenor of the whole thing. The basic thrust is that somepeople might prefer to reduce the discount rate; but if there is noreduction in the discount rate, those who prefer to reduce thediscount rate probably want a little easier stance in open marketoperations. Or vice versa: if we have the discount rate cut peoplemay not prefer any easing [in open market operations]. Quite clearly,nobody has spoken of easing in open market operations plus thediscount rate change.MR. JOHNSON. I guess we could be very careful on the openmarket side but I am a little concerned that we could end up getting apretty nasty effect in the bond market if we were to cut the discountrate and raise the borrowing level--maybe not, if we did it just alittle around the edges in a way. I think we might get a steepeningof the yield curve from an attempt to raise the borrowing level at thesame time we cut the discount rate. I'd hate to see that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not suggesting we do both at the sametime. I'm just getting reactions. Presumably, if you want to arguefor a steepening--of the Melzer school or the Stern school--I supposeyou might say you would get an increase in the bond rates with thereduction in the discount rate.MR. JOHNSON. Well, you might.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know which you would get, but I amnot sure that you would get both at the same time.MR. JOHNSON. I would like to see at least what happens tothe yield curve independent of any changes in borrowing. Maybe if wethink things are a little too aggressive as a result of that, we mightwant to change--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I am saying--take account ofthe major variable, which would be the exchange rate. If we didn'tlike that, give ourselves a little room to firm slightly.MS. SEGER. How much of a move is it going to require in[unintelligible] move in the yen to 140?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] 140 in the week or we goto the devil. I think [at] 145 we would [unintelligible] going to thedevil; 150 is not. But if we go beyond 150 in a very short period oftime--MR. CROSS. I think those numbers you mentioned are whatpeople are now focusing on: 2 DM and 150 yen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are prepared for going to 2 DMor 150 yen, but if it went suddenly beyond that I would get worried.MR. MELZER. Did I detect less certainty in your descriptionof discussions [with foreign central banks] about the discount ratethis time? At the last meeting I felt it was pretty much a faitaccompli. I might not have heard you just right, but---50-8/19/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, there has been none. I would expectnobody to follow us this time and--MR. MELZER. I didn't mean that. I mean about whether or notwe would do a discount rate cut--that perhaps there were otherdiscussions that had to take place in an international context.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is a certain ambivalence asexpressed around this table. That is right; I think you have made acorrect distinction.MR. MELZER. Just thinking in terms of that, would it notmake sense to presume nothing in that regard and convene a conferencecall if a cut in the discount rate were to occur rather than to try toanticipate all of that? I don't know whether that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] but I suspect that thatdecision will be reviewed this week. I feel a certain mechanicalurgency to make a decision this week, one way or the other, because Iam going to be out next week and a couple of days thereafter. We haveto make a decision this week or, if we don't, I presume we are notgoing to make one for another week or so. But that's no argument. Ithink it is so close to the possibility, anyway, and I don't know whatyou do. [Unintelligible] everybody seems to be at $300 million forthe moment, anyway. If we say it clearly is not going to happen for acouple of weeks, then we might ease. I think we are capable ofdeciding that today instead of--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Without getting into a great [debateon] semantics here, when you talk about your formulation I interpretyour shadings on the sides of $300 million as what I would think of astilt. It's hard to capture what you are really saying here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't be more specific than around $200million and around $400 million, but I don't want to take those tooliterally.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You are putting them in a context inwhich both are obviously conditional on a matrix of other things.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's inevitably the case. But what I amsaying is that if the exchange rate fell out of bed on its own in thenext few days and we didn't reduce the discount rate, I don't supposewe would take that particular time to go to $200 million. But Iassume if the exchange markets aren't doing anything [or if thedollar] particularly strengthened and we didn't reduce the discountrate I would.MR. BLACK. You meant to exclude the special borrowing inOklahoma from the $200 million, Mr. Chairman?MR. ANGELL. Well, I certainly would have put a differentcontext on it. If the discount rate were cut and if the dollar wereunder more pressure than we wanted and if we thought we wanted to makea gesture of intervention, I think it would be appropriate in thatcontext also to go for a higher borrowing target. I don't want us tomake an exchange rate move without in a sense backing it up a little.But I would not prefer cutting the discount rate and then just as the-51-8/19/86market gets used to a lower discount rate, boom, hit them with anincrease in borrowing and knock the fed funds rate up. That's thepart I don't want, but I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I did not say that we would just do it. Isaid it's contingent upon things happening that could be strongbusiness news, but that takes a period of time.MR. ANGELL. In the context of that I support your proposal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not talking anything very major herein either direction. That's a formulation that I propose here. Ifsomebody has a better formulation, propose it.MR. MORRIS. I would be more inclined to support a one-sidedproposition that we stay with the $300 million. And if we cut thediscount rate then I'd move borrowing to $400 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is consistent with yourexpressed view and the views of several other members of theCommittee. But I don't detect that that will command unanimoussupport; if it does, then that's what we ought to say.MR ANGELL. It won't get a majority.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is an obvious alternative. How manywould prefer that kind of alternative?MR. ANGELL. The one you suggested or Frank's?MR. MORRIS. You are asking for votes of members?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Members.MR. MORRIS. If the discount rate gets cut, there is no point[unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd lean on the side of borrowingbeing higher rather than lower.MR. RICE. With a cut in the discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how many prefer that course--atleast other than Mr. Morris? Have we got any other alternatives toput on the table?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The alternative "around $200 to $400million," just hang around--MR. JOHNSON. One other alternative is to just leave it at$300 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just leave it at $300 million and what?The problem with that is that people feel differently about whetherthere should be a discount rate cut or not.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's the alternative.8/19/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the alternative is leaving it at$300 million regardless of whether we reduce the discount rate. Thatis a theoretical alternative.MR. RICE. Theoretical?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's more than theoretical.It leaves the whole decision in our hands. Would people prefer that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In some ways I would.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I would sort of prefer that.MS. SEGER. I would.MR. WALLICH. Not change it?MR. JOHNSON. Yes, just leave borrowing at $300 millionwhether we cut the discount rate or not.MR. RICE. Leave it at $300 million with the discount ratecut or not.MR. MELZER. I would be happy with that if there were a callat the time. Wouldn't it raise the question as to what to do with theborrowing level at that time?MR. ANGELL. No.MR. JOHNSON. No, it's saying that you're willing to accept$300 million on borrowing regardless of what the discount rate--MR. BOEHNE. It's basically shifting the decision of thediscount rate.MR. MELZER. Yes, but the fact is that, in effect, it is thesame thing given the high degree of probability of a discount cuthappening. I don't think--MR. BLACK. You're giving up the $400 million possibility ifyou vote for that.MR. JOHNSON. What you're really saying is that there's not awhole lot of difference between $300 million borrowing and no discountrate cut and $300 million borrowing with a 1/2 point cut.MR. BOEHNE. Well, there's a 50 percentage point drop in thefunds rate, right?MR. JOHNSON. I know. I'm just saying that you would have tobelieve that that margin didn't mean a lot.MR. PARRY. Isn't one possibility just to maintain the $300million and when a discount rate change occurs, if it does, to revisitthe issue of reserves at that time?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just a little reluctant; if we can'tanticipate a reaction three days from now we're in pretty sad shape.8/19/86I am not saying we would automatically go to $400 million with adiscount rate reduction. I simply would leave ourselves that room ifit appears desirable in the light of events subsequent to the [ratecut].MR. BOEHNE. What about this? The discount rate decision isclearly a separate decision. And however that decision is made wewould think that the Chairman would have the normal discretion thatwe've become used to in recent years in adjusting the borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say this is all within the rangeof a certain amount of discretion. What's a little more sensitive isthe numbers we get when the percentage change in the borrowing getslarger. It seems to be a matter of greater sensitivity,understandably perhaps. I don't care if we do it; that's what Istarted out with. But I'm trying to capture a little more closely acenter of gravity.MR. ANGELL. I prefer leaving the borrowing at $300 millionas an initial part of the approach. If the circumstances are suchthat we don't cut the discount rate I don't want to take the borrowingdown to $200 million. If we do cut the discount rate, I prefer thatborrowing be at $300 million but I would want there to be latitudethat if developments then require a higher borrowing level that wewould do that. If we ever got ourselves in a position of wanting adiscount rate increase we probably would precede that first by takingthe borrowing from $300 million up to $400 million and $500 millionand then we would condition the market that we think it's time toincrease [the discount rate].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's correct. We're just talking abouttiming. Just to repeat what I said on that theory: I'm saying wemight have the flexibility to do that depending upon subsequentdevelopments. The other thing is that I am not saying we reduce thediscount rate on day A and raise borrowing on day A. Also, just to beclear, I'm saying we don't reduce it to $200 million tomorrow whenwe're going to make a discount rate decision one way or another laterthis week. If we do not make a decision to reduce it that would implyslightly easier borrowing numbers for a while pending whether we makea decision a little later.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, I could see that. That's fine.MR. GUFFEY. With that understanding, I would agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you will agree--MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I think that if you put that outas a proposal it will pass.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What it means in terms of language isthis: to say "decrease slightly" instead of "somewhat" probablycaptures it a little more closely. But we would leave in thislanguage "taking account of the possibility of a discount ratechange." Now, I don't know what numbers to put in here, because ourstaff is telling us that we're at least in grave jeopardy of exceedingthe 9 percent. Whether we want to admit that or not, I don't know.We could leave the 7 to 9 percent.8/19/86MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I would just leave that.MR. ANGELL. I'd leave it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're saying that one of theconsiderations, and it is only one of the considerations, is thatwe're looking at that contingency of whether we reduce the discountrate or not. The option to slightly tighten reserve conditions woulddepend at least in part upon whether M2 and M3 continued to zoom withM1 continuing to zoom.MR. WALLICH. But it would be a pretty large increase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sure would be, relative to what hasbeen happening. That is one of the factors; the directive says it.If we came out with 10 to 11 percent growth in M2 and M3 that wouldcertainly be a consideration in moving toward the higher borrowinglevel. I think that's what we would be saying. Understood? And thesame [language on] M1 follows that. I don't care if we use "might" or"would;" it makes no difference here. The trouble with this is it'sexactly the directive we had last time. And I don't know what it--MR. BLACK. Well, you changed "somewhat" to "slightly."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose we leave in the 4 to 8 percent.Any other questions? The language couldn't be simpler: change"somewhat" to "slightly;" leave in "taking account the possibility ofa discount rate change;" and the rest of the language remains as itwas in the last directive. The understanding is that tomorrow we donothing--stay at $300 million--and that the discount rate willobviously be considered later this week. If we reduce the discountrate we still do nothing in the [unintelligible] but, depending upondevelopments, we might use a little flexibility on the up side. If wedon't reduce the discount rate we might use a little flexibility onthe down side but very slightly depending on what [unintelligible] butwe're close to that now. Understood? Just call the roll, sir.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Melzer NoPresident Morris YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich NoCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have completed our business.Do we have sandwiches?MR. BERNARD. Yes.END OF MEETING-55-